=== PAGE 1 ===

J Stat Phys
DOI 10.1007/s10955-016-1659-9
Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work on the
Renormalization Group
Robert W. Batterman1
Received: 30 August 2016 / Accepted: 27 October 2016
© Springer Science+Business Media New Y ork 2016
Abstract This paper investigates the consequences for our understanding of physical theo-
ries as a result of the development of the renormalization group. Kadanoff’s assessment of
these consequences is discussed. What he called the “extended singularity theorem” (that
phase transitons only can occur in inﬁnite systems) poses serious difﬁculties for philosoph-
ical interpretation of theories. Several responses are discussed. The resolution demands a
philosophical rethinking of the role of mathematics in physical theorizing.
Keywords Kadanoff · Renormalization group · Block transformations · Ising model ·
Minimal models · Universality · Explanation
1 Introduction
I am honored to have been asked to write for this special issue dedicated to the work of Leo
Kadanoff. The presence of this paper by a philosopher in such a special issue will no doubt
be surprising to some. However, in my opinion, Leo, in addition to being a superb physicist,
mathematician, and a wonderful individual, was also a brilliant natural philosopher. By this I
mean that he was a deep thinker about the nature of reality and about the role mathematics can
play to allow us better access to the physical world. In this regard, I think it quite reasonable
to compare Leo’s work to that of the great nineteenth century theorists like George Gabriel
Stokes, George Green, James Clerk Maxwell, and Lord Kelvin, among others.
There are very few natural philosophers anymore. The ﬁelds of philosophy and science
parted company at the end of that century. Philosophers more and more began to turn toward
the disciplines of logic and the analysis of language, and their examination of the enterprise of
This article is dedicated to the memory of Leo Kadanoff.
B Robert W. Batterman
rbatterm@pitt.edu
1 Department of Philosophy, University of Pittsburgh, 1001 Cathedral of Learning, Pittsburgh,
PA 15260, USA
123


=== PAGE 2 ===

R. W. Batterman
science began to follow a different, less-engaged-with-scientiﬁc-detail, direction. They began
to try to determine the logic and structure of scientiﬁc theorizing in a way that was much more
arm-chair and much less concerned with details about individual theories. The aim was to
construct or reconstruct the proper logical structures of scientiﬁc explanation, conﬁrmation,
and theory choice. The philosophical reconstructions were, by and large, designed to ﬁt all
empirical science. For example, an explanation in physics should share the same general
(logical) form as explanations in biology, chemistry, or sociology. Scientists themselves,
began to specialize more and more. And as a result, the kind of broad understanding of the
physical world that Stokes, for example, possessed was distributed in a division of labor.
Leo Kadanoff may have been born in the wrong century. His interests were broad and
wide ranging. And, his physical and philosophical intuitions were often prescient. Truesdell
has said that “[t]he intuitive physicists are the scouts of natural philosophy.” [ 24, p. 90] Leo
was a remarkable scout and a remarkable philosopher.
My personal introduction to him was the result of his ﬁnding (on his own) and reading
my book, The Devil in the Details . I think he was intrigued by the title, especially by the
appearance of the word “asymptotic” in the descriptive subtitle. It prompted him to write
me an email and ultimately to invite me to Chicago to meet with him. I have known a few
physicists in my career and only a handful of them have had much time for philosophers
of science. Leo was a special case. Though he might not use the jargon of philosophers of
science, much of Leo’s writing is deeply philosophical. He had an amazing ability to employ
mathematics to study physical phenomena and to use it to better understand the nature of
those phenomena.
I have learned a great deal from him and his work. I thank him for his generosity.
What follows is a discussion of the impact on philosophical theorizing provided by the
development of the renormalization group (RG). In the next section I examine various possible
reactions to what Kadanoff called the “extended singularity theorem.” This is a statement to
the effect that phase transitions can only occur in systems of inﬁnite extent, with an inﬁnite
number of constituents. It is a mathematical fact that the function for the free energy of a
ﬁnite system cannot display the kind of singularities and discontinuities many have associated
with thermodynamic phase transitions. This fact has been the source of much consternation
in the philosophy of physics community. In the following sections I argue that those worries
are largely misplaced and that Kadanoff, himself, had seriously hinted at different kind of
resolution, one I personally think is correct. It is a resolution that requires a rethinking of
the role of mathematics in physical theorizing, in that certain features of the mathematics
itself play explanatory roles. As such it provides an excellent modern example of the kind of
natural philosophy characteristic of physics in the Victorian age.
2 Philosophical Perspectives on Theories
I think it is fair to say that from a philosophy of science point of view, physical theories are
supposed to reﬂect our best attempts to understand nature. Philosophers are also enamored
with the idea that theories have a certain logical structure—they can be written down in
some kind of axiomatic form from which, given certain inputs, various features of physical
systems (future states, e.g.) can be derived using logic and reasonably straightforward math-
ematics. Furthermore, philosophers often distinguish fundamental from nonfundamental (or
“phenomenological”) theories. This latter distinction presupposes the idea that fundamental
theories are the ones that tell us really what nature is actually like at “bottom.” These presum-
123


=== PAGE 3 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
ably include, quantum theory, quantum ﬁeld theory, maybe a theory of quantum gravity, etc.
Nonfundamental theories such as thermodynamics, continuum mechanics, and ﬂuid dynam-
ics, on the other hand, while pragmatically useful, are in a certain sense (exactly what sense is
a matter of serious contention) superﬂuous. We could, in principle, solve problems involving
the elastic bending of beams by starting from the fundamental atomic and subatomic theories
of the constituents of the beam.
Nonfundamental theories don’t get nature right. Steel beams are not really the continua
whose bending behaviors are described by the Navier–Cauchy equations. Gases are not
continuous blobs of stuff. The important theories, according to many philosophers and, I
believe, according to many physicists, are those that get the ontology right. In part, the (often
unarticulated) reason for preferring fundamental theories over phenomenological theories is
a realist presupposition that physical theories must accurately describe the world the way
the world really is. Phenomenological theories are often good for calculating, but they don’t
accurately describe the world and so must, in a sense, play second ﬁddle to their fundamental
partners.
Of course, none of this is to deny that historically we often come to consider fundamental
theories only after we have constructed and tested sophisticated phenomenological theories.
1
Thanks to work by such luminaries as Clausius, van der Waals, and Maxwell, we had quite
well developed theories of matter in the nineteenth century. In particular, these theories
were able to provide reasonably accurate accounts of observed behavior of matter in (and in
transition between) various qualitatively distinct states or phases.
With the acceptance of work by Boltzmann and Maxwell on kinetic theory, and with data
coming in about the existence of atoms—the (actual = real) discrete nature of the constituents
of everyday matter— thermodynamics began to lose its status as a fundamental theory [ 6,
22]. Theorists continued to develop statistical techniques for describing and (hopefully) for
explaining the successes of thermodynamics in terms of averages over behaviors of the
atomic constituents of the systems described by thermodynamics. Thus, there was a shift to
a more fundamental (statistical mechanical) understanding of the various phases of matter.
Certain questions became pressing: Can one understand the existence of distinct phases of
matter in terms of the statistical analysis of the behaviors of large collections of atoms and
molecules? Can one understand the transitions between these distinct phases of matter in
statistical mechanical terms?
Statistical mechanics tells us that if we know the kinds of particles involved (e.g., what
are their internal degrees of freedom) then we should be able to write down the so-called
partition function for the collection of particles that make up our system. Once we have the
partition function, we can derive equations that are analogs of the continuum thermodynamic
equations of our phenomenological theories.
2
It is natural in statistical mechanical discussions of various real systems (real ﬂuids, real
magnets) to employ simple or “minimal” models.3 The simplest model is the Ising model for
a region of spins, /Omega1,o na d-dimensional lattice. There are N(/Omega1)lattice sites/spins and since
the spins σ take values σi =± 1, there are a total of 2 N(/Omega1)possible states. The Hamiltonian
1 In fact, we most often don’t recognize the theories as phenomenological until long after they become
well-established.
2 Much of interest, philosophically, concerns the nature of these analogical derivations. Gibbs, for one, was
very cautious about claiming to have found identities that would allow one to claim that the thermodynamic
relations have been reduced to relations of statistical mechanics. See [ 4] for a discussion.
3 I will have more to say about the justiﬁcation of the use of such models below. For the term “minimal model”
and discussions concerning their use see [ 5,11,12].
123


=== PAGE 4 ===

R. W. Batterman
for this system can be written as
H/Omega1=− J
∑
<ij >
σiσj − h
∑
i∈/Omega1
σi, (1)
where < ij > signals nearest neighbor pairs on the lattice, J characterizes the spin-spin
coupling, and h is a (uniform) magnetic ﬁeld.
One can deﬁne the free energy for this region of spins as follows:
F/Omega1(T, h, J) =− kB T log
2N(/Omega1)
∑
n=1
e−βH/Omega1, (2)
with β = 1/kB T.
Given the Hamiltonian ( 1) one can write down the partition function
Z/Omega1=
2N(/Omega1)
∑
n=1
e−βEn[K], (3)
where En is the energy of the nth state and is a linear combination of the coupling constants
[K] (related to J ).
The partition function is a ﬁnite sum of 2 N(/Omega1)terms each of which is an exponential and
is positive. Hence the sums in both the free energy F/Omega1and the partition function Z/Omega1are
also analytic functions. This mathematical fact is at the center of what Kadanoff calls the
“extended singularity theorem.” [17, pp. 154–156.] The interpretation of this “theorem” has
been the subject of much philosophical controversy. In what follows, I intend to discuss some
of this controversy and some further implications of Kadanoff’s work on understanding of
the consequences of this mathematical fact for the interpretation of theories of phases of
matter.
2.1 Idealism?
In phenomenological thermodynamics, phase transitions are identiﬁed with singularities in
the derivatives of the free energy. They are places where those derivatives exhibit nonanalytic
behavior. If one accepts the idea that phase transitions are to be identiﬁed with such singular-
ities, and if one accepts that something like Eq. ( 2) “corresponds to” or is “analogous to” the
free energy of thermodynamics, then we have a fundamental problem: Since the free energy
cannot display nonanalytic behavior for ﬁnite N , there can be no phase transition according
to the statistical mechanics of ﬁnite systems. In his textStatistical Physics: Statics, Dynamics
and Renormalization Kadanoff puts the point most forcefully:
The existence of a phase transition requires an inﬁnite system. No phase transitions
occur in systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom. [ 15, p. 238]
An inﬁnite sum of analytic functions can yield a nonanalytic function. To understand
the existence and the nature of distinct phases and the transitions between them, therefore
requires that we consider inﬁnite systems.
Kadanoff notes that
[m]atter exists in different thermodynamic “phases”, which are different states of aggre-
gation with qualitatively different properties. These phases provoked studies that are
instructive to the history of science. The phases themselves are interesting to modern
123


=== PAGE 5 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
physics, and are provocative to modern philosophy. For example, the philosopher might
wish to note that strictly speaking, no phase transition can ever occur in a ﬁnite system.
…. [16, p. 778]
A realist philosopher will be dismayed by this conclusion. After all we see systems undergo
phase transitions (water in a tea kettle boils) as the temperature changes. And, we correctly
believe that the number of water molecules in the kettle is ﬁnite. How can matter both “exist
in different thermodynamic ‘phases’ ” as Kadanoff says, and yet it be the case that transitions
between the different phases cannot occur in actual(=real) ﬁnite systems?
There are several responses one can make in the face of this conundrum. Kadanoff, at least
in one publication, opted for an interpretation that philosophers might call “idealistic.”
4 He
expresses this in the very next sentence from the passage quoted above: “Thus in some sense,
phase transitions are not exactly embedded in the ﬁnite world but, rather, are productions of
the human imagination.”
Many would ﬁnd this conclusion to be a hard pill to swallow.
5 [16, p. 778] To claim that
a full understanding of phase transitions and the qualitatively different states of matter that
we experience on a daily basis, requires appeal to the human imagination goes against many
well-entrenched (realist) beliefs.
2.2 “Real” Phase Transitions Aren’t Sharp?
Many philosophers have taken a different position. They challenge the idea that the proper
understanding of a phase transition requires appeal to any mathematical singularities or non-
analytic behavior whatsoever.
6 These philosophers reject the idea that to properly characterize
the world—a world that genuinely exhibits phase transitions—requires that one make ref-
erence to inﬁnities or singularities. On their view, mathematical theories that require (either
implicitly or explicitly) the use of inﬁnite limits are simply convenient computational tools.
7
Such theories are short hand for detailed mathematical derivations involving “true” partition
functions with ﬁnitely many summands. This ﬁts quite well with the view that phenomeno-
logical, nonfundamental theories are in some sense dispensable. They don’t get the ontology
right in that they (apparently) assert that real systems like water in a tea kettle contain an
inﬁnite number of molecules. Fundamental theories, again, are the ones that describe the
world accurately, the way it really is. Thus, from this point of view, a proper understanding
of a real phase transition comes from examining the behavior of a system with ﬁnitely many
(10
23) molecules. And, of course, it follows from this that thermodynamics does not provide
a proper account of real phase transitions. This is just another indication that thermodynamics
is nonfundamental.
4 Roughly, this involves a claim to the effect that what there is in the world, or perhaps what we can know
about the world, is a product or function of human thought.
5 Actually, I’m not completely sure this was his view. In private conversation, the ﬁrst time I met him, Leo
told me he was a Platonist. This reﬂects a kind of idealism, but not one that particularly ﬁts well with a simple
reading of this sentence. And, as we will see below, he later argued for what seems to me, a very different
understanding of the consequences of the extended singularity theorem.
6 See [9] for an argument that deﬁning phase transitions in terms of nonanalyticities is evidence that we are
“taking thermodynamics too seriously.” See [ 2] for a response. See also [ 10].
7 A prominent proponent of this viewpoint is Jeremy Butterﬁeld [ 7,8] (see also, [ 21]) . On his view, the use
of inﬁnite limits receives a “straightforward justiﬁcation”:
The use of the inﬁnite limit …is justiﬁed, despite N being actually ﬁnite, by its being mathematically
convenient and empirically correct (up to the required accuracy). [ 7, p. 1077]
123


=== PAGE 6 ===

R. W. Batterman
I believe that there is another alternative. It is a point of view that takes the asymptotic
mathematics apparently required by the extended singularity theorem seriously without at
the same time committing one to believing the false claim that the contents of our tea kettles
contain an inﬁnite number of water molecules. I think that this position ﬁts nicely with
the general argument Kadanoff presents in his contribution to the The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Physics and it represents a rather radical departure from the philosophers’
usual way of thinking about physical theories. Kadanoff goes so far as to suggest that the
modern theory of critical phenomena represents a new theory. Furthermore, he asserts that,
in the sense of Thomas Kuhn, the development of this theory of critical phenomena provides
an example of a scientiﬁc revolution [ 19]. In the next section, I explore rather superﬁcially
how this new theory arose. In Sect. 4 I discuss just how different the kind of coarse-graining
or upscaling provided by the new (RG) theory is in comparison to the kind of ensemble
averaging characteristic of orthodox statistical mechanics and mean ﬁeld theory.
3 The “New” Theory of the Critical Region
The history of theories of critical phenomena provides an interesting example of the kind of
conservatism with respect to accepted theory that Kuhn called “normal science.” Physicists,
starting really with van der Waals, employed what is now called “mean ﬁeld theory” in the
attempt to describe phase diagrams exhibiting behavior of the type shown in Fig. 1 [17,
pp. 147–149]. V an der Waals’ equation of state corrected the ideal gas law by including
parameters relating to average effects of hypothesized molecules. As Kadanoff points out,
the van der Waals’ equation of state fails to predict the boiling phase transition [ 17, pp. 149–
150]. Maxwell corrected this and was able to construct the qualitative portrait displayed in
Fig. 1 with the “ﬂat” isotherms in the boiling region. We can also plot this boiling transition
as a coexistence curve displaying the density values for the vapor and liquid phases in the
kettle as a function of temperature. This is represented in Fig. 2.
One can deﬁne an order parameter to characterize the behavior in this region as the
difference between the liquid and vapor densities:
|ρ
vap − ρliq |∝| t|β, (4)
where
t = T − Tc
Tc
.
Mean ﬁeld theory predicts that β takes on the value 1/2 but experiments on many differ-
ent ﬂuids yield values closer to .35. It is a remarkable fact that different ﬂuids with different
molecular structures exhibit the same scaling behavior in the neighborhood of their respective
critical points. A famous ﬁgure from E. A. Guggenheim’s 1945 paper entitled “The Principle
of Corresponding States” illustrates this universal behavior. When plotted in reduced coor-
dinates, the coexistence curves for eight different ﬂuids all collapse onto the same curve. See
Fig. 3.
Mean ﬁeld theory was able to predict the existence of phase transitions and in particular
the existence of power law scaling behavior near criticality. But, as noted, it failed to match
experimental evidence. It worked very well in regions of the phase diagram (Fig. 1)t h a t
were far from the critical region, but misrepresented the behavior of systems near criticality.
However, mean ﬁeld theory did (theoretically) lead to the expectation that different systems
123


=== PAGE 7 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
P
Pc
Tc
Liquid
Region
Liquid-Vapor
Region
“Boiling”
Vapor
Region
Ideal Gas
Region
Isotherms
T = Constant
647 K
V
22.9MPa
Fig. 1 Cartoon PVT diagram for water [ 17, p. 148]
TTc
liq uid
re gion
vapor
re gion
region of
liquid, vapor
coexistence
coexistence
curve
ρρ
liq
ρ
vap
T '
(T')
(T')
Fig. 2 Cartoon coexistence curve
near criticality should display similar (scaling) behavior. Despite its misrepresentation of
near critical behavior, theorists to some extent carried on using the mean ﬁeld approach. 8
Interestingly though, as investigators began to focus on (non-mean ﬁeld theory) behaviors
near criticality, they noticed similarities in the between different systems.9 That a ferromagnet
8 This is a hallmark of Kuhn’s characterization of “normal science.”
9 Kadanoff notes that similarities between different systems were well known to early investigators [ 14,p .
103]. The idea that the “details of the system undergoing the phase transition might be irrelevant and that
many different phase transitions problems might be essentially identical” was already noted in Landau and
Lifshitz in the context of mean ﬁeld theory. I believe that this mean ﬁeld understanding of universality also
contributed to that theory’s entrenchment in the scientiﬁc community.
123


=== PAGE 8 ===

R. W. Batterman
Fig. 3 Universality of critical phenomena [ 13]
with order parameter deﬁned as the net magnetization displays the same behavior in the
critical region as does a liquid/gas system with the order parameter given in Eq. ( 4)w a sa
remarkable fact. Kadanoff stated the hypothesis of universality in the following way:
All phase transition problems can be divided into a small number of different classes
depending upon the dimensionality of the system and the symmetries of the order state.
Within each class, all phase transitions have identical behaviour in the critical region,
only the name of the variables are changed. [ 14, p. 103]
Given the rather large discrepancy between the mean ﬁeld theory predictions of behavior
near the critical point and experiment, many experimentalists tried for more accurate assess-
ments of the values of the critical exponents or critical indices, e.g. β. Kadanoff asserts that
this work (sometimes subject to mild ridicule) was well worth the effort:
During the many years in which critical behavior has been a subject of scientiﬁc study,
many human-years of scientiﬁc effort has been devoted to the accurate determination
of these indicies. Sometimes scientists complained that this effort was misplaced. After
all, there is little insight to be obtained from the statement thatβ (the index that describes
the jump in the liquid–gas phase transition) has the value of 0.31 versus 0.35, or 0.125 or
0.5. But these various values can be obtained from theories that give a direct calculation
of critical quantities or related them to one another. Finding the index-values then gave
an opportunity to check the theory and see whether the underlying ideas were sound.
Thus, the small industry of evaluating critical indices supports the basic effort devoted
to understanding critical phenomena. [ 17, p. 160]
Most importantly there was a shift of emphasis to study the region of the phase diagrams
in the neighborhood of the critical points. The other regions (reasonably well understood in
mean ﬁeld theoretic terms) were put to the side. This led to an intense focus on universality
and scaling. It also led to what Kadanoff takes to be a new specialized theory “intended to
apply mostly to the region near the critical point.” [ 17, p. 161]
123


=== PAGE 9 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
The new theory necessarily must part from the orthodox statistical mechanics that is
employed in mean ﬁeld approaches. The reason, as we have already noted, has to do with
the fact expressed by the extended singularity theorem. In order to describe the behavior
near the critical point one needs an inﬁnite system.
10 Statistical mechanical averages ignore
ﬂuctuations and near critical points ﬂuctuations dominate. Kadanoff describes the chaos at
an (in)famous 1937 meeting celebrating van der Waals’ 100th birthday. At that meeting the
participants debated whether a (ﬁnite) partition function could or could not explain sharp
phase transitions. In effect they wondered about the applicability of statistical mechanics.
With hindsight Kadanoff argues that the participants were right
to be disquieted by the applicability of statistical mechanics. But they focused upon the
wrong part of the phase diagram. The liquid region is described correctly by statistical
mechanics. But this theory does not work well in the two-phase, “boiling”, region of
Fig. [ 1]. Here the ﬂuctuations entirely dominate and the system sloshes between the
two phases. The behavior of the interface that separates the phases is determined by
delicate effects of dynamics and previous history, and by hydrodynamic effects includ-
ing gravity, surface tension, and the behavior of droplets. Hence, the direct application
of statistical mechanics is fraught with difﬁculty precisely in the midst of the phase
transition. Thus the extended singularity theorem suggests that a new theory is required
to treat all the ﬂuctuations appearing near singularities. [ 17, pp. 163–164]
Mean ﬁeld theory fails in the critical region because it cannot determine the effect of (spa-
tial) ﬂuctuations at all length scales on the average behavior of the relevant order parameter.
Somehow this hard mathematical problem needed to be tamed. At this point, I am going to
stop following Kadanoff’s historically oriented discussion leading to the development of the
block scaling techniques that allowed for the construction of effective Hamiltonians, etc. The
ideas are well-known and Kadanoff’s contributions are crucial for the ﬁnal development of
the RG transformation.
I want now to focus on several important ideas that support Kadanoff’s claim that the
development of the RG really did provide a new theory of critical phenomena and potentially
a new reason for philosophers to rethink their overly simplistic understanding of the role of
mathematics in the formulation or construction of physical theories.
4 The RG Revolution
Reconsider the view that statistical mechanics is a more fundamental theory than thermody-
namics. Since it (together with the quantum theory) correctly characterizes the ﬁnitely many
constituents of ﬂuids and gases, one should expect it to be able to explain the behavior of
such systems throughout the various regions of the phase diagrams. Statistical mechanics is
inherently a means for averaging. And the averaging techniques that it engenders allow one
to “upscale”, “coarse-grain”, or to ﬁnd statistical correlates of thermodynamic functions only
in certain regimes. A different kind of coarse-graining or upscaling is needed for a theory of
critical phenomena. And it is a kind of upscaling that requires a different set of mathemat-
ical tools than are present in orthodox Gibbsian statistical mechanics.
11 As we’ve seen the
10 One needs this for ﬁrst order transitions as well, but the singularities are weaker.
11 It was in part Gibbs’ recognition that his ensembles failed to provide an account of phase transitions that
he exercised extreme caution in claiming to have identiﬁed statistical mechanical analogs of thermodynamic
properties like temperature and entropy. See [ 4] for a discussion of Gibbs’ caution and his awareness that
123


=== PAGE 10 ===

R. W. Batterman
orthodox theory considers the partition function for the actual ﬁnite system. The new theory
needs to employ mathematical asymptotics and, as the extended singularity theorem asserts,
must work with inﬁnite systems.
12
4.1 Universality as Explanans
We have seen that one aspect of the theoretical focus on the critical regions was a recognition of
the importance of universality. Similar scaling behavior by different systems is an empirical
fact about the world. And, in much of Kadanoff’s work, and the work of others, it was
something to be appealed to in various explanatory contexts. I will describe what I mean by
this in a moment. Ultimately, however, I aim to consider the following question:
– From a theoretical point of view , how is universal behavior possible and how can it be
explained?
This takes the existence of universality to be the explanandum (or thing to be explained)
rather than the explanans (or thing(s) doing the explaining). Kadanoff deﬁnitely had ideas
about what, physically, was responsible for universality and so, he had a good idea of how
one might provide the explanation.
13 But I think the asymptotic techniques employed in the
Wilson reﬁnement of the block transformation arguments provide the key to the explanation.
Before addressing the question of how universality can be explained, let me provide an
example of how universality has been appealed to in order to explain other things. Kadanoff
shows how “[u]niversality describes the relationship among different phase transitions prob-
lems.” [14, p. 105] To this end, imagine that another ﬁeld is inserted into the equation for the
free energy for a ferromagnet. Call that ﬁeld λ and let U be the operator that is its thermo-
dynamic conjugate. In other words, we redeﬁne the problem by adding λ and U to the free
energy:
F = F(ϵ, h, λ),
with differential
dF =< M > dh+ < H > dϵ+ < U > dλ. (5)
Footnote 11 continued
phase transitions would pose theoretical problems for the statistical mechanical theory he developed. See [ 22,
Chap. 3] for a discussion of Gibbs’ thermodynamic analogies.
12 As an interesting aside, Clifford Truesdell, in a lecture entitled “The Ergodic Problem in Classical Statistical
Mechanics,” discusses Khinchin’s use of asymptotics to try to justify the identiﬁcation of inﬁnite time averages
of certain functions with phase (or ensemble) averages. The last paragraph reads as follows:
I should like to be able to say that statistics is unnecessary, that the name “statistical mechanics” is a
misnomer for “asymptotic mechanics”, as far as equilibrium is concerned. This is almost true, but not
quite so. [23, p. 82]
On my understanding, Truesdell is stressing the importance of appealing N →∞ limits in justifying certain
claims about ﬁnite systems whose observable properties are represented by sum-functions. Actually, I believe
it is possible to tell an RG story to justify the use of the microcanonical probability distribution for calculating
equilibrium values for functions of this form. See [ 4]a n d[18, pp. 139–142] for details.
13 In his 1970 lecture [ 14] Kadanoff says the following:
The physical origin of this hypothesis [of universality] is the observation that critical phenomena are
dominated by ﬂuctuations in M [the order parameter] and H [the energy] which appear in a special
scale which is very long compared to the force range. Then these ﬂuctuations cannot probe all the
details of the interatomic potential. Rather they only see certain gross features of the potential …. [ 14,
p. 104]
123


=== PAGE 11 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
One then considers a continuous variation fromλ= 0t o λ= 1 to “…represent the change
in the Hamiltonian which takes us from the Ising model to the Heisenberg model, or from
Ni to Fe or from a nearest neighbor interaction to a next nearest neighbor interaction.” [ 14,
p. 105] In effect, this variation “morphs” the atomic/lower scale details of one system into
those of another. Universality, then
…implies that the basic thermodynamic functions and correlation functions only
depend on λ via a trivial change of variables. The functional form is the same as
at λ= 0. However, the variables in these functions are changed in that h, ϵ,a n d M are
each multiplied by parameters a, b, c, d which depend upon λ.[ 14, p. 105, Emphasis
added.]
Let
λ= J
n.n.n.
Jn.n
,
and consider the variation from nearest-neighbor to next-nearest-neighbor coupling. Let ϵ
and h be deﬁned as follows:
ϵ = (T − Tc(λ))
Tc(λ) and h = μβ Hz
KT c
.
For λ= 0 write the order parameter as
< M >= m0(h,ϵ)
and the spin-spin correlation function as
<σ z(0)σz(r)> = g0(h,ϵ, r).
Then Kadanoff [14, p. 106] asserts that “[u]niversality implies for λ̸= 0”:
< M >= am 0(¯h, ¯ϵ), < σ z(0)σz(r)> = (ab/d3)g0(¯h, ¯ϵ, ¯r),
where
¯h = bh, ¯ϵ = cϵ, ¯r = dr.
This means that the functional forms of < M > and <σ z(0)σz(r)> do not change as λ
varies. The point here is that universality is being assumed a n dt h a ti ti sb e i n gappealed to,
to explain why “the parameters should be materially independent.” [ 14, p. 107]
The next section of [ 14] is entitled “Scaling derived from universality.” Here again the
empirically recognized fact of universality plays the role of a premise. It is used in arguments
aimed to derive theoretical descriptions of observed scaling relations and so is used to explain
the existence of scaling.
4.2 Universality as Explanandum
However, what about the legitimate question, highlighted above, concerning the very exis-
tence of universality.From a theoretical point of view, why should we expect the data collapse
displayed in Fig. 3? This question has a different form than, say, the question of why the
coexistence curve for Xe has the form that it does—a form that ﬁts a scaling law relation
|ρvap (Xe) − ρliq (Xe)|= kXe|t|β.
123


=== PAGE 12 ===

R. W. Batterman
Fig. 4 Sierpinski triangle
Presumably an answer to this question will very much depend upon the details of the inter-
molecular potential for Xe. Similarly, an explanation for why methane’s order parameter
exhibits the behavior
|ρ
vap (CH4) − ρliq (CH4)|= kCH4 |t|β
will be some detailed derivation from the detailed quantum Hamiltonian for methane. Neither
of these individual explanations provide an answer to the question about the general/universal
pattern displayed across a host of systems. There are two kinds of “why-questions” that one
might ask about a pattern of behavior.
– Type I: One might ask why a particular instance of the pattern was realized.
– Type II: One might ask why the pattern itself exists across its different realizations. [ 1,
Chap. 3].
By way of making the difference between these questions clear, consider the outcome of
what some have called the “chaos game.” Here one marks three vertices of a triangle A, B,
and C on a plane. Choose a point somewhere on the plane and roll a three sided die labled
a, b,a n dc. Go half way to the corresponding vertex and put a point. That’s the new starting
place. Iterate and one gets a Sierpinski triangle (Fig. 4). Why did the particular instance of
the pattern appear? Answer: We started at point p rolled an a,t h e nm o v e dh a l fw a yt o w a r da,
rolled a c, and so on. That provides a complete explanation of the appearance of the pattern
known as the Sierpinski triangle. Why, in general, do we get patterns of this type (with this
particular fractal dimension, etc.)? The answer provided to the ﬁrst question is essentially
irrelevant for our response to the second question. Answering the second requires an appeal
to the strong law of large numbers. In fact, we explain why we should expect this pattern by
showing it to have probability one in the space of sequences of As, Bs, and Cs generated by
our die rolls. It also follows that we can lop off any ﬁnite initial sequence of As, Bs, and Cs
from any sequence of rolls without changing the the fact that we can expect, with measure
one, that the triangle pattern will emerge. (The details of arbitrarily long ﬁnite sequences are
irrelevant for the outcome. One can “morph” one sequence into another without affecting the
emergent pattern.)
In asking why we should expect universal critical behavior across a wide range of molec-
ularly distinct systems, we are asking a question of this second type. And the answer is going
123


=== PAGE 13 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
to be similar in some respects to the appeal to the strong law of large numbers. We will need
to appeal to asymptotics. We can explain why we should expect such behavior, if we can
demonstrate that the lower scale details that genuinely do distinguish the systems from one
another (those molecular details, for example, that are responsible for the system’s having the
critical temperature and pressure it actually has), are irrelevant for the behavior expressed
by the scaling law for the order parameter. If we can tell a story about how these lower scale
molecular details are irrelevant for the upper scale observed scaling behavior, then we will
have an explanation for the universality displayed in Guggenheim’s Fig. 3.
4.3 RG: New Problems and New Solutions
An important consequence of the focus on the critical region was a better understanding of
the concept of universality as described above in Sect. 3. Kadanoff understood the idea that
repeated blocking operations would enable one, in effect, to eliminate irrelevant details about
the atomic potentials (irrelevant, that is, for describing behavior in the critical region). He
saw the procedure as a means for constructing a sequence of effective Hamiltonians each of
which (because of universality) could be assumed to have the same structural form as the
previous one. Furthermore, each of new (rescaled) parameters in the Hamiltonian would be
proportional to their old values near criticality.
However, he did not recognize that this iterative behavior could be understood in terms of
dynamical systems theory. The idea of an iterated ﬂow on an abstract (dynamical) space to
a possible ﬁxed point provides the means to answer questions that statistical mechanics with
its averaging procedures cannot. Crucial, of course, to ﬁnding a ﬁxed point, is the fact that
at criticality the correlation length diverges.
14 Unless one has correlations of inﬁnite extent,
the iterative blocking procedure will get hung up at a given length scale and one will not ﬁnd
the ﬁxed point.
Most important is the fact that while the dynamical mathematical analysis necessary to
reach a ﬁxed point requires inﬁnities and divergences, the topological nature of the RG ﬂow
in the neighborhood of the ﬁxed point can tell us much about the behavior of near critical
systems. That is, the RG is not just a theory of the critical point, but rather it is a theory of the
critical region. And, this covers large but ﬁnite systems. So, contrary to the line of reasoning
presented in Sect. 2.2 the explanation of the behavior of real ﬁnite systems requires the use
of mathematical inﬁnities, but it does not require there to be inﬁnite real systems.
15
Theories are supposed to provide descriptions and explanations. They enable us to solve
certain kinds of problems presented to us by the world. Statistical mechanical averaging or
mean ﬁeld theory failed to solve the problem of characterizing the critical region in part
because statistical mechanics consider problems to have a certain form. Kadanoff puts this
particularly nicely:
14 It is also important to recognize that at the critical point the ﬂuid exhibits fractal-like, self-similarity. It is
the recognition of this fact that allowed Kadanoff to introduce the blocking operations and Wilson to think
about ﬁnding ﬁxed points of the RG transformation.
15 A referee objects to this way of putting things because according to the point of view in Sect. 2.2 the use of
inﬁnities is merely a matter of mathematical convenience and so, the claim I’m making here is completely in
line with the claims of those supporting the idea that real phase transitions aren’t sharp. In response, it seems
to me that if one is going to hold that the use of the inﬁnite limits is a convenience, then one should be able to
say how (even if inconveniently) one might go about ﬁnding a ﬁxed point of the RG transformation without
inﬁnite iterations. I have not seen any sketch of how this is to be done. The point is that the ﬁxed point, as just
noted, determines the behavior of the ﬂow in its neighborhood. If we want to explain the universal behavior of
ﬁnite but large systems using the RG, then we need to ﬁnd a ﬁxed point and, to my knowledge, this requires
an inﬁnite system.
123


=== PAGE 14 ===

R. W. Batterman
Previous work in statistical physics had emphasized ﬁnding the properties of prob-
lems deﬁned by statistical sums, each sum being based upon a probability distribution
deﬁned by particular values of coupling constants like K and h. Such sums would
be called solutions to the problems in question. In the renormalization group work the
emphasis is on connecting problems by saying that different problems could have iden-
tical solutions. The method involved ﬁnding different values of couplings that would
then give identical free energies and other properties. These set of couplings would
then form a representation of a universality class. All the interactions that ﬂow into a
given ﬁxed point in the course of an inﬁnite number of renormalizations belong to the
universality class of that ﬁxed point. [ 17, p. 179]
The mathematical asymptotics that characterizes the RG allows one to solve different
problems. Among other things, it allows one to understand and to some extent quantify the
existence and nature of universal patterns realized by radically different systems.
4.4 Justifying Minimal Models
There is another aspect to acknowledging the existence of different kinds of problems that has,
to my mind, interesting philosophical consequences. In Sect. 2 I described the Ising model
using the term, borrowed from Goldenfeld, of “minimal model.” [ 11, p. 33] Philosophers
have long tried to understand the epistemological role of the use of models and idealizations
in describing and explaining the behavior of relatively complex physical systems. [ 3,20]
One particularly import question concerns the justiﬁcation for the use of models (minimal
models) that are not (very) representative of the systems they are used to understand. The
Ising model is a case in point. A set of discrete spins on a lattice really does not look at all
like the liquids in our tea kettles or other vessels. How is it that we can, nevertheless, use the
Ising model and others to explain and understand the behavior of real systems in the world?
The RG explanation of the existence of universality provides an interesting answer to this
question. [5] The process of renormalization aims to ﬁnd a ﬁxed point of the renormalization
group transformation. If it does, then all (critical) Hamiltonians that ﬂow to that ﬁxed point
are in the same universality class. That is to say, the universality class is the set of systems with
Hamiltonians in the basin of attraction of the ﬁxed point. By investigating the nature of the RG
ﬂow in the neighborhood of that point one can describe the shared, universal macroscopic
behavior for all systems in that class. If an Ising Hamiltonian is a member of that class,
then we have a justiﬁcation for using that model to investigate the critical and near critical
behaviors of real systems that are also members of that class. Despite the wild idealizations
and over simpliﬁcations characteristic of the Ising model (and other lattice models), the
investigation of their behavior will be guaranteed to tell us about the macroscopic behaviors
of actual gases, ﬂuids, and magnets. Thus, from an epistemic point of view, the RG theory
answers pressing philosophical questions about the use of idealizations and models in new
and interesting ways.
5 Conclusion
This paper has aimed to examine the consequences of an RG account of critical phenomena
and universal behavior for our philosophical understanding of the nature of physical theories.
One of Kadanoff’s main conclusions is that the RG constitutes a different kind of theory than
orthodox statistical mechanics. It is not simply a new mathematical tool that gets attached to
123


=== PAGE 15 ===

Philosophical Implications of Kadanoff’s Work...
the orthodox theory. Instead, it represents a new, and quite revolutionary, development. New
kinds of questions can be formulated and answered using the mathematics of the RG. The
content of the theory is informed by the mathematics that it employs.
This represents a rather dramatic departure from philosophical orthodoxy concerning the
nature of physical theories. That orthodoxy locates the content of a theory in the axiomatic
structure and, typically at least, assigns the use of inﬁnite mathematics a more pragmatically
justiﬁed role. We employ inﬁnities and continua for computational ease. The theories that
use such mathematics are not fundamental.
Kadanoff’s understanding of the new RG theory of critical phenomena reﬂects a different
conception of the role of asymptotics and inﬁnities. The kind of upscaling that leads to an
understanding of the universal macroscopic behavior of micro-diverse systems is different
than the upscaling provided in the ensemble averaging of mean ﬁeld theory. He describes
this new kind of upscaling in the following poetic passage:
…the extended singularity theorem suggests that phase transitions are triggered by a
very elegant mathematical juxtaposition put before us by Nature. On the one hand,
the phase transition is connected with a symmetry operation built into the microscopic
couplings of the system. For example, the ferromagnetic based upon the breaking of a
symmetry in the possible directions of spins. On the other hand, the phase transitions
also make use of the extended topology of [a] system that extends over an effectively
inﬁnite region of space. This coupling of microscopic with macroscopic has an unex-
pected and quite breathtaking beauty. [ 17, p. 183]
Here, Kadanoff displays the hallmark of the natural philosopher. This seems like a good place
to end.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Michael Miller for helpful comments.
References
1. Batterman, R.W.: The Devil in the Details: Asymptotic Reasoning in Explanation, Reduction, and Emer-
gence. Oxford Studies in Philosophy of Science. Oxford University Press (2002)
2. Batterman, R.W.: Critical phenomena and breaking drops: Inﬁnite idealizations in physics. Stud. Hist.
Philos. Mod. Phys. 36, 225–244 (2005)
3. Batterman, R.W.: Idealization and modeling. Synthese 169, 427–446 (2009)
4. Batterman, R.W.: Reduction and renormalization. In: Ernst, G., Hüttemann, A. (eds.) Time, Chance, and
Reduction: Philosophical Aspects of Statistical Mechanics, chap. 9, pp. 159–179. Cambridge University
Press (2010)
5. Batterman, R.W., Rice, C.C.: Minimal model explanations. Philos. Sci. 81(3), 349–376 (2014)
6. Brush, S.G.: Statistical Physics and the Atomic Theory of Matter, From Boyle and Newton to Landau
and Onsager. Princeton Series in Physics. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1983)
7. Butterﬁeld, J.: Less is different: emergence and reduction reconciled. Found. Phys. 41(6), 1065–1135
(2011)
8. Butterﬁeld, J., Bouatta, N.: Renormalization for philosophers. In: Bigaj, T., Wüthrich, C. (eds.) Meta-
physics in Contemporary Physics, vol. 104, pp. 437–485. Poznan Studies in Philosophy of Science (2015)
9. Callender, C.: Taking thermodynamics too seriously. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys.32(4), 533–539 (2001)
10. Fraser, J.D.: Spontaneous symmetry breaking in ﬁnite systems. Philos. Sci. 83, 585–605 (2016)
11. Goldenfeld, N.: Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization Group. Number 85 in Frontiers
in Physics. Addison-Wesley, Reading (1992)
12. Goldenfeld, N., Kadanoff, L.P .: Simple lessons from complexity. Science 284, 87–89 (1999)
13. Guggenheim, E.A.: The principle of corresponding states. J. Chem. Phys. 13(7), 253–261 (1945)
123


=== PAGE 16 ===

R. W. Batterman
14. Kadanoff, L.P .: Critical behavior. Universality and scaling. In: Green, M.S. (ed.) Proceedings of the
International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi” Course LI, volume Course LI, pp. 100–117, New Y ork.
Italian Physical Society, Academic Press (1971)
15. Kadanoff, L.P .: Statistical Physics: Statics, Dynamics, and Renormalization. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
(2000)
16. Kadanoff, L.P .: More is the same; phase transitions and mean ﬁeld theories. J. Stat. Phys. 137, 777–797
(2009)
17. Kadanoff, L.P .: Theories of matter: inﬁnities and renormalization. In: Batterman, R.W. (ed.) The Oxford
Handbook of Philosophy of Physics, chap. 4, pp. 141–188. Oxford University Press (2013)
18. Koralov, L., Sinai, Y .G. (2007) Theory of Probability and Random Processes, 2nd edn. Springer (2007)
19. Kuhn, T.S.: The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 2nd edn. The Universtity of Chicago Press, Chicago
(1970)
20. Morgan, M.S., Morrison, M. (eds.). Models as Mediators: Perspectives on Natural and Social Science.
Cambridge University Press (1999)
21. Norton, J.D.: Approximation and idealization: why the difference matters. Philos. Sci. 79(2), 207–232
(2012)
22. Sklar, L.: Physics and Chance: Philosophical Issues in the Foundations of Statstical Mechanics. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge (1993)
23. Truesdell, C.: The ergodic problem in classical statistical mechanics. In: Six Lectures on Modern Natural
Philosophy, chap. 5, pp. 65–82. Springer, New Y ork (1966)
24. Truesdell, C.: Method and taste in natural philosophy. In: Six Lectures on Modern Natural Philosophy,
chap. 6, pp. 83–108. Springer (1966)
123
