=== PAGE 1 ===

Universality and
RG Explanations
Robert W. Batterman
University of Pittsburgh
I discuss the concept of universality, speci ﬁcally of physical phenomena, and
even more speciﬁcally of the behavior of critical phenomena. In the philosophical
literature, I believe, this concept has been widely misunderstood. In particular ,
a number of recent attempts to formulate what counts as an explanation for the
possibility of universal behavior are misguided because they fail to properly
understand what the explanandum is. A proper explanation involves recogniz-
ing that universality implies a kind of stability of behavior under pertur-
bation. Furthermore, this stability itself requires explanation. I relate the
explanation of the stability characteristic of universality to the autonomy of
certain models or theories at continuu m scales from those and scales of the
molecular or atomic.
1. Introduction
In its broadest sense, “universality” is a technical term for something quite
ordinary. It refers to the existence of patterns of behavior by physical sys-
tems that recur and repeat despite the fact that in some sense the situations
in which these patterns recur and repeat are different. Rainbows, for exam-
ple, always exhibit the same pattern of spacings and intensities of their
bows despite the fact that the rain showers are different on each occasion.
They are different because the shapes of the drops, and their sizes can vary
quite widely due to differences in temperature, wind direction, etc. There
are different questions one might ask about such patterns. For instance,
one might ask why the particular rainbow that I ’m currently seeing ex-
hibits the spacings and intensities of its bows that it does. Perhaps an
answer to that question might need to refer to the particular sizes and
Perspectives on Science 2019, vol. 27, no. 1
© 2019 by The Massachusetts Institute of Technology doi:10.1162/posc_a_00298
Thanks to Michael Miller and Porter Williams for helpful comments and discussions.
26


=== PAGE 2 ===

shapes of the drops in the particular rain shower at this time. On the other
hand, one might ask about how it is possible that despite the differences in
the lower scale details about the sizes and shapes of drops in different rain
showers, the spacings and intensities of the bows in the different rainbows
are the same. This latter question concerns the explanation of the (uni-
versal) pattern of behavior. It is arguable that the answer to the former
question (or even answers to the former question for all the different rain-
bows all taken together) cannot answer the second question (Batterman
2002a, 2002b).
This paper examines what is, in the physics literature, the paradigm
example of universality; namely the so-called universality of critical
phenomena—certain kinds of phase transitions that systems (e.g., ﬂuids
and magnets) can undergo. In the next section I describe the phenomena.
In section 3 I lay out the mathematical and physical ingredients required
for one to describe this universal pa ttern. These include the introduction
of a function called an “order parameter ” that serves to represent a surpris-
ing change of symmetry as a system passes through a so-called critical
point. Section 4 looks back to some early work on phase transitions to
see how the concept of universality should be properly de ﬁned. One of
the most important features, virtual ly ignored in recent philosophical dis-
cussions, is a kind of stability of macroscopic behavior under changes of
microscopic details. Any explanation of the possibility of universal behavior
must account for this type of stability. In section 5 I brie ﬂy discuss how the re-
normalization group (RG) can explain the existence of universal behavior, in
part by explaining the existence of this kind of stability. Finally, in section 6
and in light of the recognition of the importance of the conception of stability
discussed in section 4, I address some objections to the RG explanation of
universality that have been raised repeatedly in the philosophical literature.
2. Universality of Critical Phenomena: A Paradigm Case
One of the most striking examples of universal behavior concerns the pattern
displayed by molecularly distinct ﬂuids near their so-called critical points.
It is worth spending a bit of time examining this paradigmatic example of
universality.
Everyone knows that water can exist in three distinct phases: as a liquid,
as a solid, and as vapor or gas. One can represent these different phases
graphically using the thermodynamic variables, pressure ( P), volume
(V ), and temperature ( T ). In ﬁgure 1, the curves show how the pressure
depends on the volume at different ﬁxed values for the temperature.
Consider the boiling region. This corresponds to the process that takes
place when water boils in a kettle. Inside the kettle both vapor and liquid
27Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 3 ===

coexist. The special point ( Tc, Pc) is called the critical point. It is special in
the following way. Below the critical temperature ( Tc ¼ 647K) and critical
pressure ( Pc ¼ 22.9Mpa) one ﬁnds the region of liquid/vapor coexistence.
Above that critical point, the kettle will no longer contain two distinct
phases of water. There is an abrupt change in the makeup of the stuff in
the kettle at that critical temperature and pressure. For carbon dioxide
(as for many other ﬂuids) the diagram looks exactly the same although there
will be different values for the critical temperature and pressure.
1 In saying
that the diagram looks exactly the same for carbon dioxide as it does for
water, the important thing is that the shapes of the dotted lines near
(Tc, Pc)f o rb o t hﬂuids are identical. So, while water and carbon dioxide
are very different ﬂuids as is evidenced by their very different critical tem-
peratures and pressures, nevertheless near their critical points ( “near criti-
cality”) they exhibit identical behavior. This is universal behavior realized
by molecularly very different ﬂuids.
A remarkable representation of the experimental fact of universality is
provided by a ﬁgure in E. A. Guggenheim ’s 1945 paper entitled “The
Principle of Corresponding States. ” When plotted in reduced coordinates
1. For carbon dioxide, Tc ¼ 31.1C (¼ 304.3K) and Pc ¼ 7.2MPa. Experimentally, it is
a lot easier to realize the critical temperature and pressure of CO2 than it is for water.
Figure 1. Cartoon PVT Diagram for Water (Kadanoff 2013, p. 148).
28 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 4 ===

(ρ
ρc
, T
Tc
), the coexistence curves for eight different ﬂuids near criticality all
collapse onto the same curve. See ﬁgure 2.
One can quantify the universal behavior by introducing a so-called “order
parameter.” For the transition between the boiling region with two co-
existent phases and the region above, de ﬁne the order parameter Ψ to be
the difference between the densities of the liquid and the vapor in the kettle:
Ψ ¼j ρl −ρvj:
Then the relation2
Ψ ∝ /C15β (1)
describes the shape of the coexistence curve for a ﬂuid. Universality is also
expressed by the fact that β i st h es a m ef o rt h ed i f f e r e n tﬂuids. This is just
what is represented in ﬁgure 2.
Figure 2. Universality of Critical Phenomena (Guggenheim 1945).
2. /C15 ¼ |(Tc − T )/T| and is a measure of how close a system is to its critical temperature
in dimensionless units.
29Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 5 ===

Guggenheim ’s demonstration of the data collapse is indeed striking.
But it is even more remarkable that the critical behavior of magnets exhibits
the identical scaling relation. For a ferromagnet the order parameter is M,
the net magnetization, and the relation
M ∝ /C15β (2)
holds as well with β identical to the value in equation (1).
3. The Ingredients of Universality
3.1. Order Parameters and Symmetries
Exactly what kind of quantities are the order parameters Ψ and M? One
can think of them as thermodynamic properties that allow us to character-
ize the qualitative behavior of systems near their critical points. That is,
one can treat these as thermodynamic properties on a par with pressure,
temperature, and volume. As thermodynamic properties they describe
the behavior to be expected as a system is cooled from a temperature above
T
c to below Tc. In the case of Ψ we see that as that temperature is crossed,
there is a spontaneous appearance of two new states of matter (liquid and
vapor). In the case of M, the magnet exhibits zero net magnetization (it is
in a so-called paramagnetic phase) and spontaneously gains a net magne-
tization as the critical temperature is crossed. In both cases, above T
c there
exists a symmetry that is broken upon passing through Tc. For example, in
a magnet in zero external magnetic ﬁeld, there is rotational symmetry (no
preferred direction) above Tc that is broken upon passing through Tc: All of
a sudden there is a preferred direction of magnetization.
The concept of an order parameter was ﬁrst introduced 3 by Landau in
1937 (Landau 1965, pp. 193 –216). The order parameter, as noted, cap-
tures the macro or continuum behavior and re ﬂects the symmetry changes
in a ﬂuid as a parameter (temperature) is varied. But, from the point of
view of statistical mechanics, one needs to think about Ψ and M in a dif-
ferent way. What, after all, is responsible for there being non-zero values
of M below Tc? The answer has to depend on some kind of lower scale/
microscopic features of the magnet —some fact about the arrangement of
(magnetic) spins on a lattice. Michael Fisher puts this as follows:
To assert that there exists an order parameter in essence says:
“I may not understand the microscopic phenomena at all ” (as was
historically, the case for super ﬂuid helium), “but I recognize that
3. Michael Fisher (Fisher 1998, p. 654) says it ’s fair to say Landau invented the order
parameter.
30 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 6 ===

there is a microscopic level and I believe it should have certain
general, overall properties as regards locality and symmetry: those
then serve to govern the most characteristic behavior on scales greater
than atomic. ” (Fisher 1998, p. 654)
Once one sees the order parameter as coding for some feature of the micro-
structure of the magnet or ﬂuid, one is in the domain of statistical physics.
Now one needs to treat the order parameters as averages and one needs to
consider the possibility of ﬂuctuations in the values of the order parameters.
Furthermore, thinking like this actually requires that one distinguish be-
tween the macroscopic scale (the scale of the continuum where the order
parameter is simply a function of thermodynamic macroscopic properties
like temperature and pressure), a mesoscale where ﬂuctuations in aggregates
of atomic scale properties may be important, and the atomic scale where
what matters is the detailed natures of the atoms/molecules and spins.
The order parameter lives in the intermediate region. Here is Fisher again:
Signiﬁcantly, in my view, Landau ’s introduction of the order
parameter exposed a novel and unexpected foliation or level in our
understanding of the physical world. Traditionally, one characterizes
statistical mechanics as directly linking the microscopic world of nuclei
and atoms (on length scales of 10
−13 to 10 −8 cm) to the macroscopic
world of say, millimeters to meters. But the order parameter,
as a dynamic, ﬂuctuating object in many cases intervenes on an
intermediate or mesoscopic level characterized by scales of tens or
hundreds of angstroms up to microns (say, 10 −6.5 to 10 −3.5 cm)
(Fisher 1998, pp. 654).
It is reasonable to ask why this works. Why is this foliation of the physical
world successful and appropriate? The answer to this is important for
understanding both how universal behavior is possible and for understand-
ing how one can explain such universality. That is to say, the existence of
meso-scale features of the world captured by the order parameter is a nec-
essary condition for universality.
4
3.2. Length Scales
Kadanoff describes a “very interesting and fundamental question ” concern-
ing the fact tlhat the world
4. Although I cannot argue this point here, I believe that the spatial (and in other cases,
temporal) foliation into small (short), meso, and large (long) scales is an important feature of
universality in various sciences. This includes materials science, among others. See the discus-
sion of intermediate asymptotics in Batterman (2002a). See also Batterman (2018).
31Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 7 ===

shows an amazing variety of length scales: There is the Hubble
radius of the universe, 10 10 light years or so and the radius of our
own solar system, 10 11 meters roughly, and us –two meters perhaps,
and an atom –10−10 meters in radius, and a proton 10 −16 meters, and
the characteristic length of quantum gravity —which involves
another factor of about 10 20.
How these vastly different lengths arise is a very interesting and
fundamental question. … However, we can think about how one
describes the region between these lengths. If one is looking at scales
between two fundamental lengths, there are no nearby characteristic
lengths. Similarly in critical phenomena, whenever one looks [at]
any event which takes place between the scale of the lattice constant
[the spacing between molecules or spins] and the much larger scale
of the coherence length, one is in a situation in which there are
no nearby characteristic lengths (Kadanoff 2000), p. 251).
This lack of characteristic length scales is crucial for both the existence of
universal behavior and for its explanation. In the above quote, Kadanoff
refers to the “coherence length ” sometimes also called the “correlation
length.” For a system near criticality the correlation length becomes
enormous and for infinite systems, it diverges to infinity.
5 For a ﬂuid sys-
tem like the water in the kettle, the correlation length is a measure of the
average size of a region of vapor (say) in the kettle. V apor molecules cluster
with other vapor molecules and liquid molecules cluster with other liquid
molecules. (The analog of this in a ferromagnet is that the spins on the
lattice sites want to be next to spins pointing in the same direction. So
one has “droplets” of up-spins of a certain size and “droplets” of down-
spins as well.) As the water in the boiling region (or the spins in the mag-
net) heat up and approach critical temperatures, the size of the different
droplets get larger and larger. This means that, even though the physical
forces between the molecules (or spins) remain local, distant molecules
(spins) become correlated as a result of existing in the different droplets.
In addition, one has large correlated droplets of vapor inside droplets of
liquid inside droplets of vapor .... See ﬁgure 3.
In the phase diagram of ﬁgure 1, the region near critical point inside
the boiling region corresponds to this “fractal like ” structure of droplets
within droplets, etc. The reason for this is that near the critical point,
ﬂuctuations are dominant and average values for the order parameters es-
sentially lose their meaning. Orthodox statistical mechanics is unable to
describe the critical behavior because there are ﬂuctuations at all length
5. I will have more to say about the role of in ﬁnite systems below.
32 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 8 ===

scales from the macroscopic correlation length equal to the size of the
system (the kettle), and the microscopic distance of the range of the forces
between molecules or spins. These ﬂuctuations “cannot probe all the details
of the interatomic potential. Rather they only see certain gross features of
the potential: for example the amount of breaking of an exact symmetry… or
the distance from the critical point. ” (Kadanoff 1971, p. 104)
Given all these details about what is happening at the micro-, meso-,
and macro-scales in the neighborhood of a critical point, we can now see
how properly to de ﬁne the universality of critical phenomena.
4. How Universality is De ﬁned
Kadanoff states the “hypothesis of universality ” as follows:
All phase transition problems can be divided into a small number of
different classes depending upon the dimensionality of the system
and the symmetries of the order state. Within each class, all phase
transitions have identical behaviour in the critical region, only the
names of the variables are changed (Kadanoff 1971, p. 103).
Table 1 exhibits different values for the scaling exponent β for different
phase transitions at criticality.
6 We can here see how the scaling exponent
depends upon the dimensionality of the system. The ferromagnetic transi-
tion for a two dimensional ﬁlm is in a different universality class than the
6. Table 1 is from data presented in (Kadanoff 1971, p. 102).
Figure 3. Droplets inside droplets inside droplets (Kadanoff 1976, p. 12).
33Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 9 ===

three dimensional magnet. Notice also that despite remarkable differences in
microstructural makeup, the liquid/vapor systems, super ﬂuid helium, and
the d ¼ 3 ferromagnet are all in the same universality class; that is, the scaling
exponent β appearing in equations (1) and (2) are the same (within experi-
mental error).
A full description of a phase transition typically involves two ﬁeld var-
iables. Consider the ferromagnetic transition. One can take the external
magnetic ﬁeld h as a ﬁeld that can drive a system from one coexisting phase
(up spins) to the other (down spins). The second ﬁeld is provided by the
reduced temperature, /C15,d e ﬁned above in footnote 2. This ﬁeld drives the
system closer or away from the critical point. These are the variables to
which Kadanoff refers in his hypothesis of universality above. In terms
of these ﬁeld variables, the free energy for the system can be written as
follows7: F ¼ F(h, /C15) In differential form, this becomes
dF ¼< M > dhþ < H > d/C15; (3)
where < H> is an energy. In this differential form we see that the ﬁelds h
and /C15 are paired with two thermodynamically conjugate variables: < M>
and < H>, respectively. For the liquid/vapor transition, the corresponding
pairs of variables are the order parameter Ψ with its conjugate ( μ − μc)
related to the chemical potential. When Kadanoff says that “only the
names of the variables change ” for systems in the same universality class
these are the changes to which he refers:
M; hðÞ ↔ Ψ ; μ −μcðÞðÞ
7. The free energy is a measure of the internal energy of the system that is available to
do work.
Table 1. Scaling Exponents for Different Transitions
Phase Transition V alue of β
Mean Field Theory 1/2
d ¼ 2 Ising Model Ferromagnet 1/8
d ¼ 3 Liquid/ V apor CO2, Xe 0.35
d ¼ 3 Super ﬂuid Helium 4He 0.359
d ¼ 3 Ising Model Ferromagnet 0.315
34 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 10 ===

The ferromagnetic/paramagnetic pha se transition and the liquid/vapor
phase transition are in the same relatively small class.
4.1. Stability
Thus there is a relationship between different phase transitions problems
that leaves invariant various features of those transitions. Here is Kadanoff
again:
The theorist can discuss this relation in the following way: He
imagines that yet another ﬁeld is inserted into the free energy. Call
that other ﬁeld λ and the operator which is its thermodynamic
conjugate, U. Here λ represents a parameter in the Hamiltonian.
Continuous variation from λ ¼ 0t o λ ¼ 1 might represent the
change in the Hamiltonian which takes us from the Ising model to
the Heisenberg model, or from Ni to Fe or from a nearest neighbor
interaction to a next nearest neighbor interaction. Therefore, the
discussion of λ and its thermodynamic conjugate U is in effect the
discussion of the relationship among different phase transition
problems (Kadanoff 1971, p. 105).
Consider the ferromagnetic transition. Inserting this new parameter into
the Hamiltonian means that the free energy is now a function, not only of
the magnetic field h and the ﬁeld /C15, but also of the ﬁeld λ:
F ¼ F /C15;h; λðÞ :
In differential form we now have
dF ¼ < M > dhþ < H > d/C15þ < U > dλ: (4)
As an example, consider the Hamiltonian for a nearest neighbor Ising
ferromagnet:
ℋ
Ω ¼ −Jn:n:
X
<ij>
σiσj −h
X
i2Ω
σi; (5)
where Ω is a region of spins on a d-dimensional lattice, < ij> signals near-
est neighbor pairs on the lattice, Jn.n. characterizes the nearest neighbor
spin-spin coupling, and h is a (uniform) magnetic ﬁeld.
Next, let
λ ¼ Jn:n:n:
Jn:n:
;
be the ratio of the next nearest neighbor spin coupling strength to that
of nearest neighbor coupling strength. Consider the variation of λ from
35Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 11 ===

λ ¼ 0t o λ ¼ 1.8 This takes us from the nearest-neighbor to next-nearest-
neighbor coupling. Let /C15 and h be de ﬁned as follows:
/C15 ¼ T −Tc λðÞðÞ
Tc λðÞ and h ¼ μβHz
KTc
:
For λ ¼ 0 write the order parameter as function, m0 of h and /C15:
< M > ¼ m0 h;/C15ðÞ :
Similarly introducing the distance r between spins, one can write the spin-
spin correlation function g0 as follows:
< σz 0ðÞ σz rðÞ > ¼ g0 h;/C15 ;rðÞ :
Then Kadanoff (Kadanoff 1971, p. 106) asserts that “[u]niversality implies
for λ ≠ 0”:
< M > ¼ am0 /C22h; /C22/C15ðÞ ;< σz 0ðÞ σz rðÞ > ¼ ab=d3ðÞ g0 /C22h; /C22/C15;/C22rðÞ ;
where
/C22h ¼ bh; /C22/C15 ¼ c/C15; /C22r ¼ dr:
This means that the functional forms of <M> and <σz(0)σz(r)> do not change
as λ varies.
Universality, then
… implies that the basic thermodynamic functions and correlation
functions only depend on λ via a trivial change of variables. The
functional form is the same as at λ ¼ 0. However, the variables in
these functions are changed in that h, /C15, and M are each multiplied by
parameters a, b, c, d which depend upon λ (Kadanoff 1971, p. 105).
What does this result mean? It means that the Hamiltonians of different
systems—as different as 9 nickel and iron, or as different as 10 CO2, Xe, and
4He—can be perturbed into one another without changing the nature of
the phase transition problem.11 This, in turn, means that the scaling behavior
8. See also the paper by Robert Grif ﬁths “Dependence of Critical Indices on a Param-
eter,” Grifﬁths (1970).
9. See above quote from Kadanoff.
10. See Table 1 above.
11. Not all such transitions will preserve the nature of the phase transition problem.
In fact, a perturbation from an Ising Hamiltonian to a Heisenberg Hamiltonian, will take
us from one problem to another.
36 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 12 ===

of the order parameter will remain unchanged as the transformation (by vary-
ing the value of λ) between Hamiltonians is effected. In other words, many
of the details that genuinely distinguish a lattice of nickel from that of iron
(different interatomic strengths, etc.) are irrelevant for the scaling behavior.
This is best understood as a stability result. The class of systems represented
by their Hamiltonians between which such λ-transformations can take place
without effecting the scaling behavior of the order parameter (whether it is
M,o r Ψ , or whatever) is called a “universality class.” It is deﬁn e da st h a ts e t
of systems between which such (perturbative) transformations hold.
This stability under perturbation isthe key propertyof universality. To explain
how universality is possible, then, requires that one explain two features:
1. Why are the phase transitions stable under perturbation of the micro-
scopic details of the systems (as encoded in their Hamiltonians)?
2. Why are the universality classes dependent
12 upon the symmetry of the
order parameter and the dimensionality of the systems 13?
5. Explaining Universality
In this section I outline, very brie ﬂy, how the renormalization group allows
for an explanation of the two key features of universal behavior just men-
tioned. This explanation has been called into question by a number of
commentators and I will consider their objections in the following section.
Recall the ingredients of universalit y. Near criticality, the correlation
length is enormous and there is a droplets-within-droplets structure that
exhibits self-similarity (i.e, it behaves like a fractal). As a result there are no
characteristic scales between the atomic/lattice spacing and the continuum.
Importantly, as noted, for an in ﬁnite system the correlation length actually
diverges to in ﬁnity.
Kadanoff recognized that one could exploit the droplets-within-droplets
fractal structure to change a Hamiltonian representing a system into a re-
lated effective Hamiltonian by a kind of coarse-graining procedure. This is
now known as the Kadanoff block spin method.
The idea is to group or block spins or molecules and replace them
with an some kind of average.
14 In ﬁgure 4 there are nine spins per block
12. Recall Kadanoff ’s “hypothesis of universality ” quoted at the beginning of this
section.
13. It should be clear from the way this question is answered below that the kind of
dependence on symmetry and dimension is not causal. Nor is the explanation of that de-
pendence causal in nature.
14. It almost doesn ’t matter what averaging or coarse-graining scheme is used. This
fact is just another signature of the stability of phase transitions under perturbation.
37Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 13 ===

and the “averaging” rule is to let the majority rule: If more spins in a
block are up-spins (down-spins), re place those nine spins with a single
“block spin ” that points up (down). Now we have a lattice of block spins
that looks pretty much like the original lattice but the spacings between
the block spins is greater. Next one spatially rescales so as to put the new
spins on the same lattice as the original. Finally one changes the block
spins so that the exhibit coupling strengths as similar to the original
coupling as possible.
15 We now have a new “renormalized ” Hamiltonian
corresponding to this effective syste m. Continued iteration of this proce-
dure leads to a ﬂow (the RG ﬂo w )o na na b s t r a c ts p ace of Hamiltonians.
That is, it induces a dynamics that takes one Hamiltonian into another
as the blocking procedure is repeated. See ﬁgures 5 and 6.
One examines the dynamical ﬂow on this abstract space and looks for
potential ﬁxed points. These are points which when acted upon by the
transformation yield the same point.
16 A ﬁxed point is a property of
15. This part of the procedure is to a certain extent an art. There is no explicit recipe
that one can follow.
16. If τ represents the transformation and p*i sa ﬁxed point we will have τ( p*) ¼ p*.
Figure 4. Blocking and averaging to yield a new (coarse-grained) effective system
(Kadanoff 2013, p. 172).
38 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 14 ===

the transformation itself and all details of the systems that ﬂow toward
that ﬁxed point have been eliminated. Those systems/models (points in
the space) that ﬂow to the same ﬁxed point are in the same universality
class—the universality class is delimited —and they will exhibit the same
macro scaling behavior. 17 That macro-behavior, in particular, the deter-
mination of the scaling exponent β in equations (1) and (2) can be deter-
mined by an analysis of the transformation in the neighborhood of the
ﬁxed point.
Crucially, those systems that actually ﬂow to a ﬁxed point are at criti-
cality. This means that they are in ﬁnite systems. As such, those systems are
idealizations. But the in ﬁnite idealization is necessary if one is to locate the
ﬁxed points of the RG ﬂow in the abstract space. This is because the cor-
relation length must diverge to be able to in ﬁnitely iterate the RG trans-
formation. Nevertheless, systems that are near criticality (real, large ﬁnite
systems) will start off close to the critical systems and their behavior can be
understood by examining the topology of the RG ﬂow in the neighbor-
hood of the ﬁxed point. So, the RG along with the analysis of the topology
17. To put this another way: The universality class is the basin of attraction of the
ﬁxed point.
Figure 5. Fixed Point and Universality Class (Fisher 1998, p. 673).
39Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 15 ===

in the neighborhood of the ﬁxed point provides the explanation of near
critical, real systems. 18 It explains what is going on in the neighborhood
of the critical point in the boiling region of ﬁgure 1.
So the ﬁxed point delimits the class of systems that all exhibit similar
behavior near criticality. It also, thereby, justiﬁes the existence of the kind of
perturbative stability Kadanoff describes in his discussion of what we ’ve
called the λ-transformations. 19 See, ﬁgure 5. Finally, this analysis also
demonstrates that the only important or relevant features (other than being
near criticality) for this common behavior are the dimensionality of the
system and the symmetry of the order parameter in the critical region.
6. Objections and Responses
As noted, a number of philosophers of science have challenged some of
the claims I have just been making. Let me set up my replies to these ob-
jections with another quote from Michael Fisher. In “Scaling, Universality,
and Renormalization Group Theory ” Fisher (1983) expresses what, from
a contemporary philosophical perspective, is a rather heretical point of
view.
18. If it only explained the behavior of idealized in ﬁnite systems, it would not be such
a big deal. Hardly worthy of a Nobel prize! Note also, contrary to some assertions in the
literature, that the linearization analysis of the ﬂow in the neighborhood of the ﬁxed point
is not part of the RG. It is a standard technique in dynamical systems theory for analyzing
dynamics near attractor states.
19. The justi ﬁcation of the existence of such transformations lies at the heart of the
claim that minimal models like the Ising model need not accurately represent the actual
features of systems in the universality class.
Figure 6. Fixed Point, Universality Class, and λ-Transformation.
40 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 16 ===

The traditional approach of theoreticians, going back to the
foundation of quantum mechanics, is to run to Schrödinger ’s
equation when confronted by a problem in atomic, molecular or
solid state physics! One establishes the Hamiltonian, makes some
(hopefully) sensible approximations and then proceeds to attempt
to solve for the energy levels, eigenstates and so on. However, for
truly complicated systems in what, these days, is much better called
“condensed matter physics, ” this is a hopeless task; furthermore,
in many ways it is not even a very sensible one!
The modern attitude is, rather, that the task of the theorist is to
understand what is going on and to elucidate which are the crucial
features of the problem. For instance, if it is asserted that the
exponent [ β ] depends on the dimensionality, d, and on the
symmetry number, n, but on no other factors, then the theorist ’s job
is to explain why this is so and subject to what provisos. If one had a
large enough computer to solve Schrödinger ’s equation and the
answer came out that way, one would still have no understanding of
why this was the case! ’ (Fisher 1983, pp. 46 –47).
It is clear from this quote that for Fisher our understanding of universal
behavior requires explaining why the pattern depends upon the dimension
of the system and the symmetry of the order parameter. This, of course, fits
nicely with Kadanoff ’s definition of universality (section 4) that explicitly
characterizes phase transition problems as depending upon the dimensionality of
the system and the symmetries of the order state.
6.1. Objections: Reutlinger and Lange
Alexander Reutlinger holds that the RG explanation for the universal be-
havior of critical phenomena (section 5) proceeds in a completely different,
intuitive, everyday way. He says RG explanations “are not special and
quite intuitive in one crucial respect. RG explanations explain the phe-
nomenon that microscopically different physical systems display the same
macro-behavior … by referring to features that those physical systems
have in common , although the physical systems at issue are different in
many other respects ” (Reutlinger 2017, p. 144). The “common features ”
that are supposed to explain the universal behavior are the common di-
mensionality and the common symmetry of the order parameters. To cite
these features, according to Ruetlinger, just is to explain the universal critical
behavior of ﬂuids and magnets.
In a reply to a paper by Collin Rice and me, Lange (2015) argues similarly
for what Ruetlinger calls the “commonality strategy. ” He holds that our
justiﬁcation of why minimal models like the Ising model can be used to
41Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 17 ===

understand the behaviors of actual systems also depends upon citing common
features. He asserts that “since the model’s explanatory utility arises from its
having certain features in common with the target system, the model ’s
explanatory utility arises from its representing accurately enough the target
system, contrary to B&R ’s [Batterman ’sa n dR i c e’s] view ” (Lange 2015,
p. 298). Speci ﬁcally, the claim is that a minimal or “toy” model can be
explanatory if it shares features (dimension and symmetry in the case of
the Ising model) with the actual target, ﬂuid system.
In our paper, Rice and I argue that the justi ﬁcation for the applicability
of minimal models derives from the demonstration that the minimal model
is in the same universality class as the target system of interest. The discus-
sion above aims in part to show how the RG demonstrates this very fact.
Furthermore, and importantly, we have seen that this demonstration also
provides an account of why dimensionality and symmetry are important
features characteristic of the universality class.
But Lange asks why do “B&R insist that a minimal model explanation
must explain why the common features are necessary for the macrobehavior
to occur and why these features are present in all members of the uni-
versality class despite their he terogeneous microdetails? ” (Lange 2015,
p. 303). The answer to these questions, once one properly understands
what it is to be a universality class, is that one needs to show that those
very features (symmetry and dimensionality) are the important common fea-
tures. This ﬁts with the above discussion of the de ﬁnition of universality
(section 4) and with the insistence by Fisher (in the quote above) that
“the theorist ’sj o bi st oe x p l a i nwhy [the common exponent β depends
upon the dimensionality d and the symmetry number n]” (Fisher 1983,
pp. 47).
Lange does appeal to a passage from Fisher that comes just after the one
quoted above:
We may well try to simplify the nature of a model to the point where
it represents a ‘mere caricature ’ of reality. But notice that when one
looks at a good political cartoon one can recognize the various
characters even though the artist has portrayed them with but a few
strokes. … [A] good theoretical model of a complex system should
be like a good caricature: it should emphasize those features which
are most important and should downplay the inessential details. ”
(Fisher 1983, p. 47)
Lange claims that here Fisher “seems to be supporting a ‘common features
account’: the minimal model, despite being a caricature of some actual
system, shares with it ‘those features which are most important ’” (Lange
2015, p. 299, fn. 3).
42 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 18 ===

Of course Lange is right about this. But the question is why are those
the features that are important! Without an answer to that question, we
neither have a justi ﬁcation for the use of the minimal model, nor an expla-
nation of universal behavior.
6.2. Objections: Franklin and Mainwood
Alexander Franklin has recently argued that the Kadanoff blocking scheme
(aka “real”-space RG) discussed above, cannot explain the possibility of
universal behavior. Franklin (2018) He says that
[b]uilding on Mainwood (2006) I argue that the [real-space RG and
the ﬁeld-theoretic RG] approaches ought to be distinguished: while
the ﬁeld-theoretic approach explains universality, the real-space
approach fails to provide an adequate explanation. (Franklin 2018,
p.1)
Without going into too much detail, I want to argue that this claim is
mistaken. The error is two-fold. First, the claim rests on a mistaken
characterization of universality (similar to the view held by of Reutlinger
and Lange). On this mistaken view, one fails to realize that to explain
universality (as I’ve discussed above) requires that one explain the dependence
of the macropattern on the symmetry and dimension. Second, Franklin ’s
assertion rests upon a myth (whose genesis in philosophical discussions, I
believe, is Mainwood ’s dissertation Mainwood (2006)); namely, that there
really are two kinds of RG explanations, one given by the real-space (or
Kadanoff ) approach, the other by a so-called ﬁeld-theoretic (or Wilsonian)
approach.
We have seen above how the real-space approach is supposed to work.
And, it is true that physics textbooks often do refer to the ﬁeld-theoretic
approach as distinct. In fact, one text upon which Franklin relies makes
the distinction between the two types of RG explanations quite explicit.
Binney et al. (1992) I think this distinction (between real-space and ﬁeld-
theoretic RG) makes some sense and does simplify some calculations.
However, it begs the important question when it comes to explaining uni-
versality. That is, the so-called “ﬁeld-theoretic” approach assumes univer-
sality rather than explaining it.
The ﬁeld-theoretic “explanation ” starts with what is known as the
Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson (LGW) Hamiltonian:
H ¼
Z
d
d x 1
2 ζ2 ∇ ø xðÞjj 2 þ 1
2 θ ø xðÞjj 2 þ 1
4! η ø xðÞjj 4
/C20/C21
: (6)
43Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 19 ===

For my purposes here it suf ﬁces to note two features of this Hamiltonian
(neither of which is controversial). First, ø( x) is an order parameter (like Ψ
or M) and that, within the LGW Hamiltonian, only even powers of that
order parameter appear. Second, the LGW Hamiltonian is an effective
Hamiltonian. This latt er feature means that the LGW Hamiltonian is
not a microscopic characterization of the system. In fact, since it makes
reference to the order parameter ø( x), given the discussion in section 3
it is a mesoscale Hamiltonian. Thus, unlike the real-space RG explanation
that starts with microscopic Hamiltonians, the ﬁeld-theoretic approach be-
gins with a Hamiltonian that already ignores various microscopic details that
distinguish different systems. Most importantly, the LGW Hamiltonian ’s
elimination of odd power terms of the order parameter, is a re ﬂection of
the symmetry of that order parameter .
In other words, the LGW Hamiltonian is designed to represent systems
that share the same dimensionality and order parameter symmetry. There-
fore, it cannot (on pain of circularity) serve to explain why the systems in
the universality class have those properties as common features. It is surely
true that condensed matter physicists often start with the effective (meso-
scopic) LGW Hamiltonian, rather than a more realistic (or at least more
detailed), microscopic Hamiltonia n. They then use this to investigate
macroscopic aspects of condensed matter systems captured, for example,
by the power law scaling relations. It is surely more convenient to start
with this effective Hamiltonian. But the important question here concerns
what justiﬁes their starting at this mesoscopic scale? What, that is, justi ﬁes
the pragmatic use of the LGW Hamiltonian?
Recall Fisher ’s remarks in Fisher (1998) that Landau ’s introduction of
an order parameter introduced a novel foliation of the world into micro-
scopic, mesoscopic, and macrosopic. The LGW Hamiltonian, lives in the
mesoscopic regime. In that same paper, Fisher argues that work needs to be
done to justify the use of the LGW Hamiltonian:
… [O]ne starts from this intermediate level with a physically
appropriate LGW Hamiltonian in place of a true (or, at least, more
faithful or realistic) microscopic Hamiltonian; and then one brings
statistical mechanics to bear in order to understand the macroscopic
level. The derivation and validity of the many types of initial, LGW
Hamiltonians may then be the object of separate studies to relate
them to the atomic level. ” (Fisher 1998, p. 654 –655, emphases
in original)
These latter, “separate studies” aim to relate the mesoscale to the atomic
scale. They include RG investigations of the sort discussed in section 5.
They involve real-space techniques designed to establish the dependence
44 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 20 ===

of phase transition problems on dimensionality and symmetry and they
work by providing in principle demonstrations that near criticality, the
details that genuinely distinguish the systems (and their respective Ham-
iltonians) from one another are by and large irrelevant for the upper scale
behavior of interest. It is only after these demonstrations that one is able to
justiﬁably appeal to an effective Hamiltonian as representative of a large
(universality) class of distinct systems.
7. Conclusion
As Kadanoff and others (speci ﬁcally Grifﬁths 1970) have emphasized, uni-
versal behavior re ﬂects a stability of a certain behavior under perturbation
of particular details. The concept of universality also depends upon a sep-
aration of scales and the fact that no nearby characteristic length (time)
scale is present. Finally, it is part of the very concept of universality of
critical phenomena that the (universality) class of systems depends upon
the dimensionality of the system and the symmetry of the ordered state.
Thus, any explanation for how the universality of critical phenomena can
be possible requires demonstrations that the systems are stable under the appro-
priate ( λ-)perturbation and that the only system features relevant to the
behavior are the physical dimensionality and the symmetry of the ordered
state.
The renormalization group can provi de these two demonstrations. It
does so by introducing a transformation on an abstract space of Hamiltonians
corresponding to actual and possible systems and ﬁnding ﬁxed points of
that transformation. The Hamiltonians that ﬂow to the same ﬁxed point
are exactly those between which the perturbative ( λ) stability holds. They
are also those critical systems that sha re dimensionality and the appropri-
ate meso-scale symmetry.
As discussed in section 6 a number of objections have been offered to
this RG explanation. I answer these by looking back at the historical dis-
cussions in which the concept “universality” ﬁrst appeared as an expression
of similar behavior by radically distinct systems. The arguments above
demonstrate that the the commonality strategy for explaining universality
just won’t work. In fact, since universality is a statement to the effect that
the similar behaviors of critical systems depend only on dimensionality and
symmetry, to explain how universal behavior is possible requires explaining
the dependence upon dimensionality and symmetry. Simply citing those
properties as explanans is just to cite part of the explanandum, and hence,
provides no explanation at all. Finally, appealing to a ﬁeld-theoretic RG
that starts with an effective Hamiltonian fails to meet the explanatory task.
The effective (LGW) Hamiltonian requires justi ﬁcation. As it is effective,
it actually expresses the very universality one seeks to explain.
45Perspectives on Science


=== PAGE 21 ===

References
Batterman, Robert W. 2002a. “Asymptotics and the Role of Minimal
Models.” The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53: 21 –38.
Batterman, Robert W. 2002b. The Devil in the Details: Asymptotic Reasoning
in Explanation, Reduction, and Emergence . Oxford Studies in Philosophy of
Science. Oxford University Press.
Batterman, Robert W. 2018. Multiscale modeling in inactive and active
materials. Unpublished.
Binney, J. J., N. J. Dowrick, A. J. Fisher, and M. E. J. Newman. 1992.
The Theory of Critical Phenomena: An Introduction to the Renormalization
Group. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fisher, Michael E. 1983. “Scaling, Universality and Renormalization
Group Theory. ” In Critical Phenomena , volume 186 of Lecture Notes in
Physics. Edited by F. J. W. Hahne. Summer School held at the Univer-
sity of Stellenbosch, South Africa; January 18–29, 1982. Berlin: Springer-
V erlag.
Fisher, Michael E. 1998.“Renormalization group theory: Its basis and formu-
lation in statistical physics.” Reviews of Modern Physics 70 (2): 653 –681.
Franklin, Alexander. 2018. “On the Renormalisation Group Explanation
of Universality.” Philosophy of Science DOI: 10.1086/696812.
Grifﬁths, Robert B. 1970. “Dependence of Critical Indices on a Param-
eter.” Physical Review Letters 24 (26): 1479 –1482.
Guggenheim, E. A. 1945. “The Principle of Corresponding States. ” The
Journal of Chemical Physics 13 (7): 253 –261.
Kadanoff, Leo P . 1971. “Critical Behavior. Uni versality and Scaling. ”
Pp. 100 –117 in Proceedings of the Inter national School of Physics “Enrico
Fermi” Course LI, volume Course LI. Edited by M. S. Green. New York,
Italian Physical Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Academic Press.
Kadanoff, Leo P . 1976. “Scaling, Universality, and Operator Algebras. ” In
Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena , volume 5A. Edited by C. Domb
and M. S. Green. Academic Press.
Kadanoff, Leo P . 2000. Statistical Physics: Statics, Dynamics, and Renormali-
zation. Singapore: World Scienti ﬁc.
Kadanoff, Leo P . 2013. “Theories of Matter: In ﬁnities and Renormaliza-
tion.” Pp. 141–188 in The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Physics. Edited
by Robert W. Batterman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Landau, L. D. 1965. “On the Theory of Phase Transistions. ” Pp. 193–216
in Collected Papers of L. D. Landau . Edited by D. Ter Haar. New York:
Gordon and Breach, Science Publishers.
Lange, Marc. 2015. On “Minimal model Explanations ”:AR e p l yt o
Batterman and Rice. Philosophy of Science 82: 292 –305.
46 Universality and RG Explanations


=== PAGE 22 ===

Mainwood, Paul. 2006. Is More Different? Emergent Properties in Physics . PhD
thesis, Merton College, University of Oxford.
Reutlinger, Alexander. 2017. “Do Renormalization Group Explanations
Conform to the Commonality Strategy? ” Journal of General Philosophy
of Science 48: 143 –150.
47Perspectives on Science
