--- Page 1 ---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Synthese
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-021-03084-w
1 3
Between pebbles and organisms: weaving autonomy 
into the Markov blanket
Thomas van Es1  · Michael D. Kirchhoff2
Received: 11 December 2020 / Accepted: 11 February 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
The free energy principle (FEP) is sometimes put forward as accounting for bio-
logical self-organization and cognition. It states that for a system to maintain non-
equilibrium steady-state with its environment it can be described as minimising its 
free energy. It is said to be entirely scale-free, applying to anything from particles 
to organisms, and interactive machines, spanning from the abiotic to the biotic. 
Because the FEP is so general in its application, one might wonder whether this 
framework can capture anything specific to biology. We take steps to correct for this 
here. We first explicate the worry, taking pebbles as examples of an abiotic system, 
and then discuss to what extent the FEP can distinguish its dynamics from an organ-
ism’s. We articulate the notion of ‘autonomy as precarious operational closure’ from 
the enactive literature, and investigate how it can be unpacked within the FEP. This 
enables the FEP to delineate between the abiotic and the biotic; avoiding the pebble 
worry that keeps it out of touch with the living systems we encounter in the world.
Keywords Free energy principle · Markov blanket · Autonomy · Operational 
closure · Biology · Cognition · The pebble challenge · Unification
1 Introduction
The free energy principle (FEP) is a principle first approach to what it takes for a 
system to exist. Rather than empirical investigation, the FEP starts from a math-
ematical principle that a system is thought to conform to if it exists. Indeed, FEP 
researchers seek to provide a general theory unifying biology and cognitive science 
formulated almost entirely from mathematical principles in physics and information 
 * Thomas van Es 
 thomas.vanes@uantwerpen.be
1 Centre for Philosophical Psychology, Department of Philosophy, Universiteit Antwerpen, 
Prinsstraat 13, 2000 Antwerpen, Belgium
2 School of Liberal Arts, Faculty of Arts, Social Sciences and the Humanities, University 
of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia

--- Page 2 ---

 Synthese
1 3
theory (see e.g., Friston, 2010, 2013; Hohwy, 2020; Kirchhoff et al., 2018; Linson 
et  al., 2018; Ramstead et  al., 2019a, b). The ambition is to secure a definition of 
existence by appealing to constructs in physics and information theory, and then 
employing those constructs to derive a principle of self-organization and cognition 
(Friston, 2019; Hesp et al., 2019). In a nutshell, the FEP states that a system that 
maintains non-equilibrium steady-state (NESS) with its environment can necessar -
ily be cast as minimising free energy.1 This particular observation can consequently 
be exploited to show a wide variety of interesting relations to hold between a NESS 
system and its environment.
Yet the FEP’s mathematical toolkit is not only applicable to living systems. It 
is said to be entirely scale-free in its applicability. That is, it is intended to apply 
to any system able to maintain its organisation despite tendencies towards disor -
der: from chemotaxis in cells (Auletta, 2013; Friston, 2013), neuronal signalling in 
brains (Friston et al., 2017; Parr & Friston, 2017), tropism in plants (Calvo & Fris-
ton, 2017), synchronised singing in birds (Friston & Frith, 2015) to decision-making 
and planning in mammals (Daunizeau et al., 2010; Friston, 2013; Williams, 2018). 
It has also been applied to model adaptive fitness over evolutionary timescales by 
casting evolution in terms of Bayesian model optimisation and selection (Campbell, 
2016; Hesp et al., 2019). However, this widespread applicability of the FEP can be 
taken as a fault, rather than an advantage.
Indeed, there is a general concern about the FEP’s ability to speak to the essential 
organizational dynamics of biology, because it can seem utterly disconnected from 
biology. More specifically, the FEP is sometimes considered incapable of uniquely 
addressing the organisational dynamics of living systems (Colombo & Wright, 
2018; van Es, 2020). Because the FEP implies an entirely scale-free dynamics in 
which any self-organising NESS system can be cast in terms of self-evidencing, 
some worry that this particular view cannot capture the specific details of biological 
organisation that is of interest to the biological sciences. If true, this undercuts the 
grand unifying ambitions of many FEP researchers.
We address this worry here. We start by rehearsing the basic tenets of the FEP, 
with particular focus on the Markov blanket formalism and how it relates to Bayes-
ian inference (Sect.  2). We proceed to explicate the aforementioned worry by con-
sidering the application of the FEP formalism to a pebble and discuss how the FEP 
seems to fall short in delivering the tools to distinguish pebbles from organisms 
(Sect.  3). Prima facie, its scale-free applicability makes it seem like it is unable to 
carve any interesting joints between the abiotic and the biotic, which would hinder 
the prospect of a FEP biology. Kirchhoff et  al. (2018) make an initial attempt to 
1 The term ‘non-equilibrium steady-state’ refers to self-sustaining processes in a system requiring input 
and output to avoid relaxing into thermodynamic equilibrium (= systemic decay/death). It is important 
to mention here that the notion ‘steady-state’ in non-equilibrium systems is an approximation to some 
specified duration of time—e.g., circadian rhythms over a 24 h clock cycle or the homeostatic processes 
involved in maintaining on average and over time a specific body temperature. So strictly speaking, bio-
logical systems are not in steady states; rather, to say that a system is in a steady-state, X, at a particular 
time, is effectively to say that the probability density over the system’s states during some period of time 
was X.

--- Page 3 ---

1 3
Synthese 
address this problem, suggesting that autonomy is what distinguishes living from 
non-living systems. The overarching claim there is that autonomy is the capacity of 
a system to modulate its exchange with its environment. Here we supplement this 
initial treatment. We first look at ‘autonomy’ from an enactive viewpoint (Sect.  4). 
We then sketch the contours of how the notion of ‘autonomy’ from the enactive liter-
ature could be emulated with the tools available to the FEP formalisms. This allows 
us to understand what constitutes an autonomous system rather than merely using 
the notion of autonomy as a mark by which to delineate life from no-life (Sect. 5).
2  Markov blankets, free energy and Bayesian inference
The FEP speaks to what characteristics a system must exhibit for it to exist (Fris-
ton, 2013). Its basic premise is that any random dynamical system “that possesses a 
Markov blanket will appear to actively maintain its structural and dynamical integ-
rity” (Friston, 2013, p. 2).
A Markov blanket is a statistical separation of states that is applicable to any 
thing that exists (Hipólito, 2019). It is a set of blanket states that separates a system’s 
internal states from external states (Beal, 2003; Pearl, 1988). The blanket states 
shield (in a statistical sense) internal from external states, and vice versa. They can 
be partitioned into sensory states and active states. Sensory states capture the influ-
ence of external states on internal states. Active states capture the influence of inter-
nal states on external states. Intuitively, any thing can be separated statistically from 
that which it is not (Palacios et al., 2020) (Fig. 1).
In this statistical formulation, the separation between internal and external states 
implies that these states are conditionally independent, given the states that com-
prise the Markov blanket. If we want to figure out the external states and we know 
the values of the blanket states, knowing the values of the internal states will not 
offer additional predictive value, and vice-versa. This is so by definition, because 
the blanket states already capture any possible influence the internal states could 
have on the external states. A brief example may clarify this. Say you observe that 
it is cold. This could be either due to an open window or to an air conditioning sys-
tem that is set too strong. If you would observe that, say, the air conditioning is set 
excessively high, the observation that it is cold now does not offer further informa-
tion with regards to whether or not the window is open. That is, in this case, the 
observed cold and the open window are conditionally independent, given that the air 
conditioning is on blast (Beal, 2003; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2019). In terms of the 
Markov blanket formalism, the observed cold could be cast as the internal states, the 
state of the window could be formalized as the external states with the states of the 
air conditioning serving as the blanket states. This example is important because it 
indicates the widespread applicability of the formalism. Indeed, it is not necessarily 
obvious to associate the boundaries induced by the Markov blanket with physical 
boundaries, though it does seem to lend itself well to this particular application. We 
should nonetheless remain wary about overstating the implications of this statistical 
partitioning of states when considering its application onto other systems (van Es, 
2019, 2020).

--- Page 4 ---

 Synthese
1 3
Now that it is clear what a Markov blanket is, we can delve into its relation 
with free energy minimisation and Bayesian inference. This is a technical story. 
According to the Second Law of thermodynamics, the entropy of any closed sys-
tem increases indefinitely over time. Any system that exists, or any Markov blan-
keted system that retains its structural integrity over time, seems to temporarily 
slow down the increase of entropy for as long as it remains intact (Friston, 2012, 
2013, 2019; Schrödinger, 1944). Of course, any such ‘resistance’ is only tempo-
rary, as entropy increases upon disintegration, which, in the case of biotic sys-
tems, means death.
For any such system, you can establish a multi-dimensional state space with as 
many dimensions as there are variables represented in the state space. Each point 
in the state space corresponds to a unique intersection of values for each vari-
able. In this state space, you can mark a bound of states within which a system 
can remain intact, outside of which it cannot (Friston, 2012, 2013). For as long as 
the system remains intact, the system will continuously ‘revisit’ the states within 
this bound. This is so by definition, as we define the bound by the range of values 
within the system remains intact. With regards to organisms, the viable bound 
differs per species: humans remain intact under quite different circumstances than 
Fig. 1  is a schematic representa-
tion of a Markov blanketed sys-
tem. The gray circle delineates 
the Markov blanketed system 
that separates internal states 
(int) from external states (ext). 
The blanket states, sensory 
states (sen) and active states 
(act) are displayed as surround-
ing the internal states. The 
arrows depict modes of influ-
ence. External states influence 
only one another or sensory 
states, while influenced only 
by active states or one another. 
Internal states are influenced 
only by sensory states, influenc-
ing only active states. In terms 
of modes of influence, internal 
states are separated from exter-
nal states. (figure taken from 
Bruineberg et al., 2018)


--- Page 5 ---

1 3
Synthese 
fish do, for example. Insofar as this bound counts as a description of the states in 
which the system can be found when alive, it is also considered to be a mathemat-
ical description of a phenotype (Friston, 2013; Kirchhoff et al., 2018). 2 On aver -
age and over time, any living system is thus likely to be found within the bound 
of viable states and unlikely to be found outside of it. That is, we may expect a 
system to be within a bound of states that it typically remains within on average  
(Friston et al., 2020). This implies a probability distribution that can be laid over 
the state space so that each state is assigned a probability value (Corcoran et al. 
2020; Friston, 2013; Ramstead et  al., 2019a, b). At any given time the system 
is encountered, it is highly likely to occupy a state within the viable bound, and 
highly unlikely to occupy a state outside of this. This means that states within the 
bound are considered high-probability states, whereas states outside of it are con-
sidered low-probability states.
Furthermore, if a system’s internal states remain within a particular range, this 
must mean that the influences on those states are similarly bounded. An example 
should clarify this. Consider an egg and spoon race. An egg-and-spoon runner 
will need to ensure that the influence on the egg of their running the race remains 
within certain bounds, lest the egg move out of the spoon and break. Let us apply 
the Markov blanket partitioning method. We shall take the internal states here to 
be the egg’s, and the influences it receives via the spoon shall be the sensory states, 
the runner is here the environment impacting on the spoon and comprises the exter -
nal states. This means that an egg-and-spoon runner can be cast as keeping a tight 
bound on the sensory states of the Markov blanketed egg for as long as it remains in 
the spoon.
As it is for the egg-and-spoon runner, so it is for any  system that remains intact 
over time. Relative to the viable bound of the internal states of the system, then, we 
can also establish a state space for the sensory states within which the system can 
remain intact, outside of which it cannot. Here too, we can determine a probability 
distribution where states within the bound are ascribed high probability, those out-
side of it are ascribed low probability. This is a probability distribution over exter-
nal states, as it relates to the influences on the internal states by the external states. 
In other words, it defines the possible external states that there could be relative to 
the internal states, given that the internal states remain within the viable bound. Of 
interest here is that the internal states themselves provide all we need (the ‘sufficient 
statistics’) to compute the probability distribution over the external states. As such, 
by knowing the viable bound of the internal states, we can compute the viable bound 
of the system’s sensory states.
Further, in Bayesian probabilistic theory, surprise is a quantity defined as the 
improbability of a particular state (Shannon, 1948). If the surprise of sensory states 
(or ‘sensory surprise’, not to be confused with agent-level surprise with regards to 
an unexpected sensation) is high, the sensory states currently occupy a low prob-
ability area in the state space. As low-probability states are those that endanger the 
2 See Colombo and Wright (2018) for criticism on the viability of this application onto an organismic 
system.

--- Page 6 ---

 Synthese
1 3
system’s structural integrity, surprise is kept low, or minimized, as long as the sys-
tem remains intact. However, sensory surprise is a probabilistic measure of sensory 
states. The entire state space of sensory states includes all possible modes of influ-
ence the external states could possibly exert on the internal states. This is, in princi-
ple, an infinite set. Computing sensory surprise directly is thus intractable (Friston, 
2009).
This is where (variational) free energy comes in. Free energy, in the statistical 
usage of the term, is a functional of the internal and sensory states a system is in. 3 
In this case, free energy is thus, more specifically, the function of a function of the 
sensory states that is parameterized by the internal states. Because of this, the value 
of free energy limits the possible values of the internal and sensory states. To see 
why, consider a solution to a simple summation problem in arithmetics, say it’s 15, 
and the terms of the equation are non-negative. This means that none of the terms 
of the problem can exceed the value of 15. Minimizing the value of free energy, 
then, minimizes an upper bound on the probability of sensory states. This ensures 
that sensory states remain in high-probability areas in the state space, which in turn 
implies that sensory surprise is minimized. Minimizing free energy can thus be seen 
as approximately minimizing the otherwise intractable value of sensory surprise 
(Friston & Stephan, 2007). Moreover, as free energy is a function of only the inter -
nal and sensory states, it is in principle computable (Friston & Ao, 2012; Kiebel 
et al., 2008).
In Bayesian probability theory, negative surprise is equivalent to Bayesian model 
evidence. Minimizing surprise thus maximizes Bayesian model evidence. The pro-
cess by which Bayesian model evidence can be maximized is called Bayesian infer -
ence, sometimes referred to as self-evidencing (Friston et al. 2006; Hohwy, 2016). 
Bayesian inference then refers to the particular way a probability distribution needs 
to be updated in light of new evidence (Beal, 2003). Bayesian inference describes 
the permissible ‘moves’ one can make in the formal system of Bayesian probability 
theory. We can now see that for any system to remain intact over time, its entropy 
needs to be minimized on average over time, which means expected free energy 
needs to be minimized, which in turn implies the minimization of sensory surprise, 
which is done by way of a formal operation called Bayesian inference.
The above story is employed in the FEP as a mathematical description of the 
homeostatic processes of biotic systems (Friston, 2013). This works, very roughly, 
as follows. In the Markov blanket formalism, the Markov blanket is thought to carve 
out ontological joints: the internal states map onto the organism itself, and the exter-
nal states map onto the environment (Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2019). The partition-
ing blanket states map onto the organism’s modes of interaction so that sensory 
states are associated with sensory receptor activity, and active states are associated 
with the system’s influence on its environment, such as action. It remains a current 
debate to what extent this application of the Markov blanket should be taken liter -
ally or instrumentally (Bruineberg et al., 2020; Hohwy, 2016; van Es, 2020). In this 
paper, we will remain neutral in this debate, and instead explore only what can be 
3 A functional is a function of a function.

--- Page 7 ---

1 3
Synthese 
done within the formalism, regardless of how it may or may not be implemented in 
any real system.
In a realist interpretation, to ‘engage’ in Bayesian inference is considered a fun-
damental aspect of life, as without it, the organism would go outside of its viable 
bounds. This is called active inference, and is thought to account for both action 
and perception by the same guiding principle (Friston, 2013). The probability dis-
tributions are embodied and/or encoded by the organism (and/or the brain). They 
are to be manipulated, updated and leveraged by the organism. Through active infer-
ence, the organism updates the probability distributions in the face of newfound evi-
dence, and uses this to infer action policies for its interaction with the world. Long 
term activities are thought to require counterfactual inference, which is associated 
with the minimization of expected free energy or free energy on average over time 
(Corcoran et al., 2020). Rather than updating the probability distribution to remain 
within its viable bounds, this should be seen as the inference of a possible trajec-
tory through the state space conditioned on bodily movement. This allows the organ-
ism to adapt to environmental fluctuations. After all, the distribution of states within 
which an organism can remain alive cannot be simply ‘updated’ when confronted 
with an environment likely to push the system outside of viable bounds. Active 
inference thus plays a central role in the realist FEP story of biological systems.4
3  Pebble meets Markov blanket
One person’s meat is another person’s poison: the scale-free applicability of the 
FEP’s Markov blanket formalism may be taken as a vice, rather than a virtue. In 
this section we take up a specific challenge to the FEP that flows from what seems 
like an overly generous application of the FEP formalism to a wide variety of phe-
nomena: the pebble challenge. It challenges the FEP’s ambitions to describe the 
organizational dynamics of life precisely because its mathematical formalisms apply 
equally well to pebbles, and other abiotic systems as they do to biotic ones. One 
might therefore worry that the FEP fails to say anything specific about biology, 
unless characteristics we take to be specific to biology are not so specific at all. We 
describe this challenge in more detail now.
Friston and Stephan (2007) anticipates this kind of challenge to the FEP. They 
ask, “What is the difference between a plant [a biotic system] and a stone [an abiotic 
system]?” (2007, p. 422) They say that the plant “is an open non-equilibrium sys-
tem, exchanging matter and energy with the environment, whereas the stone is an 
open system that is largely at equilibrium” (2007, p. 422). There is something to this 
initial observation. Plants are open systems, i.e., energy and mass can flow between 
4 The extent to which this story should be taken in a realist sense so that each biotic system literally 
performs advanced statistical operations, or in an instrumentalist sense so that each biotic system’s inter-
actional dynamics merely correspond to (or ‘instantiate’) the dynamics described in Bayesian inference 
is still debated (van Es, 2020; see Ramstead et al., 2019b; Corcoran et al., 2020). A discussion of this 
debate is outside the scope of this paper, and it is unnecessary for our current purposes.

--- Page 8 ---

 Synthese
1 3
the system and its surroundings. The same, of course, can be said of stones as envi-
ronmental forces impinge on their surface area, and their own existence influences 
their environment by, say, releasing heat during the day, or altering pathways for 
organisms (Olivotos & Economou-Eliopoulos, 2016). At first glance, it thus seems 
that the FEP applies in the same way to stones, plants and humans.
The FEP (as we saw above) starts from the simple observation “that for some-
thing to exist it must possess (internal or intrinsic) states that can be separated sta -
tistically from (external or extrinsic) states that do not constitute the thing” (Fris-
ton, 2019, p. 4, emphases added). This Markov blanket formulation would apply 
to a pebble as follows. The Markov blanket defines the conditional independencies 
between two sets of states: the system and the environment. Pebbles are composed 
of minerals with different properties, lattice structure, hardness and cleavage. We 
can associate these variables as the internal states comprising the system. On shin-
gle beaches, the second set of states (the environment) would be other pebbles, and 
so on. In rivers, the water could be cast as the external states. As seen in Sect.  2, it 
is possible to cast a spatial boundary for anything that exists in terms of a Markov 
blanket (Friston, 2013). The pebble has a clear boundary separating internal states 
and external states. The sensory states of a pebble can be associated with the effects 
of external causes of its boundary—stressors such as pressure, temperature and so 
on. Its active states would correspond to how the pebble effects external states—
e.g., via release of heat back into the environment. The Markov partitioning rule 
governing the relation between states dictates that external states act on sensory 
states, which influence, but are not themselves influenced by internal states. Internal 
states couple back to external states, via active states, which are not influenced by 
external states (Palacios et al., 2020). Given that the Markov blanket formulation for 
a pebble is possible, it follows that internal pebble states are conditionally independ-
ent of external states in virtue of the Markov blanket states.5
What does this mean for our FEP analysis of the pebble, given what we have 
seen in Sect.  2? Under the FEP, the mere presence of a Markov blanket implies that 
internal states can be understood as if they minimise the free energy over the states 
that make up their Markov blanket. Technically, since minimising free energy is the 
same as performing approximate Bayesian inference, it follows that one can associ-
ate the internal pebble states (and its blanket states) with Bayesian inference. As 
such, it seems that if (1) anything that exists over time can be described in terms of 
a Markov blanket which implies that expected free energy is minimized by way of 
Bayesian inference, and (2) pebbles exist, then (3) pebbles can be described as hav -
ing a Markov blanket, whose dynamics will appear as though they minimize free 
energy by way of Bayesian inference. The formalisms of the FEP that we employed 
here therefore seem too general to distinguish between pebbles and organisms. 
5 We could, for example, determine the surface molecules of the pebble to be sensory states, adjacent 
molecules to be active states, and the remainder of the pebble’s molecules to be internal states, with the 
environment cast as external states. The molecules we cast as active states are then shielded from influ-
ence of the external states, while still able to influence the external states, though vicariously through 
sensory states. Of course, a pebble is merely an example and this could apply to many abiotic systems. 
Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.

--- Page 9 ---

1 3
Synthese 
Below we will discuss what is needed for a formalism to properly address autonomy 
in Sect.  4. In Sect.  5 we will see how FEP’s toolkit can be leveraged to make a head-
way in providing a principled distinction between pebbles and organisms.
4  Autonomy meets pebble
The pebble challenge need not be a knockdown argument against the ambitions of 
the FEP to address biology and cognitive science. Here we consider a possible reply 
to it. Our agenda will be to introduce the notion of autonomy from enactive philoso-
phy of cognitive science. 6 Kirchhoff et al. (2018) appeal to this notion in order to 
distinguish between mere active inference and adaptive active inference. The for -
mer can be shown to apply to abiotic systems such as pebbles (from above) and 
the generalised synchrony induced in coupled pendulum dynamics. Adaptive active 
inference is introduced to make sense of the idea that living organisms are able to 
actively change or modulate their sensorimotor coupling to their environment—
which is needed to actively monitor and predict changes to perturbations that chal-
lenge homeostatic variables, which may, sometimes, go out of bounds. However, the 
modulation of sensorimotor coupling is merely a (contingent) feature of an autono-
mous system. Operational closure and precariousness jointly define autonomy. We 
build on Kirchhoff et al.’s (2018; see also Kirchhoff & Froese, 2017) argument by 
showing how autonomy is underwritten by the concepts of operational closure and 
precariousness (cf. Di Paolo & Thompson, 2014).
4.1  Operational closure and precariousness
Operational closure is central to the conceptualisation of autonomy (Di Paolo & 
Thompson, 2014). It is characterized as a form of organization in the sense that it 
specifies the particular way any system’s component parts are organized in relation 
to one another. By specifying the organized ‘unity’ (the system) via this formalism, 
we also implicitly define its environment. Furthermore, by defining the system and 
its environment, we also specify the boundary through which the system interacts 
with its environment (Beer, 2004, 2014; Maturana & Varela, 1980).
A system is operationally closed if the processes that make up the system con-
stitute what is known as a self-enabling network. This means that each of the net-
work’s processes enables and is enabled by at least one other process in the network. 
It is empirically possible to determine whether any particular system is operationally 
6 Autonomy is a central theoretical construct of the enactive approach to life and mind (Varela, 1979; 
Varela et al., 1991; Thompson 2007; Di Paolo & Thompson 2014; Di Paolo et al. 2017). Enactivism is 
a theoretical framework with roots in theoretical biology, dynamic systems theory, and phenomenology. 
In enactivism, the notion of autonomy as operational closure has received special attention in attempting 
to unearth the self-organisational dynamics essential to life. Yet the literature so far has fallen short of 
construing operational closure in terms of the FEP’s conceptual toolkit. Here we will make a first attempt 
at conceiving of an operationally closed system as being composed of a network of Markov blanketed 
systems that stand in a mutually enabling relation to one another.

--- Page 10 ---

 Synthese
1 3
closed by mapping out the causal processes relevant for the system and how they 
relate to one another. In particular, one must look for enabling relations. Any one 
process is said to enable another process if its continuation is partly or wholly con-
stitutive of the enabled process. To explain how this works, it may help to look at 
the diagram of an operationally closed system (Fig.  2 below). In this toy system, 
we distinguish five component processes: A, B, C, D, and E represented as nodes 
in the figure. The arrows between them represent enabling relations, so that A can 
be seen to enable process B. Following the arrows, we can identify a closed loop in 
the enabling relations pertaining to processes A, B, and C. This means that the con-
tinuation of A enables the continuation of B, which enables the continuation of C, 
which comes full circle and enables the continuation of process A: the ABC network 
is thus self-enabling. But what about processes D and E? E can be seen to enable 
process A, yet remains outside of the network as it is not enabled by a process in the 
network. D, on the other hand, is enabled by a process in the network, but doesn’t 
loop back and enable a process in the network itself. This is why ABC can be identi-
fied as a self-enabling network, while D and E fall outside the boat.
Precariousness signifies a natural inclination to decline. In Fig.  2 above, for 
example, process A is precarious if it would cease were it not enabled by E and C. It 
may be that not each enabling process is per se necessary or sufficient in enabling. If 
A is precarious, this does mean however, that jointly, its enablers are both necessary 
and sufficient for the continuation of A. As each node in the network is precarious, 
the network itself is too. This is crucial for the notion of autonomy in the enactive 
approach (Di Paolo, 2005).
A paradigmatic case that displays operational closure and precariousness is a sin-
gle cell. A cell is constituted by a complex network of interrelated causal processes, 
but, for didactic purposes, we distinguish three. The first process comprises the 
metabolic network. The second process is the membrane-generation of the cell that 
separates the network from the environment. The third process consists of the active 
regulation of matter and energy exchanges of the cell, via the membrane-induced 
barrier, with its external environment. By way of this third process, the system can 
absorb nutrients from and expel wastes into its environment to continue its metabo-
lism, looping back into process one.
Fig. 2  a diagram displaying an operationally closed network of enabling relations. Each node in the 
figure represents a process in the network, and each arrow represents an enabling relation. The opera-
tionally closed network is marked by the black nodes; processes outside the operationally closed system 
are marked in grey. Each node that is part of the operationally closed network is marked by having at 
least one outgoing and one incoming arrow from another node in the operationally closed network as is 
described in-text (inspired by Di Paolo & Thompson, 2014)

--- Page 11 ---

1 3
Synthese 
The metabolic network, process 1, can be divided into subprocesses. A central 
aspect of metabolism is the production of enzymes, which exhibits a form of closure 
in itself. Enzymes are precarious. As such, when particular enzymes need to be pro-
duced, this occurs “in metabolic pathways helped by other enzymes, which in turn 
are produced with the participation of other ones … in a recursive way” (Mossio & 
Moreno, 2010, p. 278, emphasis added). That is, the metabolic network in itself can 
be said to be “enzymatically closed” (Mossio & Moreno, 2010, p. 278). This pro-
duction network enables process 2: the generation of a membrane that separates the 
network from its environment. This semipermeable barrier is necessary for the sys-
tem to actively regulate its exchanges with the environment. It both allows the sys-
tem to take in matter and energy from the environment, and protect its internal net-
work from external perturbation of the metabolism (Ruiz-Mirazo & Mavelli, 2008; 
Thompson, 2007). The exchange with the environment enabled by the barrier’s sep-
aration is process 3. The limited openness is exploited to allow for the absorption of 
nutrients from the environment which can stimulate the maintenance of the mem-
brane itself, but also “contribute to the production of an ‘energy currency’” (Ruiz-
Mirazo & Mavelli, 2008, 376; Skulachev, 1992). Via trans-membrane mechanisms, 
this ‘currency’ is cashed out in internal metabolic reactions, transformed to serve as 
energy resources to maintain and actively regulate its boundary conditions (Ruiz-
Mirazo & Mavelli, 2008). This is to say that process 3 loops back into enabling pro-
cess 1 and 2. These enabling relations are visualized in Fig.  3 below. Here we can 
see that operational closure and precariousness jointly correctly marks a cell as an 
autonomous system.
4.2  Autonomy and the pebble
A pebble is not autonomous. Given that autonomy is intended to solve the pebble 
challenge, it is important to subject the pebble to the same analysis: is a pebble 
operationally closed and precarious? If not, this indicates that autonomy as used 
Fig. 3  illustrates the simplified process network relevant to a single cell. Process 1, which captures the 
metabolic network, is represented by the 1 in the top-left. Process 2, membrane-generation, is repre-
sented by 2 in the top-right. Process 3, the active regulation of matter and energy exchanges with the 
environment is represented by 3 in the bottom-right. The environment is represented by the E in the bot-
tom-left. The arrows between the represented processes stand for enabling relations as described above. 
We see that 1, 2 and 3 form a self-enabling network as per the definition above. Each process in the 
network enables and is enabled by at least one other process in the network. 1 enables 2 and is enabled 
by 3. 2 enables 3 and is enabled by 1 as well as 3. 3 enables both 1 and 2, and is enabled by 2 and E. The 
network here described thus represents an operationally closed system

--- Page 12 ---

 Synthese
1 3
here is an adequate concept to distinguish between abiotic and biotic systems. 
We distinguish four causal processes that are relevant to the formation and main-
tenance of the pebble’s structural integrity on a shingle beach, two of which are 
directly considered to be determinants of a pebble’s shape and size: particle abra-
sion and particle transport. These two processes may be more or less relevant 
depending on the particular geological location (Domokos and Gibbons, 2012; 
see also Landon, 1930; Kuenen, 1964; Carr, 1969; Bluck, 1967). Particle trans-
port refers to the transport of the pebble by the river. Particle abrasion refers to 
the collusion with other pebbles (and other materials) that occurs primarily dur -
ing particle transport. The remaining two processes are the fluid flows of the river 
and the environment that consists of abraders of a hard enough consistency to 
allow for particle abrasion.
The four processes in the network are thus: fluid flows (A), environmental abrad-
ers (B), particle abrasion (C) and particle transport (D). Fluid flows enable particle 
transport, and can reasonably be considered to enable particle abrasion too. Assum-
ing there are no other moving objects in the river, the pebble will be unlikely to 
move from its location and is thus unlikely to be abraded by other materials, if it is 
not swept anywhere by the fluid flows. Environmental abraders only enable particle 
abrasion. Particle abrasion in itself does not enable any other process in the network. 
Particle transport only enables particle abrasion. This means that fluid flows only 
enable other processes, but are themselves not enabled by any other process in the 
network. The enabling relations are specified in Fig. 4 below. This means that A can-
not be part of a self-enabling network. Environmental abraders only enable particle 
abrasion, and are not themselves enabled by other processes in the network and thus 
B suffers the same fate as A. C, particle abrasion, is enabled by all other processes in 
the network, but does not actually enable any other process, and can also not figure 
in a self-enabling network. Process D, particle transport, is the only process that is 
both enabled by and enables another process in the network, being enabled by fluid 
flows, enabling particle abrasion. This enabling chain, however, never loops back 
into enabling the continuation of particle transport. As such, Process D too cannot 
be part of a self-enabling network. Summing it up, there is no self-enabling network 
Fig. 4  represents the process network relevant to a pebble on a shingle beach. The nodes with letters 
A, B, C and D in the figure represent the processes A, B, C, and D mentioned in-text respectively. The 
arrows represent enabling relations so that the arrow going down from A to C means that A enables C. 
Each node is coloured gray to indicate that the network is not operationally closed, as no process except 
for D enables and is enabled by at least one other process in the network. The network can thus not be 
said to be self-enabling

--- Page 13 ---

1 3
Synthese 
to be found in the processual network surrounding pebbles. This means that, under 
the operational closure formalism, pebbles are not marked as autonomous.7
5  Autonomy meets Markov blanket
Operational closure and precariousness provide the principled distinction between 
autonomous and non-autonomous systems. It is this distinction that seems diffi-
cult to capture within the Markov blanket formalism of the FEP: indeed, following 
Sect.  3, it seems as though both organisms and pebbles can be said to minimise 
free energy and can thus be cast as engaging in Bayesian inference. In Sect.  4 we 
have seen two notions from the enactive literature that are apt at capturing the dif-
ference between biotic and abiotic systems. As such, there is good reason to attempt 
to incorporate the enactive notion of autonomy into the FEP (Kirchhoff et al., 2018; 
Palacios et al., 2020).
A few FEP conceptions of autonomy exist in the literature, so it is important to 
discuss these and why they fall short of capturing operational closure and precari-
ousness. According to one usage of autonomy, the internal and active states of any 
Markov blanketed system are considered autonomous states, because their values 
are not directly influenced by the environment (Friston et al., 2020). Yet this does 
not aid in a distinction between biotic and abiotic systems, as any Markov blanketed 
system by definition has internal and active states. One may also think the presence 
of active states in a system is crucial, as active states are what, in the FEP formal-
ism, allow an organism to modulate their exchange with its environment. Yet, recall 
from Sect.  3 that a pebble also has active states. It would be strange to think that a 
pebble’s existence has no influence on its environment merely because it does not 
act on its environment. A pebble’s mass will influence the state of the water that 
may surround it, or the movement of the adjacent pebbles on a shingle beach, and 
influences the behaviour trajectories of organisms in its vicinity. These sorts of influ-
ences will be formalised as active states in the Markov blanket formalism. As such, 
we will be able to identify external states dependent on the pebble’s active states in 
the same way we can do so for organisms.
Yet, one may object, a pebble’s exchange with its environment is much, shall we 
say, simpler, than an organism’s. This is roughly what is captured in the distinction 
between between active particles and inert particles, discussed in Friston’s, 2019. 8 
The distinction here rests on what is called the ‘information length’ of a system, 
8 Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
7 Our treatment of the pebble case may seem disanalogous with our treatment of the cell case. The dis-
cussion of the cell case treated a few important internal processes such as metabolism and membrane-
generation next to the external processes concerned with exchanges with the environment. Our take on 
the pebble case seems to lack in internal counterparts to the external processes. This speaks to what the 
operational closure formalism indicates, which is that the pebble simply is not an operationally closed 
system. This means that, in terms of this formalism, there is no ‘internal’ to speak of that could operate 
(semi-)independently of the external processes.

--- Page 14 ---

 Synthese
1 3
the technical specifics of which are outside of the scope of this paper. 9 Broadly, one 
could say the information length of a system corresponds to the size of the ‘viable 
bound’ of the system under scrutiny as we have discussed it in Sect.  2. This means 
that a high information length is associated with systems whose internal states dis-
play a large degree of variability, whereas low information length is associated with 
systems whose internal states remain largely static, or consistently revisit a very 
small set of states. This seems to make headway into distinguishing biotic from abi-
otic systems, yet fails to draw a divide in kind, offering only a gradual distinction in 
degrees, leaving room for a grey area between biotic and abiotic. Take the pebble, 
for example. For the sake of argument, let us concede that the pebble’s information 
length is sufficiently low to be termed an inert particle. Yet consider now a shingle 
beach, consisting of a large amount of pebbles, that lies at water. We can consider 
the beach as a whole to have its own Markov blanket, forming an ensemble of the 
individually blanketed pebbles at the beach. The complexity of the internal states of 
the shingle beach as a whole as it maintains its integrity (continues being a shingle 
beach) in spite of the environmental fluctuations (the water flowing on and off-shore, 
weather circumstances, etc.) increases exponentially as we imagine it to be larger, 
comprising more distinct and varied pebbles, each of which ‘respond’ differently to 
the varying temperatures and kinetic forces. This increases the associated informa-
tion length of the shingle beach. We could do this for increasingly complex abiotic 
systems until, one could imagine, the information length starts to look a lot like that 
of a single bacterium. The crucial point here is that relying on a system’s informa-
tion length may not necessarily pick out biotic systems exclusively, and remains a 
difference in degree, as opposed to a difference in kind.10
A final suggestion that could be thought to pick out organisms over pebbles is 
that of non-equilibrium steady-state (NESS). According to the FEP’s more recent 
formulations,11 any Markov blanketed system that is at NESS with its environment 
can be cast as minimizing free energy (Ramstead et al., 2019a). For a system to be 
in a non-equilibrium steady-state so defined means that the system is far from equi-
librium and, in virtue of systematic environmental exchange, remains in the same 
state over time. Yet being in a steady state implies that the system remains in the 
same state over time (Gagniuc, 2017). This means that, for a dynamically chang-
ing organism in constant flux, this only holds by approximation or within certain 
specific timeframes. An extreme example are butterflies that just got out of their 
cocoon, which corresponds to a massive change in the organism’s states, but humans 
can just as well hardly be said to occupy the same state over time. 12 A pebble is in 
9 See Friston’s (2019) unpublished manuscript for a description in technical detail.
10 What this means is that the grey area is not inherently a fault, yet conceding this does not help us in 
distinguishing the pebble clearly from the organism.
11 Contrary to, say, Friston (2013), the condition of a system being at NESS with its environment seems 
to have replaced the initial clause of being locally ergodic (see Friston 2019; but also Hipólito, 2019; 
Ramstead et al., 2019a). Discussion of this change and its philosophical implications are outside of the 
scope of this paper, but see Bruineberg et al. (2020) for preliminary discussions.
12 The FEP may be able to accommodate ‘wandering sets’ (see Birkhoff, 1927) which could account for 
changes to a system’s viable bound over time, though it remains to be seen whether this could accommo-
date drastic and sudden changes such as the butterfly’s (Friston, 2019).

--- Page 15 ---

1 3
Synthese 
no need of environmental exchange to remain a pebble and is thus not at NESS. Yet 
it is also known that NESS does not uniquely pick out biotic systems (see for exam-
ple Bernard & Doyon, 2015; Pourhasan, 2016). As such, it remains of import to look 
at the enactive approach to autonomy and how this could be approached from within 
the FEP.
5.1  On self‑individuation
A system is considered operationally closed only if it exhibits a network of self-
enabling processes. That is, each process in the network enables and is enabled by at 
least one other process in the network. This means that any operationally closed sys-
tem is inherently composed of multiple individually distinguishable component pro-
cesses. Taken together, these individually distinguishable component processes form 
a larger network that self-individuates, and generates its own boundary between 
itself and its environment. The Markov blanket formalism is well-equipped to cap-
ture this hierarchical boundary generation of processes (Palacios et al., 2020). If we 
take each component process to have a Markov blanket, and the larger, operationally 
closed network to have a Markov blanket too, the generation of a self-enabling and 
self-individuating process network can be cast as the hierarchical self-organization 
of a Markov blanketed ensemble of Markov blankets. Palacios et  al. (2020) show 
how, with a few crucial assumptions, single cells can be shown to aggregate quite 
naturally into a larger ensemble. In this particular way, we can consider each node 
of the network to be Markov blanketed, and the ensemble-network to be Markov 
blanketed in itself, as shown in Fig.  5 below. The nodes of the operationally closed 
network need not be operationally closed themselves, which means that the nodes 
themselves need not invite being divided further into another layered network. We 
can thus ground operational closure in terms of Markov blanket ensembles with-
out inviting an infinite regress. This maps onto a single cell organism too. Consider 
that each organelle of a single cell can be distinguished statistically from the rest of 
the cell, thus establishing a Markov blanket (Palacios et al., 2020), without in itself 
being operationally closed and thus not in itself requiring to be composed of a self-
enabling process network under the current definition of operational closure.
Fig. 5  describes the operationally closed single cell system with a Markov blanket around the ensemble 
of process networks that make up the system. The process relations described are just as they were in 
Figure (x: cell). The circle around the self-enabling network of 1, 2 and 3 represents the Markov blanket 
around the ensemble

--- Page 16 ---

 Synthese
1 3
Although this captures a key feature of operational closure, self-individuation (or 
membrane-generation in terms of a single biotic cell), it falls short of accounting for 
the conditional enabling network that differentiates autonomous from non-autono-
mous systems. Hierarchical self-organization is only part of the enactive story of 
autonomy. Indeed, the pebble challenge could be reformulated as a shingle beach 
challenge so that the beach can be cast as an ensembled Markov blanketed system 
that engages in Bayesian inference, composed of individually Markov blanketed 
pebbles. The distinction between abiotic and biotic thus remains blurred, even in a 
hierarchical perspective.
5.2  On operational closure and enabling relations
There are a few differences between just any Markov blanketed system and an oper-
ationally closed Markov blanketed system that we need to capture. Operational clo-
sure is a particularly structured manner of self-organization (Maturana & Varela, 
1980). Increased structure over time implies that the long term entropy (informally a 
measure of disorder; Friston, 2013) is low, which means that sensory surprise must 
be low too. The ensemble’s states are constituted by the component states, which 
means that the component states inherit this low surprise. This is a key aspect of 
understanding operational closure in the FEP.
We can exploit the lower surprise internal to the network further by, for the sake 
of exposition, ignoring the system’s environment. For each particular node, its sen-
sory states are entirely determined by the active states of the other nodes in the net-
work (Palacios et al., 2020). More specifically, if A enables B, that means that the 
active states of A must have an important influence on B, which in turn means that 
the active states of A are significantly determinant of the sensory states of B. Con-
versely, if B is enabled only by A, its sensory states are entirely determined by the 
active states of A. This means that, within the network, each node’s sensory states 
are determined by the active states of its enablers. This implies that the sensory sur -
prise of any node is at a nearly absolute minimum, given the active states of the 
enabling nodes.
In light of this, an enabling relation is closely related to the notion of coupling. 
Any two nodes can be said to be coupled when they are in a relation of mutual influ-
ence (Friston, 2013). In active inference, the generative models associated with 
two coupled systems will approach one another over time, giving rise to what is 
known as generalized synchrony. As the coupled two systems continuously inter -
act, they become attuned to one another; they adapt to one another (Friston, 2013). 
This attunement means that the influence they have on one another becomes increas-
ingly well accommodated. In mutual attunement, this entails changes in the extrinsic 
probability distribution in the state space, so that the sensory states associated with 
the active states of the coupled system are increasingly likely. On the scale of the 
network, this means that the nodes as part of the network, i.e. on a network-level 
scale, are in a tight coupling relation. This is to say that each node’s influence will 
enable, and thus largely determine, another node’s states that will, by virtue of being 
part of the network, couple back the initial node to enable and largely determine its 

--- Page 17 ---

1 3
Synthese 
own states either directly or indirectly. An operationally closed network, then, can 
be taken as a tightly coupled network of Markov blanketed nodes.
Note however, that, prima facie, the notion of coupling is not necessarily appli-
cable to any two nodes in an enabling relation within the network. We thus can-
not simply transcribe the enabling relations between nodes as coupling relations. A 
coupling relation is symmetrical insofar it prescribes mutual influence. This does 
not mean that the interaction needs to be identical in both directions of influence, 
but it does imply that the interaction is minimally bidirectional: the active states of 
one node determine the sensory states of another node and vice versa. Taken in this 
sense of direct influence, an enabling relation is not. An enabling relation can be 
asymmetrical, as we see in nodes 1 and 2 in Fig.  5 above. This means that we would 
miss out on asymmetrical enabling relations if we were to transcribe them as cou-
pling relations in a model. Moreover, an enabling relation concerns a specific type 
of influence that one node has on another. Consider that any random two systems 
may, for a certain duration over time, be coupled in a mutually disruptive fashion. 
This means that rather than enabling one another, they instead inhibit one another. 
This distinction too may be lost if we were to transcribe enabling relations as cou-
pling relations. Crucially, however, we can say that the individual nodes are at least 
indirectly coupled to one another from a network perspective.
The network perspective can also capture the sense in which operational closure 
depends on a network’s constituents. Consider, for example, how the free energy 
of a Markov blanketed ensemble of Markov blankets depends on the free energy 
of its constituents (Friston, 2013). Nonetheless, the shingle beach considerations in 
Sect. 5.1 remain valid.
5.3  On precariousness and limits
The Markov blanketed ensemble of Markov blankets has been important in our char-
acterization of self-individuation and operational closure, so one could think it to 
cover precariousness as well. The idea is that an ensemble’s free energy is deter -
mined by the free energy of its constituents, which means that if the constituents’ 
free energy is minimised, the free energy of the ensemble is minimised too. It is 
important to note that this hierarchical dependence is a crucial feature of precarious-
ness in organisms. That is, organisms and their component processes are inherently 
precarious. Yet what is typical of precariousness is not the hierarchical dependence 
relation: it is the natural inclination to decline.
More important here is the FEP requirement of a system to be at NESS with its 
environment. As we have seen, this implies that the system requires continued envi-
ronmental exchange to maintain its state. Barring the limiting remarks of the appli-
cability of NESS to real, living organisms noted above at the start of Sect.  5, the 
continued environmental exchange requirement for maintaining its state is exactly 

--- Page 18 ---

 Synthese
1 3
what precariousness demands. Some employ this feature of the FEP to construe 
cancer, for example (Kuchling et al. 2019; Manicka & Levin, 2019).13
Furthermore, the low sensory surprise of an enabled node, given the active states 
of enabling nodes may also be able to capture an organism’s precariousness. Recall 
that precariousness appears on two levels in an autonomous system. Each process 
in the network is precarious, and the network as a unity is too. Network-level pre-
cariousness is built into the FEP at its very core. Any system needs to put in work 
to be able to maintain its boundaries with the environment and continue existing. 
This means that without this work, the system will disintegrate, which is to say the 
system is naturally inclined to cessation, yet remains intact due to the ‘efforts’ of the 
system. In this sense, the organism can be taken as precarious.
However, this line of thinking invites an unintended implication on the node level. 
Consider that high-probability sensory states are those for which they are largely 
determined by their enablers’ active states. The cessation of a process, further, is 
associated with leaving expected bounds. When a process ceases, its active states 
will thus by definition leave expected bounds. This implies that the sensory states 
of an enabled node would be highly surprising (given its ceasing enabler’s active 
states) so that it’s likely to enter an unviable state and cease as well. This seems to 
entail that if any random enabling node would cease, the sudden increase in sensory 
surprise for the enabled nodes would sooner or later cause each other process in the 
network to fall like dominoes. After all, their own cessation will cause a spike in 
sensory surprise in the nodes they enable, and so on. As the network is composed 
only of processes that both enable and are enabled by at least one other node in the 
network, no single process will be spared. In certain cases, this is to be expected. 
Consider our toy description of a single cell in Sect.  4.1 above. If we were to cease 
any of the processes in that network, the entire network would collapse. Each pro-
cess is essential for the continuation of the network. However, this is only a contin-
gent fact of our toy description. As stated above, it is not necessary for each enabling 
process to be individually necessary or sufficient for the continuation of the enabled 
process. This flexibility is key in our understanding of operational closure, yet is 
orthogonal to the domino effect we find on a node-level of description. This shows 
that, though this approach is able to capture certain characteristics, it is not capable 
of incorporating precariousness on both a network- and a node-level of description.
Further, if we intend to capture the essential organizational dynamics for biotic 
systems, abstracting away the environment misses the point. By defining what 
something is (the system, or the unity), we indirectly define that which it is not 
(the environment) (Beer, 2004; Friston, 2019). This is exacerbated by the fact that 
for each probability distribution over internal states, there is an associated prob-
ability distribution over external states that specifies the expected influences of 
external states (Friston et al., 2020). Even in the presence of an external environ-
ment, an operationally closed system intrinsically defines its environment as well 
as its boundary through which it can interact with the environment (Beer, 2004, 
13 Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out, which inspired further considerations regard-
ing operational closure as well.

--- Page 19 ---

1 3
Synthese 
2014; Friston, 2012). In an ecological situation, any one node’s surprise is thus 
not at nearly absolute minimum, but can still be said to be particularly low, given 
the active states of its enablers.
In sum, we have presented some ways to consider conceptualizing operational 
closure and precariousness in terms of a tightly coupled network of Markov blan-
kets. There is a sense in which tightly bound network-scale coupling, and particu-
larly low sensory surprise of enabled nodes given the active states of enabling 
nodes, can capture operational closure and precariousness. This can be taken as a 
proof of concept. Further simulational research may aid further in the incorpora-
tion of autonomy into the FEP by putting the approach here to work.
6  Conclusion
Many FEP researchers hold the FEP to support a grand unifying ambition to 
account for a wide variety of phenomena, among others the organizational 
dynamics of living and cognitive systems. Yet a common criticism is that it is 
overly general and cannot distinguish between biotic and abiotic systems, mak -
ing it seem uninteresting from a biological perspective. We addressed this worry 
by elaborating on earlier suggestions to incorporate the enactive notion of auton-
omy into the FEP framework. In Sect.  4, we described how operational closure 
and precariousness are concepts fit to handle the pebble challenge. In the subse-
quent section, we made a first attempt at incorporating the enactive language of 
autonomy into free energy language. We discuss different aspects of autonomy in 
the enactive approach and how they could potentially be transcribed into the FEP 
formalism. The FEP quite naturally accounts for self-individuation, a corollary 
of operational closure. The same applies to the bi-directional dependence rela-
tion of an operationally closed system and its component processes and a Markov 
ensemble and its nodes. Yet the enabling relation central to operational closure 
proves more challenging. There are implications with regards to the statistical 
relations between nodes for any operationally closed system such as an enabled 
node’s low sensory surprise in light of its enablers’ active states that we show the 
FEP can account for. Precariousness is also shown to be difficult to incorporate 
on a node-level (although the ensemble level is able to capture some basal fea-
tures of precariousness), and the complexity of an ecological environment places 
limits on surprise-minimization descriptions as leveraged before. The FEP can 
thus emulate a limited version of autonomy as it appears in the enactive approach. 
Simulation modeling can further help incorporate this notion of autonomy into 
the FEP formalism.
Acknowledgements Kirchhoff’s work was supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery 
Project “Mind in Skilled Performance” (DP170102987). Van Es’s work was supported by the Research 
Foundation Flanders (Grant No. 1124818N). We would like to thank Mel Andrews, Mads Julian Dengsø 
and two anonymous reviewers for comments on a previous draft of this paper.

--- Page 20 ---

 Synthese
1 3
References
Auletta, G. (2013). Information and metabolism in bacterial chemotaxis. Entropy. https ://doi.
org/10.3390/e1501 0311
Beal, M. (2003). Variational algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference. Ph.D. thesis University 
of Cambridge.
Beer, R. D. (2004). Autopoiesis and cognition in the game of Life. Artificial Life, 10(3), 309–326.
Beer, R. D. (2014). The cognitive domain of a glider in the game of life. Artificial Life, 20, 183–206. 
https ://doi.org/10.1162/ARTL_a_00125  
Bernard, D., & Doyon, B. (2015). Non-equilibrium steady states in conformal field theory. Annales 
Henri Poincaré, 16, 113–161. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0002 3-014-0314-8
Birkhoff, G. D. (1927). Dynamical systems. American Mathematical Society.
Bluck, B. J. (1967). Sedimentation of beach gravels; Examples of South Wales. Journal of Sedimen-
tary Research, 37, 128–156. https ://doi.org/10.1306/74D71 672-2B21-11D7-86480 00102 C1865  
D
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-
energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 2417–2444. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1122 9-016-1239-1
Bruineberg, J., Dolega, K., Dewhurst, J., & Baltieri, M. (2020). The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets 
[Preprint]. PhilSci Archiv http://phils ci-archi ve.pitt.edu/id/eprin t/18467 .
Carr, A. P. (1969). Size grading along a pebble beach: Chesil beach, England. Journal of Sedimentary 
Petrology, 39, 297–311. https ://doi.org/10.1306/74D71 C3A-2B21-11D7-86480 00102 C1865 D
Campbell, J. O. (2016). Universal Darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference. Frontiers in Systems 
Neuroscience. https ://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys .2016.00049 
Calvo, P., & Friston, K. (2017). Predicting green: Really radical (plant) predictive processing. Journal of 
the Royal Society Interface, 14(131), 20170096. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0096
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2018). First principles in the life sciences: The free-energy principle, organi-
cism, and mechanism. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-018-01932 -w
Corcoran, A. W., Pezzula, G., & Hohwy, J. (2020). From allostatic agents to counterfactual cognisers: 
Active inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biology and Philosophy. https 
://doi.org/10.1007/s1053 9-020-09746 -2
Domokos, G., & Gibbons, G. W. (2012). The evolution of pebble size and shape in space and time. Pro -
ceedings of the Royal Society A, 468, 3059–3079. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2011.0562
Daunizeau, J., den Ouden, H. E. M., Pessiglione, M., Kiebel, S. J., Stephan, K. E., & Friston, K. J. (2010). 
Observing the observer (I): Meta-Bayesian models of learning and decision-making. PLoS ONE, 
5(12), e15554. https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ al.pone.00155 54
Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sci-
ences, 4(4), 429. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1109 7-005-9002-y
Di Paolo, E., & Thompson, E. (2014). The enactive approach. In L. Shapiro (Ed.), Routledge handbooks 
in philosophy. The Routledge handbook of embodied cognition (pp. 68–78). Routledge/Taylor & 
Francis Group.
Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2015). Active inference, communication and hermeneutics. Cortex; 
A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 68, 129–143. https ://doi.
org/10.1016/j.corte x.2015.03.025
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
13(7), 293–301.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 
11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14(11), 2100–2121.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface. https ://doi.org/10.1098/
rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. Unpublished manuscript.
Friston, K., & Ao, P. (2012). Free-energy, value and attractors. Computational and Mathematical 
Methods in Medicine. https ://doi.org/10.1155/2012/93786 0
Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. A. (2006). Free energy principle for the brain. Journal of Physi-
ology-Paris, 100, 70–87. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys paris .2006.10.001

--- Page 21 ---

1 3
Synthese 
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and active 
inference. Network Neuroscience, 1, 381–414. https ://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018  
Friston, K., & Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free energy and the brain. Synthese, 159, 417–458.
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of consciousness: From 
Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516. https ://doi.org/10.3390/e2205 0516
Gagniuc, P. A. (2017). Markov chains: From theory to implementation and experimentation. John 
Wiley & Sons.
Hesp, C., Ramstead, M., Constant, A., Badcock, P., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K., et al. (2019). 
A Multi-scale view of the emergent complexity of life: A free energy proposal. In M. Price 
(Ed.), Evolution, development, and complexity: Multiscale models in complex adaptive systems. 
Springer.
Hipólito, I. (2019). A simple theory of every ‘thing.’ Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 79–85. https ://doi.
org/10.1016/j.plrev  .2019.10.006
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285. https ://doi.org/10.1111/
nous.12062  
Hohwy, J. (2020). New directions in predictive processing. Mind & Language, 35, 209–223.
Kiebel, S. J., Daunizeau, J., & Friston, K. J. (2008). A hierarchy of time-scales and the brain. PLoS Com-
putational Biology, 4(11), e1000209. https ://doi.org/10.1371/journ al.pcbi.10002 09
Mirchhoff, K., & Froese, T. (2017). Where there is life there is mind: In support of a strong life-mind 
continuity thesis. Entropy. https ://doi.org/10.3390/e1904 0169
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2019). How to determine the boundaries of the mind: A Markov blan-
ket proposal. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-019-02370 -y
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blankets of life: 
Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 
https ://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kuchling, F., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., & Levin, M. (2019). Morphogenesis as Bayesian inference: A 
variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex biological systems. Physics of Life 
Reviews. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev .2019.06.001
Kuenen, Ph. H. (1964). Experimental abrasion of pebbles. VI. Surf action. Sedimentology, 3, 29–43. https 
://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3091.1964.tb002 73.x
Landon, R. E. (1930). An analysis of beach pebble abrasion and transportation. The Journal of Geology, 
38, 437–446. https ://doi.org/10.1086/62373 9
Linson, A., Clark, A., Ramamoorthy, S., & Friston, K. (2018). The active inference approach to ecologi-
cal perception: General information dynamics for natural and artificial embodied cognition. Fron -
tiers in Robotics and AI. https ://doi.org/10.3389/frobt .2018.00021 
Manicka, S., & Levin, M. (2019). Modeling somatic computation with non-neural bioelectric networks. 
Scientific Reports, 9(1), 18612. https ://doi.org/10.1038/s4159 8-019-54859 -8
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition. Reidel.
Mossio, M., & Moreno, A. (2010). Organisational closure in biological organisms. History and Philoso-
phy of the Life Sciences, 32(2010), 269–288.
Olivotos, S., & Economou-Eliopoulos, M. (2016). Gibbs free energy of formation for selected platinum 
group minerals (PGM). Geosciences, 6(1), 2. https ://doi.org/10.3390/geosc ience s6010 002
Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2017). Working memory, attention, and salience in active inference. Scientific 
Reports, 7, 14678. https ://doi.org/10.1038/s4159 8-017-15249 -0
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2020). On Markov blankets and hier -
archical self-organisation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 486, 110089. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jtbi.2019.11008 9
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference. Morgan 
Kaufmann.
Pourhasan, R. (2016). Non-equilibrium steady state in the hydro regime. Journal of High Energy Physics, 
2016, 5. https ://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP0 2(2016)005
Ramstead, M. J. D., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Variational ecology and the 
physics of sentient systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 188–205. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev 
.2018.12.002
Ramstead, M., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. (2019). Multiscale integration: Beyond 
internalism and externalism. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-019-02115 -x
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is life? Cambridge University Press.
Skulachev, V. P. (1992). The laws of cell energetics. European Journal of Biochemistry, 208, 203–209.

--- Page 22 ---

 Synthese
1 3
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Systems Technical Journal, 27(3), 
379–423.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind. Harvard Univer -
sity Press.
van Es, T. (2019). Minimizing prediction errors in predictive processing: From inconsistency to non-
representationalism. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1109 
7-019-09649 -y
van Es, T. (2020). Living models or life modeled? On the use of models in the free energy principle. 
Adaptive Behavior. https ://doi.org/10.1177/10597 12320 91867 8
Varela, F. (1979). Principles of biological autonomy. The North-Holland series in general systems 
research (Vol. 2). Elsevier North-Holland.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experi-
ence. MIT Press.
Williams, D. (2018). Predictive coding and thought. Synthese, 197, 1749–1775.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
