=== PAGE 1 ===

Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244
Critical phenomena and breaking drops:
Inﬁnite idealizations in physics
Robert W. Batterman
Department of Philosophy, Ohio State University, 350 University Hall, 230 N. Oval Mall,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Received 23 January 2004; accepted 11 May 2004
Abstract
ThermodynamicsandStatisticalMechanicsarerelatedtooneanotherthroughtheso-called
‘‘thermodynamic limit’’ in which, roughly speaking the number of particles becomes inﬁnite.
Atcritical points(placesofphysical discontinuity)thislimitfailstoberegular.Asaresult,the
‘‘reduction’’ of Thermodynamics to Statistical Mechanics fails to hold at such critical phases.
This fact is key to understanding an argument due to Craig Callender to the effect that the
thermodynamic limit leads to mistakes in Statistical Mechanics. I discuss this argument and
argue that the conclusion is misguided. In addition, I discuss an analogous example where a
genuine physical discontinuity—the breaking of drops—requires the use of inﬁnite
idealizations.
r 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Thermodynamic limit; Scaling; Theory reduction; Critical phenomena; Idealizations.
1. Introduction: intertheory relations in physics
The study of intertheoretic relationships is a prime topic for philosophers of
science. Typically such studies involve questions about whether one theory reduces
to another, and if so, what is the best way to characterize this relationship. Most
contemporary workers in this area pay homage to Ernest Nagel’s seminal discussion
of theory reduction (Nagel, 1961, Chapter 11). In the crudest form, Nagel and his
ARTICLE IN PRESS
www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsb
1355-2198/$-see front matterr 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2004.05.004
E-mail address: batterman.1@osu.edu.


=== PAGE 2 ===

followers hold that a typically older and coarser theoryTc reduces to a typically
newer and more reﬁned theoryTf according to the following scheme:
(N)Tc reduces toTf just in case the laws ofTc arederivable from those ofTf :
As an example, we can think ofTf as special relativity andTc as the Newtonian
theory of space and time. Thus the Newtonian theory reduces to the special
relativistic theory, because some kind of derivational relationship obtains between
the laws of the two theories. Much work over the years has been devoted to reﬁning
and elaborating this schema. (Nagel, himself, said nothing remotely so crude.)
Nevertheless, for our purposes here, I think that this is sufﬁcient to begin with.
1
In contrast to this ‘‘philosopher’s conception’’ of reduction, is what I call a
‘‘physicist’s conception’’. This view was ﬁrst noted and discussed by (Nickles (1973))
in a paper entitled ‘‘Two Concepts of Intertheoretic Reduction’’. On this view the
ﬁner theory reduces to the coarser theory in some appropriate limit.
lim
/C15! 0
Tf ¼ Tc. (1)
Thus, the special theory of relativity reduces to the Newtonian theory of space and
time in the limit in which the relative velocities of the reference frames are small
compared with the speed of light.
Muchofmyrecentworkhasbeenfocusedontheschema(1).
2 Inparticular,Ihave
argued that one cannot have interesting philosopher’s reductions, without a
physicist’s reduction obtaining. Furthermore, and this is the crucial point for the
current discussion, for most theory pairsT
f andTc;the physicist’s schema actually
fails. Thus, most cases of purported reductions between theories will actually fail to
be reductions at all. The reason for this is really quite simple. The equality in (1) can
obtain only if the limit is regular. If the solutions of the relevant formulas or
equationsofthetheoryT
f aresuchthatforsmallvaluesof/C15theysmoothlyapproach
the solutions of the corresponding formulas inTc;then the limit is regular and (1)
will be satisﬁed. For such cases we can say that the ‘‘limiting behavior’’ as/C15! 0
equals the ‘‘behavior in the limit’’ where/C15¼ 0 :On the other hand, if the behavior in
the limit is of afundamentally different character than the nearby solutions one
obtains as/C15! 0 ;then the limit is singular and the schema will fail.
Examples where the physicist’s schema fails include the short wavelength (l ! 0)
limit of the wave theory of light and the semiclassical (_ ! 0) limit of quantum
mechanics. These limits both fail to approach smoothly the solutions to the coarser
theories—ray optics and classical mechanics, respectively.
Anotherlimitingrelationshipthatfailstoberegularisthetopicofthispaper—the
thermodynamic limit of statistical mechanics at critical points. The situation here is
very subtle indeed and the study of the limiting failures bring much of interest
physically, mathematically, and philosophically.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1Ontheotherhand,wewillshortlyhavetobecomeabitmoresophisticatedinourunderstandingofthis
‘‘philosopher’s conception’’ of reduction.
2In particular, see (Batterman, 2002).
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244226


=== PAGE 3 ===

Here, I want to investigate further the consequences of the singular nature of
schema (1) for understanding the relationships between statistical mechanics and
thermodynamics. One point I would like to make is that a failure to realize the
import of this singular relationship has recently led to a mistaken view about the
role of the thermodynamic limit and the idealizations according to which statisti-
cal mechanics must treat systems as containing an inﬁnite number of particles.
In particular, I intend to take issue withCallender’s (2001)claim in ‘‘Taking
Thermodynamics Too Seriously’’ that such an idealization leads to funda-
mental mistakes. On the contrary, once we understand that reductive relations
between thermodynamics and statistical mechanics completely fail at critical points
and phase transitions, we will see that the inﬁnite idealizations are completely
justiﬁed.
The conclusion generalizes. I will consider, by way of further supporting the
legitimacy of limiting inﬁnite idealizations, a second example. This is the everyday
phenomenon in which a ﬂuid such as water dripping from a faucet undergoes a
singular evolution as it breaks apart into drops.Despite obvious differences, the two
cases are, in fact, quite similar.
2. The ‘‘received’’ view
In order for thermodynamics to reduce to statistical mechanics in the
philosopher’s sense of schema (N), one must be able to derive the thermodynamic
behavior of a system as captured by the laws of that theory from the statistical
mechanical laws that take seriously the idea that such a (thermal) system is
composed of a large number of particles. Quite famously, primarily because of
Nagel’s presentation, the reduction of thermodynamics to statistical mechanics is
taken to be the paradigm instance of theory reduction in the physical sciences.
However, as recent work has shown, this is a mistake.
3 Many problems arise
including how one can identify the nonstatistical concepts appearing in thermo-
dynamics with the statistical/ensemble quantities that play such a crucial role in
statistical mechanics. Such identiﬁcations or bridge laws are necessary for the
derivation demanded by schema (N), nevertheless, their validity, to say the least, is
not at all straightforward.
Moreseriousisthefactthatatcriticalpoints,itseemsthattherecanbenoschema
(N)-type derivation whatsoever, even if we were able to solve the various problems
about bridge laws. This is because the physicist’s schema, (1) is singular at those
locations in phase. I will say more about this below. For now note that one way in
which the singular nature of this limit manifests itself is in the failure of so-called
Mean Field Theory to accurately represent what goes on at criticality. Let me now
introduce these terms and discuss an important argument leading to what I take to
be the received view of the relationship between thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics at critical points.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
3See Sklar’sPhysics and chance (Sklar, 1993) for a discussion.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 227


=== PAGE 4 ===

Consideramagnetmodeledasasystemofspinsonalattice.Themagnetizationof
the system (in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld) is produced by the
spontaneous alignment of the spins. Such states, again in the absence of an external
ﬁeld, are degenerate—for every state in which the average magnetizationm of the
spins points some directionsthere is a thermodynamically equivalent state in which
it points in the opposite direction. An important quantity for understanding the
criticalbehaviorofasystemistheso-called‘‘orderparameter’’ whichforthemagnet
is deﬁned to be average magnetizationm ¼ mðh;TÞwherehis the magnetic ﬁeld and
T is the temperature. As we see inFig. 1, below the critical temperatureT
c there are
two values of the magnetization for every temperatureT, whereas aboveTc the
magnetization is zero. Therefore, at zero ﬁeld (h ¼ 0) there is a ﬁrst order phase
transition forToTc and asT ! Tc from below that discontinuity vanishes
indicating the existence of a second order (or continuous) phase transition at the
critical point.
It is well-known that so-called Mean Field Theory gives a qualitatively correct
characterization of phase transitions in magnetic systems. This theory employs the
assumption that each spin acts as if it is independent of the others feeling only the
average (mean ﬁeld) produced by all of the other spins. In making this assumption,
Mean Field Theory explicitly ignores ﬂuctuations in the ordering of the spins on the
lattice. This has the unfortunate consequence that Mean Field Theory completely
failstoreproducetheexperimentallyobserved criticalexponentbthatappears inthe
scaling law for the magnetization:
m /jtj
b, (2)
where
t ¼ T /C0Tc
Tc
ARTICLE IN PRESS
TT=Tc
m
m=0
m=ms
m=-ms
Fig. 1. Magnetization vs. temperature at zero ﬁeld.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244228


=== PAGE 5 ===

is the reduced temperature describing the deviation of the system from criticality in
dimensionless units. The Mean Field prediction forb is 1/2, whereas a value much
closer to .325 is actually observed.
Mean Field Theory, because it ignores ﬂuctuations, also ignores the fact that near
criticality the correlation length—roughly, the distance over which signiﬁcant spin
correlations occur—becomes extremely large and actually diverges at the critical
point. In fact, though I would not rehearse the argument here, it is possible to use
MeanFieldTheoryitselftoestimatetheimportanceofsuchﬂuctuations.Asaresult,
the theory, in effect, predicts its own failure. The argument is due toGinzburg
(1960).S e eKadanoff (2000, pp. 242–243)andGoldenfeld (1992, pp. 169–172)for
discussions.
Instatisticalmechanicseverythermodynamicfunctioncanbedeterminedfromthe
partition functionZ which is related to the free energyF through the relation
ZðbÞ¼ e
/C0bðF ðb;lÞÞ,
wherel is a some parameter appearing in the system’s Hamiltonian andb is the
inversetemperature—b ¼ 1 = kT:4 Inparticular,themagnetizationmisdeterminedas
follows:
m ¼ q
qh lnZ.
For our system ofN spins on a lattice, the partition function is a sum of 2N terms
representing the different possible conﬁgurations of the spins. Each such term is a
positive exponential and there is a mathematical result stating that a ﬁnite sum of
positive exponentials must be an analytic function. It is, therefore,impossible for the
magnetization to be a nonanalytic function. Phase transitions and, in particular, the
continuous phase transition at the critical point, are represented in thermodynamics
asnonanalyticities in the relevant thermodynamic potentials. This leads immediately
to the conclusion thatfor a system with a ﬁnite number of particles or degrees of
freedom, there can be no phase transitions . As a result, no derivation of the critical
behavior described by thermodynamics from statistical mechanical considerations is
possible. The philosopher’s reduction fails.
On the other hand, Kadanoff holds that this argument—suggesting as it does that
nonanalyticities are impossible—is ‘‘spurious’’ (Kadanoff, 2000, p. 238). He believes
that the theorem is inapplicable since itis possible for nonanalytic behavior to
appear in systems of inﬁnite size—that is, with inﬁniteN. He says that from this
argument we must conclude that
The existence of a phase transition requires an inﬁnite system. No phase
transitions occur in systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom.
(Kadanoff, 2000, p. 238)
ARTICLE IN PRESS
4It is an unfortunate convention thatb is also used to represent the exponent in the scaling law for the
order parameterm. Context should make clear to what it refers.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 229


=== PAGE 6 ===

Mean Field Theory for inﬁniteN provides aqualitative description of phase
transitions and critical phenomena in the thermodynamic limit. Quantitatively, it is
accurate away from critical points but fails at criticality in that (among other things)
it predicts the incorrect value of 1/2 for the exponentb:The idealization of inﬁnite
N—the thermodynamic limit—is necessary for the qualitative characterization of
phase transitions and critical phenomena as Kadanoff’s argument demonstrates, but
itisinsufﬁcientforanaccuratequantitativedescriptionofwhatgoesonatcriticality.
Now, I think that it is fair to say that the view of phase transitions and critical
phenomena as requiring the limit of inﬁniteN is the dominant view among
physicists.
5 However, a little reﬂection suggests that this dominant or ‘‘received’’
view is not quite so straightforward. When pressed with the fact that actual physical
systems are composed of a ﬁnite number of particles, most people respond by saying
something along the following lines: ‘‘Well, the thermodynamic limit is really an
idealization, what we mean is that actual systems approximate in some way this
idealized limiting case’’.
6 In other words, they hold that from a purely mathematical
perspective, we do need the thermodynamic limit. But in the real world of physics,
our appeal to such a limiting idealization is really a pragmatic move that will help us
deal with very messy detailed calculations.
Such a response is clearly at odds with Kadanoff’s conclusion that inﬁnite systems
arenecessary for phase transitions. I think that this ‘‘elaborated received view’’,
which endorses Kadanoff’s conclusion while simultaneously appealing to the
pragmatic need to approximate, is an unstable position. On the one hand, perhaps
we should take seriously the fact that real systems are ﬁnite and search for an
account of phase transitions and critical phenomena in terms of the statistical
mechanical partition function for systems with ﬁniteN. On the other hand, if we do
this,werunafoulofthetheoremmentionedabovetotheeffectthatphasetransitions
for ﬁniteN systems are impossible.
In the next section I will consider an argument to the effect that we ought to look
for an account of phase transitions that takes seriously the fact of ﬁniteN and
dismisses the relevance of the theorem.
3. Taking thermodynamics too seriously?
Callender (2001), I think, can be understood as reasoning to this effect. He argues
that when we assert that the thermodynamic limit is essential for characterizing
phase transitions and critical phenomena, we are ‘‘taking thermodynamics too
seriously’’—that is, we are taking the thermodynamic representation of phase
transitions and critical phenomena as nonanalytic behaviors in the various
thermodynamic potentials too literally.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
5There are dissenters, however. See, e.g. (Gross, 2001).
6I am not saying that this is Kadanoff’s view of the matter.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244230


=== PAGE 7 ===

He recognizes the mathematical theorem we have been discussing:
The problem is that phase transitions—as understood by statistical mechanics—
canonlyoccurininﬁnitesystems,yetthephenomenathatwearetryingtoexplain
clearly occur in ﬁnite systems (Callender, 2001, p. 549).
Further, after allowing that from apragmatic point of view the statistical
mechanicalidealizationofrealsystemsashavinganinﬁnitenumberofmoleculesisa
very good thing—such an idealization enables us to ignore boundary effects, it
enables us to minimize (in fact eliminate ﬂuctuations), etc.—Callender still insists
thatthereissomethingphilosophicallymistakenaboutsuchanidealization.Hesays,
[o]n the other hand, the thermodynamic limit may not be a good approximation
inamorefoundational,philosophical sense.... [E]venifthethermodynamiclimit
can be given a full philosophical justiﬁcation, that justiﬁcation cannot turn an
inﬁnity into a ﬁnite quantity. We can grant that it is often ﬁne to substitute ﬁnite
NwithinﬁniteNforpurposesofpractical physics.But ifthesystemisreallyﬁnite
N,whatwehaveuntilwesaymoreisamathematicalproofthatitcannotundergo
a phase transition. So we ought to grant that, practically speaking, it is often a
good approximation, but point out that this just does not touch this particular
problem....
[T]he fact that thermodynamics treats phase transitions as singularities does not
imply that statistical mechanics must too. To assume that would be to take
thermodynamics too seriously.... Thermodynamics represents (for pretty good
reasons) phase transitions as singularities, and statistical mechanics (for pretty
good pragmatic reasons) takes this to mean a non-analyticity in the partition
function. But from a foundational perspective we cannot endorse this knee-jerk
identiﬁcation of mathematical deﬁnitions across levels (Callender, 2001, p. 550).
We take thermodynamics too seriously when (from the point of view of statistical
mechanics) we take seriously the thermodynamic conception of a phase transition as
mathematically represented by a discontinuity or singularity in a thermodynamic
potential such as the free energyF. Thus, this must mean that such a mathematical
representation is somehow to be faulted. In other words, the equations of
thermodynamics must be physically inadequate. Hence, the inadequacy of the
thermodynamic equations is ultimately responsible for our (apparently) mistaken
conviction that the thermodynamic limit is required to ‘‘derive’’ phase transitions
from fundamental statistical mechanics. To the contrary, Callender insists that
analytic partition functions must govern the phase transitions we see in real systems
and must ‘‘in some sense approximate a singularity’’ (Callender, 2001, p. 555).
I will argue below that this view is inadequate. Thus, I want to champion the
manifestly outlandish proposal that despite the fact that real systems are ﬁnite, our
understanding of them and their behavior requires, in a very strong sense, the
idealization of inﬁnite systems and the thermodynamic limit. Before getting to this,
let me try to provide another perspective on why one might think that appeal to the
thermodynamic limit and inﬁniteN is a mistake—why, that is, we might be taking
thermodynamics too seriously.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 231


=== PAGE 8 ===

3.1. A more sophisticated attempt at reduction
As I mentioned earlier, schema (N)—the philosopher’s view of reduction—is too
crude as it stands.7Often in attempting to reduce a theoryTc toTf in the
philosopher’ssenseweﬁndthatweneedtoamendorcorrectthereducedtheoryTc:8
Mostphysicists,now,wouldaccepttheideathatourconceptoftemperatureandour
conception of other ‘‘exact’’ terms that appear in classical thermodynamics such as
‘‘entropy’’, need to be modiﬁed in light of the alleged reduction to statistical
mechanics. Textbooks, in fact, typically speak of the theory of ‘‘statistical
thermodynamics’’ allowing explicitly for ﬂuctuations that one observes in thermo-
dynamic systems. The very process of ‘‘reduction’’ often leads to a corrected version
of the reduced theory.
Schaffner, for instance, has developed a relatively sophisticated version of the
Nagelian reduction strategy that explicitly takes this fact into consideration
(Schaffner, 1976, p. 618). Let us call this schema (NN), for ‘‘neoNagelian’’.
(NN)T
c reduces toTf if and only if there is a corrected version ofTc (call itT/C3
c)
such that
1. The primitive terms ofT/C3
c are associated via reduction functions (or bridge laws)
with various terms ofTf :
2. T/C3
c is derivable fromTf when it is supplemented with the reduction functions
speciﬁed in 1.
3.T/C3
c correctsTc in that it makes more accurate predictions than doesTc:
4. Tc isexplainedbyTf inthatTc andT/C3
c arestrongly analogoustooneanother,and
Tf indicates whyTc works as well as it does in its domain of validity.
Here the idea is that we can have a reduction of thermodynamics to statistical
mechanics if there is a corrected version of the orthodox thermodynamic theory—
statisticalthermodynamics—thatplaystheroleofT
/C3
c inschema(NN).Therealwork
to be done is in spelling out what ‘‘strongly analogous’’ means in clause 4. One way
of attempting to elucidate this notion is by appeal to the existence of a limiting
relationship between statistical thermodynamics and the orthodox theory along the
lines suggested by schema (1).
On the assumption that the relationship between thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics ﬁts this sophisticated neoNagelian reductionprogram, we can see why we
would be taking thermodynamics too seriously when we need to appeal to the
thermodynamic limit of statistical mechanics to explain/reduce the thermodynamic
theory. In other words, perhaps we can account for the ‘‘apparent’’ necessity of the
inﬁniteN idealization by noting that we have failed to realize thatorthodox
thermodynamicstooliterallytreatsphasetransitionsasreal discontinuities. Once we
ARTICLE IN PRESS
7Again, Nagel, himself, would take (N) to be a caricature of the position.
8SeeSklar (1967)andSchaffner (1976).
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244232


=== PAGE 9 ===

see that the theory is really corrected in the process of reduction, this literal reading
will be seen to be too strong. Callender actually suggests something like this in a
different context: He holds that the statistical mechanical identiﬁcation of a
stationary probability distribution with thermal equilibrium results from a failure to
realize that (orthodox) thermodynamics too literally treats equilibrium states as
completely constant and ﬂuctuation free.
9 Statistical thermodynamicsðT/C3
c Þclearly
does not make this mistake.
So on the current proposal, the idealization of inﬁniteN is misguided, at least in
part because the reduced theory—orthodox thermodynamics—needs to be corrected
and not read at face value. Had theorists a more sophisticated, less naive, view of
reduction, they would not have taken thermodynamics so seriously and they would
not have made this mistake. Despite this argument, I still believe that the conclusion
that the inﬁnite idealization is unwarranted, is mistaken. In the next section I begin
to argue for this claim.
4. Taking thermodynamics seriously
Let me begin by making a distinction between two types of discontinuities,
broadly construed—‘‘physical discontinuities’’ and ‘‘mathematical discontinuities’’.
As an instance of a physical discontinuity we can take the phenomenon with which
we are concerned, namely, the observedqualitative distinctions between the distinct
phases of a magnet (above and below the critical point) or the distinctions between
the phases of a ‘‘ﬂuid’’—gaseous, liquid, and solid. Another example of a physical
discontinuity, to be discussed in detail in the next section, is the obvious
discontinuity that obtains when a dropletbreaks off from a stream of water coming
out of a faucet.
These physical discontinuities are represented mathematically as blow-ups or
singularities in the equations that purportedly describe the behaviors of the various
systems. In the former these are mathematical singularities (kinks in the derivatives
of the thermodynamic potentials) in the (static or quasistatic) thermodynamic
equations. In the latter case, the phenomenon is dynamical and the mathematical
discontinuities are singularities in the Navier–Stokes equations of ﬂuid dynamics—
inﬁnities that develop inﬁnite time in the evolution of the ﬂuid as it drips from a
faucet.
The real question is whether the singularities in the mathematical representations
(the equations) have genuine physical signiﬁcance. Callender, as I understand him,
answers this question in the negative. He agrees withLiu (1999)that ‘‘[a]ctual
systems are ﬁnite and phase transitions in them are never real singularities’’
(Callender, 2001, p. 550, note). I take it, given my distinction above, that this means
ARTICLE IN PRESS
9Callender (2001, pp. 545–547)thinks that the identiﬁcation of such Gibbsian ensembles with
thermodynamical equilibrium states is a mistake. I take it that his reasons for this can be seen as resting
upon an endorsement of an understanding of reduction as involving the correction of the reduced
(thermodynamic) theory according to something like schema (NN).
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 233


=== PAGE 10 ===

(i) there are no physical discontinuities and (ii) the mathematical discontinuities are,
therefore, nonrepresentative.
Now, perhaps, one might argue that the qualitative distinctions between phases of
a magnet or of a ﬂuid system are not genuine physical discontinuities. Ido not really
see how the argument might go other than to appeal to the fact that the equations
are mathematically singular and this requires, as we have seen, the ‘‘unrealistic’’
idealization of the thermodynamic limit. But, if the distinction between physical and
mathematical discontinuities makes sense, this is to beg the question. Besides, it
surely does seem very plausible to describe the breakup of water into droplets as a
genuine physical discontinuity. Itis truethat wedo notseethetopological changein
the phase transition (say when we witness water boiling in a tea kettle) in the same
wayweseeastreamofﬂuidbreakapart.Butthat,byitself, doesnotshowthat there
is no genuine physical discontinuity in the thermodynamic system.
My contention is that thermodynamics is correct to characterize phase transitions
as real physical discontinuities and it is correct to represent them mathematically as
singularities. Further, without the thermodynamic limit, statistical mechanics would
completely fail to capture a genuine feature of the world. Without the
thermodynamic limit, in fact, statistical mechanics is incapable even of establishing
the existence of distinct phases of systems .
If one takes the view that there are no real physical discontinuities (recall
Callender’s endorsement of Liu’s claim that ‘‘phase transitions [in ﬁnite systems] are
never real singularities’’), then I suppose there is no reason for statistical mechanics
to employ the thermodynamic limit. But if thereare genuine physical discontinuities
and it is a goal of statistical mechanics to describe them and to explain how they are
possible, then this move simply will not work. In Section 5 I will discuss the case of
breakingdroplets.Theaimtherewillbe,inpart,toprovidefurtherevidencethatreal
physical discontinuities do exist, and require inﬁnite idealizations for their
explanation and understanding. For now, let me continue to examine the
thermodynamic situation on the assumption that critical phenomena are real
physical discontinuities.
One might think of Mean Field Theory as an attempt to realize Schaffner’s more
sophisticated version (NN) of the philosopher’s reductive derivation of thermo-
dynamic behavior from statistical mechanical assumptions. As Mean Field Theory
involves the assumption that a given spin on a lattice behaves as if it were
independentofitsneighborsandfeelsonlytheaverageﬁeldproducedbyalltheother
spins, it cannot truly be a realization of the reductive program, since it involves a
rather fundamental idealization about the reducing theory. However, Mean Field
Theory is quite accurate in reproducing the noncritical behavior of thermodynamic
systems and it does, in fact, provide qualitative accounts of phase transitions. It
succeeds in this, in part, because it employs the limit of inﬁniteN.
Now, Callender appeals to Mean Field Theory in support of our ‘‘faith’’ in the
view that statistical mechanics can proceed without the thermodynamic limit. He
notes that ‘‘[w]e have mean ﬁeld theory, which is very accurate except near some
critical points’’ (Callender, 2001, p. 551). This is true, but Mean Field Theory does
employ the thermodynamic limit! So how, exactly can Callender appeal to Mean
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244234


=== PAGE 11 ===

Field Theory as a (partial) justiﬁcation for our belief that we can derive
approximations to (orthodox) thermodynamic singularities? Now, I do not
think that anyone would want to eliminate all idealizations from physics—that
would be like claiming that we could not speak of frictionless planes, etc. And
fact, away from those pesky critical points the limit of inﬁniteNi s relatively
unproblematic. It is similar in certain respects to the idealization of friction-
less planes. For instance, we can explain ﬂuctuations appearing inactual ﬁnite
systems, in a way analogous to being able to deal with the introduction of a bit of
friction that real inclined planes possess. We can make precise predictions about the
extent of ﬂuctuations in large but ﬁnite systemsaway from criticality despite (in fact,
becauseof)ouruseoftheinﬁniteNidealization.And,wemaybeabletosayinwhat
sense our ﬁnite systems actually approximate a singularity atﬁrst order phase
transitions.
OnewayofexpressingthisistosaythattheidealizationofinﬁniteNiscontrollable
in those contexts—away from critical points. The idea that some idealizations are
controllable and others uncontrollable is prevalent in physics. However it is a
difﬁcult task indeed to try to make the distinction precise. Very roughly, let us say
that an idealization is controllable means that it is possible, via appeal to theory, to
compensate in some way for the idealization. SeeSklar (2000)for an extended
discussion of this distinction.
Thus, in some sense, Mean Field Theory enables one to provide something like a
physicist’s reduction of statistical mechanics to (corrected) thermodynamics
according to schema (1)at least for systems not at criticality . As a result, away
fromcriticalpointswemayverywellexpecttosatisfy,withvariouscaveats,themore
sophisticated philosopher’s model of reduction as well.
Nevertheless, as we have seen above, and as Callender himself acknowledges,
Mean Field Theory fails to characterize correctly the detailed thermodynamics of
critical systems. That theory is completely incapable of dealing with the ﬂuctuations
that arise in the neighborhood of a critical point. At critical points itdoesn’t even let
us talk about approximation in the relevant sense . The reason is that at critical points
the limitN !1 is uncontrollable—that is, it is singular and the behavior asN !
1 isqualitatively distinctfromthebehavioratN ¼1 :Wemaygetnumericalresults
for large ﬁniteN that ‘‘look close’’ to the nonanalytic results for inﬁniteN. But
‘‘closeness’’ in this sense is not relevant: smooth curves are smooth no matter how
sharp they appear. And, if there exist genuine physical discontinuities, then their
faithful mathematical representation demands curves with kinks. A sense of
‘‘approximation’’ that appeals to how similar the smooth curves are to the kinky
curves is inapposite.
Let me summarize the discussion of this section. As Callender notes, ‘‘Thermo-
dynamics represents (for pretty good reasons) phase transitions as singularities, and
statistical mechanics (for pretty good pragmatic reasons) takes this to mean a non-
analyticity in the partition function’’ (Callender, 2001, p. 550). Thermodynamics
represents phase transitions and critical phenomena as singularities for very good
reasons indeed. It does so becausereal systems exhibitphysical discontinuities. As a
result, I think we should take thermodynamicsvery seriously on this point. We
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 235


=== PAGE 12 ===

should not fault thermodynamics for representing such discontinuities as singula-
rities.
One might diagnose the failure of the naive derivational reduction as the result of
taking (orthodox) thermodynamics too seriously. Instead, perhaps we should look
for some corrected account whereby we can ﬁnd analytic partition functions
governing phase transitions that, as Callender says, ‘‘in some sense approximate a
singularity’’ (Callender, 2001, p. 550).
But the failure of schema (1) at criticality indicates that eventhis neoNagelian
reduction strategy must fail. The limit is singular and, as a result, no such corrected,
approximate account is possible. This manifests itself in the failure of Mean
Field Theory to correctly produce the exponentb in Eq. (2). The idea that we
can ﬁnd analytic partition functions that ‘‘approximate’’ singularities is mis-
taken, because the very notion of approximation required fails to make sense when
the limit is singular. The behavior at the limit (the physical discontinuity, the phase
transition) isqualitatively different from the limiting behavior as that limit is
approached.
Asweknow,itispossibletoprovideamathematicalproofthatforanyﬁniteNthe
partitionfunctionZisanalytic.ThelimitN !1 ;therefore,isanecessarycondition
for obtaining mathematical discontinuity inZ. But the failure of that limit to be
regular tells us further that Mean Field Theoryeven in the thermodynamic limit
cannot correctly represent the real physical discontinuities that are accurately
captured by the thermodynamic equations. New statistical mechanical techniques
(renormalization group theory) are required to deal with the singularities in the
thermodynamic limit at critical points. In particular, the renormalization
group techniques take advantage of the fact that at criticality, there is no
characteristic length scale. These techniques, in effect, exploit this fact about
the singularity to develop scaling or similarity solutions that can then be employed
to explain the observed universal behavior. I would not go into the details here,
but they are similar (no pun intended) to the techniques to be discussed in the
next section. Furthermore, it is no accident that the techniques are related to one
another. The problems of dealing with singularities in these equations are quite
analogous.
As a consequence of the singular nature of the thermodynamic limit at critical
points, I believe that one ought to give up on the goal of reducing one theory to the
other. The singularnature ofthethermodynamic limit suggests thatmuchofinterest
remains to be investigated by examining the details of the singular asymptotic
domain.Ittherefore,suggeststhattheideaofinﬁniteNisnotsoreadilydismissedas
Callender and others would like it to be.
Tobemoreprecise,theworryabouttheinﬁniteNidealizationper seisnotthereal
issue.In some cases that idealizationiscontrollableand provides norealinterpretive
problems. The real issue is the existence of genuine physical discontinuities—real
singularities in the physical system. One needs mathematics that will enable one to
represent these genuine physical discontinuities. As a result, there is something
deeply right about the thermodynamic representation of the singularities—some-
thing that needs to be taken very seriously. Callender is right to argue that a ‘‘knee-
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244236


=== PAGE 13 ===

jerk’’ identiﬁcation of singularities between the theories should be avoided. But, the
fact that the limit is singular at critical points is really an indication that the
idealization cannot be dismissed so readily.
The next section discusses the other example mentioned earlier. This concerns
understandingofthestructureofbreakingdroplets.Heretoowewillseethatthereis
something deeply correct about the ‘‘unrealistic’’ idealization that accompanies the
hydrodynamical equations required for the representation of real singularities. This
istheidealizationthatwearedealingwithacontinuum,asopposedto,onceagain,a
ﬁnite collection of molecules governed by molecular dynamical equations.
5. Breaking droplets
The problem of describing and explaining the nature of drop formation in ﬂuids
received its ﬁrst systematic investigation in the 19th century. Despite this, it is fair to
saythatrealprogressonthisproblemhasbeenachievedonlywithinthelast40years
or so with much work being accomplished in the last decade. One reason for this is
the recognition that various linear theories were inadequate, and that a full theory
would involve the investigation of the nonlinear Navier–Stokes equations for free
surface ﬂows.
10
As water drips from a faucet it undergoes a topological change—a single mass of
water changes into two or more droplets. This is perhaps the most common example
of a hydrodynamical discontinuity that arises in a ﬁnite period of time. It was
recognized early by Lord Rayleigh that drops form as a result of a competition
betweengravitationalforceandsurfacetension.Hewasabletodeterminethetypical
size of a droplet and was able to set the time scale upon which a drop would form
(Eggers, 1997, p. 866).
Contemporary work has focused on the shape of the ﬂuid interface near the time
of breakup. As the interface breaks, the thickness of the ﬂuid must become very
small. In fact, it must necessarily become smaller than any other macro-length scale
that ﬁgures in the problem, such as the nozzle diameter. This has the consequence
that the ﬂuid thickness is essentially the only length (prior to reaching atomic scales)
that can effect the shape of the ﬂuid near the singularity or breakup. In particular, it
is natural to assume that the shape of the ﬂuid at different times near the breakup
will differ only by a change in scale. In such a situation it is reasonable to look for a
similarity solution describing the radius of the drop as a function of the vertical
lengthz
0 and the timet0 both measured from the point of breakup atz0 andt0
(z0 ¼ z /C0z0 andt0 ¼ t /C0t0). (SeeFig. 2.) Such a solution has the form
hðz0;t0Þ¼ f ðt0ÞaHðzÞ, (3)
ARTICLE IN PRESS
10 SeeEggers (1997)for a recent review.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 237


=== PAGE 14 ===

where11
z ¼ z0
f ðt0Þb .
EggersandDupont(1994)arguethatasimilaritysolutionofthisformdoesindeed
hold for the problem at hand. In fact they argue that such a solution is in good
agreementwithsolutionstotheNavier–Stokesequation(orapproximationsthereof)
for low viscosities.
12
This similarity solution must break down as the radius of the ﬂuid neck reaches
atomic scales. There, surely, microscopic structure becomes relevant for a complete
description of the breakup. The analogy between this and the thermodynamic
problematic discussed in the last section is clear: how can a continuum theory
provide a realistic representation of the breakup when ultimately (from a
‘‘foundational, philosophical’’ perspective) the particulate makeup of the system
ARTICLE IN PRESS
(z0,t0)
z' = z - z0
t' = t - t0
neck radius
Fig. 2. Neck radiush vs.z.
11 Thescalingexponentsaandbareconstantstobedetermined,asarethefunctionsfandH.Notealso,
thatb;here, has no special meaning and is different from both its occurrences earlier in the paper.
12 Shi, Brenner, and Nagel (1994)argue that Eggers’ and Dupont’s solution needs to be corrected as
there are perturbations (noise) that play an essential role in determining the character of the ﬂuid shape
near breakup.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244238


=== PAGE 15 ===

plays a role in its behavior? From such a (microscopic) perspective there can be no
discontinuity just as there can be no real singularity at criticality from the point of
view of a theory that takes seriously the fact that statistical systems have ﬁniteN.
Perhaps we take the hydrodynamic theory too seriously when we useit to represent
thebreakupoftheﬂuidneckintodroplets.Perhapsweneedtoincludeamicroscopic
length scale in the full description of the droplet problem.
Following the breakup, the new surfaces that appear (on the neck side and on the
droplet side) are again governed by similarity solutions to the Navier–Stokes
equation. So an important question is whether we need to include a microscopic
length scale in our attempt to ﬁnd a continuation of the Navier–Stokes equation
from before breakup to after breakup—that is, across the singularity. If such a scale
were required, then the hydrodynamic description would not be self-consistent, and
we would have reason to suspect that wewere taking that theory too seriously.
However, Eggersshows,forscalessufﬁciently greaterthan themicroscopic,that it
is possible to continue the solution for the before-the-breakup ﬂuid to that for the
after-the-breakup formation of drops and satellite droplets (Eggers, 1994)(Eggers,
1997,pp.894–904).Thus,thehydrodynamictheoryofthebreaking—thetopological
transition—isself-consistentand‘‘thedynamicsveryquickly‘forget’themicroscopic
details of breaking’’. (Eggers, 1998, p.306). As long as we are interested in scales
larger than the microscopic, the hydrodynamic description is completely adequate.
A couple of caveats are in order here: ﬁrst, it is true (as noted in footnote 12) that
perturbations disturb the Eggers-Dupont similarity solution. Nevertheless, as
Brenner, Shi, and Nagel (1994)suggest, thermal ﬂuctuations producing capillary
waves cause instabilities in the primary similarity solution which themselves lead to
structures that are self-similar.
Second, there is the fact that the shape of the breakup region depends upon the
ratio of the viscosity of the internal ﬂuid,m
int; to the viscosity of the external
surroundingmedium,mext:The shape ofwater drippingfrom a faucet surrounded by
air (Figs. 3and4) in whichmintbmextis different than that of a ﬂuid falling through
anotherﬂuidofapproximatelythesameviscosity(Fig.5)wheremint/C25mext:13 Despite
this both are, in fact, robust across a wide range of parameters.14 Interestingly,
Doshi et al. have recently demonstrated a third regime, characterized bymint5mext
that fails to exhibit universal behavior (Doshi et al., 2003). The breakup proﬁles in
this latter regime are nonuniversal and dependupon initial and boundaryconditions
in a way that the other two regimes do not.
These caveats aside, the existence of the similarity solution in the variablez
indicates the universality of the shape of breaking droplets. For instance, compare
the cone-to-sphere shape inFig. 3with the shape of the interface between the about-
to-break satellite drop at the top ofFig. 4. This has the same cone-to-sphere shape
indicating that ‘‘[t]he point of breakup would have looked the same even if it had
ARTICLE IN PRESS
13Compare the shapes of the cone at the breakup inFigs. 3and5.(Figs. 3–5are courtesy of Sidney R.
Nagel).
14 In particular, they are robust or universal over a fairly wide range of the relative viscosities of inner
and outer ‘‘ﬂuids’’.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 239


=== PAGE 16 ===

beenformedfromawavetossedintotheairattheshoresofLakeMichigan’’(Nagel,
2001, p. 27). Thus, the details of how the drops are formed are essentially irrelevant
for their character upon breaking. This is a characteristic feature of universality.15
Physical discontinuities, typically are represented by singularities and divergences
in their representative equations. Such singularities or divergences are often
associated with the existence of scaling and, hence, are indicators of universality.
We see this in the case of breaking droplets and in the case of thermodynamics at
critical points. The determination of the scaling exponents (e.g.a andb in Eq. (3))
provides a means to delimit the class of systems that exhibit the same (universal)
behavior.
6. Conclusion
As I noted in the beginning, many physical theories are related to one another by
limits that are singular—situations in which for some relevant parameter,/C15;schema
(1) fails. Statistical mechanics and thermodynamics provide an interesting pair in
thatthelimiting relationshipissingularatcriticalpoints.Yetforotherphases,much
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 3. Water droplet at breakup.
15See (Batterman, 2002) for an extended discussion.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244240


=== PAGE 17 ===

work has been done to demonstrate the existence of this thermodynamic limit—that
is, the regularity of schema (1).
Several interesting things are going on here. First, there are two limits involved:
/C15The thermodynamic limit:
1
N ! 0.
/C15The limit in which the temperatureT ! Tc from below in the case of a magnet.
If we take the thermodynamic limit ﬁrst, and then letT ! Tc; we will have
nonanalyticities in the statistical mechanical equations that mimic the kinks in the
thermodynamic equations. On the other hand, if we letT ! T
c ﬁrst, we will not get
a phase transition for any ﬁniteN no matter how large. This is to say that the two
limits do not commute.
Second, it is exactly at critical points (second order phase transitions) where the
thermodynamic limit is singular. In other words, as we have seen, Mean Field
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 4. Water droplet after breakup.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 241


=== PAGE 18 ===

Theory fails. The idealization becomes uncontrollable and new techniques are
required to understand the subtle structures that emerge at those locations in phase.
Itisherethatweencountersophisticatedattemptstodealwiththesingularnatureof
the limit. In effect, the success of these attempts provides a vindication of the
universal thermodynamic representation of the phenomena. But, such a vindication
is most deﬁnitely not a derivation.
16
The analogy with the case of drop breakup is close indeed. The hydrodynamic
equationsmustblowupasthebreakuppointisapproached.Attemptsmustbemade
to see if it is possible to justify a ‘‘macroscopic’’ (that is, hydrodynamic) description
of the physical discontinuity.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 5. Two ﬂuid drop off.
16ItisinterestingtonotethatinGibbs’famousworkElementary principles in statistical mechanics(1902)
nomentionofphasetransitionsorcriticalphenomenaappeardespitethefactthatGibbswasanexperton
the subject. The book develops, as far as possible, a reductive relationship between thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics that holds away from lines of phase transition and critical points. One reason for
Gibbs’ caution in advocating ‘‘thermodynamic analogies’’ as opposed to philosopher’s bridge laws
connectingconceptsofthe twotheories, wassurelyhis recognitionthatsuch connectionsfail at criticality.
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244242


=== PAGE 19 ===

In both situations, as the singularities are approached, there is a loss of a
characteristic length scale. This leads to the hypothesis of scale invariance and the
idea that the large scale features of a system are virtually independent of what goes
on at a microscopic level. In the thermodynamic case we see that the bulk properties
of the thermodynamic systems are independent of the detailed microscopic,
molecular constitution of the physical system. Similarly in the case of drop
formation, the ultimate breakup proﬁle is independent of the microscopic details of
the breaking.
Weoughttotakeveryseriouslytheideathatrealphysicalsystems displaygenuine
physical discontinuities—critical behavior in thermodynamic systems and ﬁnite time
topological changes in the evolution of hydrodynamic free surface ﬂows. And, we
ought to take very seriously the idea that the full understanding of such physical
discontinuities can be achieved only though a detailed investigation of the
asymptotics of the governing equations. The appeal to asymptotics is essential to
a foundationally respectable understanding of these physical discontinuities.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Ge´rard Emch, Malcolm Forster, Leo Kadanoff, Nicholaos
Jones, Sid Nagel, and Sheldon Smith for helpful comments, criticism, and
discussion. A version of this paper was presented at the ESF Conference on
Philosophical and Foundational Issues in Statistical Physics, Utrecht 28–30
November 2003. (Special thanks to Jos Ufﬁnk and Dennis Dieks for a wonderful
conference.)
References
Batterman, R. W. (2002). The devil in the details: Asymptotic reasoning in explanation, reduction, and
emergence.Oxford studies in philosophy of science . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brenner, M. P., Shi, X. D., & Nagel, S. R. (1994). Iterated instabilities during droplet ﬁssion.Physical
Review Letters, 73(25), 3391–3394.
Callender, C. (2001). Taking thermodynamics too seriously.Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics, 32(4), 539–553.
Doshi, P., Cohen, I., Zhang, W. W., Siegel, M., Howell, P., Basaran, O. A., & Nagel, S. R. (2003).
Persistence of memory in drop breakup: The breakdown of universality.Science, 302, 1185–1188.
Eggers, J. (1994). Theory of drop formation.Physics of Fluids, 7, 941–953.
Eggers, J. (1997). Nonlinear dynamics and breakup of free-surface ﬂows.Reviews of Modern Physics ,
69(3), 865–929.
Eggers, J. (1998). Hydrodynamic singularities. In S. C. Mu¨ller, J. Paris, & W. Zimmermann (Eds.),A
perspective look at nonlinear media: From physics to biology and social sciences (pp. 305–312). Berlin:
Springer.
Eggers, J., & Dupont, T. F. (1994). Drop formation in a one-dimensional approximation of the
Navier–Stokes equation.Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 262, 205–221.
Gibbs, J. W. (1902).Elementary principles in statistical mechanics: Developed with especial reference to the
rational foundation of thermodynamics . New York: Yale University Press (also published in 1982 by
Woodbridge, Connecticut: Ox Bow Press).
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244 243


=== PAGE 20 ===

Ginzburg,V.L.(1960).Someremarksonphasetransitionsofthesecondkindandthemicroscopictheory
of ferroelectric materials.Soviet Physics, Solid State, 2, 1824.
Goldenfeld, N. (1992).Lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization group . Frontiers in Physics.
Vol. 85. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gross, D. H. E. (2001).Microcanonical thermodynamics: Phase transitions in ‘‘small’’ systems . Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc.
Kadanoff, L. P. (2000).Statistical physics: Statics, dynamics, and renormalization . Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc.
Liu, C. (1999). Explaining the emergence of cooperative phenomena.Philosophy of Science ,
66(Proceedings), S92–S106.
Nagel, E. (1961).The structure of science: Problems in the logic of scientiﬁc explanation . New York:
Harcourt, Brace, & World.
Nagel, S. R. (2001). Shadows and ephemera.Critical Inquiry, 28(1), 23–39.
Nickles, T. (1973). Two concepts of intertheoretic reduction.The Journal of Philosophy, 70(7), 181–201.
Schaffner,K.(1976).Reductionisminbiology:Prospectsandproblems.InR.S.Cohen,etal.(Eds.),PSA
1974 (pp. 613–632) (Philosophy of Science Association). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Shi, X. D., Brenner, M. P., & Nagel, S. R. (1994). A cascade structure in a drop falling from a faucet.
Science, 265(5169), 219–222.
Sklar, L. (1967). Types of inter-theoretic reduction.The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 18,
109–124.
Sklar, L. (1993).Physics and chance: Philosophical issues in the foundations of statistical mechanics .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sklar, L. (2000).Theory and truth: Philosophical critique within foundational science . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
R.W. Batterman / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36 (2005) 225–244244
