--- Page 1 ---

 1
 TRUE ENOUGH* 
Catherine Z. Elgin 
Harvard University 
 Epistemology valorizes truth.  Sometimes practical, or prudential, or political reasons 
convince us to accept a known falsehood, but most  epistemologists deny that we can have 
cognitively good reasons to do so.  Our overriding cogn itive objective, they maintain, is the truth, 
preferably the whole truth, and definitely nothing but the truth. 1  If they are right, then at least 
insofar as our ends are cognitive, we should accept only what we consider true, take pains to 
insure that the claims we accept are in fact tr ue, and promptly repudiate any previously accepted 
claims upon learning that they are false.  I suggest, however, that the relation between truth and 
epistemic acceptability is both more tenuous and more  circuitous than is standardly supposed.  
Sometimes, I contend, it is epistemically res ponsible to prescind from truth to achieve more 
global cognitive ends. 
 At first blush, this looks mad.  To retain a falsehood merely because it has other 
epistemologically attractive features seems the height of cognitive irresponsibility.  Allegations of 
intellectual dishonesty, wishful thinking, false con sciousness, or worse immediately leap to mind.  
But science routinely transgresses the boundary betw een truth and falsehood.  It smoothes curves 
and ignores outliers.  It devel ops and deploys simplified models that diverge, sometimes 
considerably, from the phenomena they purport to re present.  Even the best scientific theories are 
not true.  Not only are they plagued with anoma lies and outstanding problems, but where they are 
successful, they rely on laws, models, idealizati ons and approximations that diverge from the 
truth.  Truth-centered epistemology, or veritism, as Alvin Goldman calls it, easily accommodates 
  
* I would like to thank Jonathan Adler, Nancy Nersessian, Robert Schwartz, Bas van Fraassen, and Stephen 
Yablo for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
1 Alvin Goldman, Knowledge in a Social World, (Oxford: Clarendon, 1999), p. 5; Keith Lehrer, ‘The 
Coherence Theory of Knowledge,’ Philosophical Topics  XIV, (1986), p. 6; Laurence BonJour, The 
Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985, p. 9. 

--- Page 2 ---

 2
anomalies and outstanding problems, since they are readily construed as defects.  The problem 
comes with the laws, models, idealizations, a nd approximations which are acknowledged not to 
be true, but which are nonetheless critical to, indeed constitutive of, the understanding that a 
science delivers.  Far from being defects, they figure ineliminably in the success of science.  If 
truth is mandatory, much of our best science tu rns out to be epistemologically unacceptable and 
perhaps intellectually dishonest.  Our predicament is this: We can retain the truth requirement and 
construe science either as cognitively defective or  as non-cognitive, or we can reject, revise, or 
relax the truth requirement and remain cognitivists about, and fans of science.  
 I take it that science provides an understanding of the natural order.  By this I do not 
mean merely that an ideal science would provide such an understanding or that in the end of 
inquiry science will provide one, but that much actual science has done so and continues to do so.  
I take it then that much actual science is cognitiv ely reputable.  So an adequate epistemology 
should explain what makes good science cognitively good.  Too strict a commitment to truth 
stands in the way.  Nor is science the only casua lty.  In other disciplines such as philosophy, and 
in everyday discourse, we often convey info rmation and advance understanding by means of 
sentences that are not literally true.  An adequate  epistemology should account for this as well.  A 
tenable theory is a tapestry of interconn ected sentences which together constitute an 
understanding of a domain. 2  My thesis is that some sentences that figure ineliminably in tenable 
theories make no pretense of being true, but are not defective on that account.  If I am right, 
theories and the understandings they embed have a more intricate symbolic structure than we 
standardly suppose.  Nevertheless, I do not th ink that we should jettison concern for truth 
completely.  The question is what role a tr uth commitment should play in a holism that 
recognizes a multiplicity of sometimes conflicting epistemological desiderata. 
  
2 I use the term ‘theory’ broadly, to comprehend the ways mature sciences and other disciplines account for 
the phenomena in their domains.  Under my usage, a phy sical theory would include its models rather than 
being distinct from them. 

--- Page 3 ---

 3
 Consensus has it that epis temic acceptability requires something like justified and/or 
reliable, true belief.  The justification, relia bility, and belief requirements involve thresholds. 
‘[O]ne may need to be confident enough and we ll enough justified and one’s  belief must perhaps 
derive from a reliable enough source, a nd be little enough liable to be false.’ 3  But truth, unlike 
the other requirements, is supposed to be an absolute matter.  Either the belief is true or it is not.  I 
suggest, however, that the truth requirement on epistemic acceptability involves a threshold too.  I 
am not saying that truth itself is a threshold concept.  Perhaps such a construal of truth would 
facilitate treatments of vagueness, but that is not my  concern.  My point is rather that epistemic 
acceptability turns not on whether a sentence is true , but on whether it is true enough – that is, on 
whether it is close enough to the truth.  ‘True enough’ obviously has a threshold. 
 I should begin by attempting to block so me misunderstandings.  I do not deny that 
(unqualified) truth is an intelligible concept or a realizable ideal.  We readily understand instances 
of the (T) schema: 
 ‘Snow is white’ is true ≡ snow is white 
 ‘Power corrupts’ is true ≡ power corrupts 
 ‘Neutrinos have mass’ is true ≡ neutrinos have mass 
and so on.  A disquotational theory of truth suffices to show that the criterion expressed in 
Convention (T) can be satisfied.  One might of course want more from a theory of truth than 
satisfaction of Convention (T), but to make the case that the concept of truth is unobjectionable, 
such a minimalist theory suffices (assuming, of course, that it evades the paradoxes). Moreover, 
not only does it make sense to call a sentence true, we can often tell whether it is true.  We are 
well aware not only that ‘Snow is white’ is true ≡ snow is white, but also that ‘Newly fallen snow 
is white’ is true.  The intelligibility and realizability  of truth, of course, show nothing about which 
  
3 Ernest Sosa, ‘Skepticism and Contextualism,’ Skepticism, ed., Ernest Sosa and Enrique Villanueva, 
Boston: Blackwell, 2000, p. 2. 

--- Page 4 ---

 4
sentences are true or which truths we can discover.  Nevertheless, as far as I can see, nothing 
about the concept of truth discredits veritism.  Sin ce truth is an intelligible concept, epistemology 
can insist that only truths are epistemically acceptabl e.  Since truth is a realizable objective, such 
a stance does not lead inexorably to skepticsm.  I do not deny that veritism is an available 
epistemic stance.  But I think it is an unduly limiting one.  It prevents epistemology from 
accounting for the full range of our cognitive achievements. 
 To be sure, if epistemic acceptance is c onstrued as belief, and epistemic acceptability as 
knowledge, the truth requirement seems reasonable.  For cognizers like ourselves, there does not 
seem to be an epistemically significant gap between believing that p, and believing that p is true.  
Ordinarily, upon learning that our belief that p is false, we cease to believe that p.  Moreover, we 
consider it cognitively obligatory to do so.  One ought to believe only what is true.  Perhaps a 
creature without a conception of truth can harbor beliefs.  A cat, for example, might believe that 
there is a mouse in the wainscoting without believi ng that ‘There is a mouse in the wainscoting’ 
is true.4  In that case, the connection between believing that p and believing that p is true is not 
exceptionless.  But whatever we should say about  cats, it does not seem feasible for any creature 
that has a conception of truth to believe that p without believing that p is true.  If epistemic 
acceptance is a matter of belief, acceptance is closely linked to truth.  Assertion is too.  Although 
asserting that p is not the same as asserting that p is true, it seems plain that one ought not to 
assert that p if one is prepared to deny that p is true or to suspend judgment about whether p is 
true; nor ought one assert that p is true if one is prepared to deny that p or to suspend judgment 
about whether p.  Assertion and belief then seem committed to truth.  So does knowledge.  
Whether or not we take knowledge to  be equivalent to justified or  reliably generated true belief, 
once we discover the falsity of something we took ourselves to know, we withdraw the claim to 
knowledge.  We say, ‘I thought I knew it, but I was wrong,’ not ‘I knew it, but I was wrong’. 
  
4 I do not have strong intuiti ons about this case, but I do not think it is clearly wrong to say that the cat has 
 

--- Page 5 ---

 5
 Being skeptical about analyticity, I do not contend that a truth commitment is part of the 
meanings of ‘belief,’ ‘assertion, ’ and ‘knowledge’.  But whatever the explanation, because the 
truth commitment tightly intertwines with our  views about belief, assertion, and knowledge, it 
seems best to retain that connection and revise epistemology by making compensatory 
adjustments elsewhere.  Once those adjustments are made, knowledge and belief turn out to be 
less central to epistemology than we standardly th ink.  I do not then claim that it is epistemically 
acceptable to believe what is false or that it is linguistically acceptable to  assert  what is false.  
Rather, I suggest that epistemic accep tance is not restricted to belief.
5  Analogously, uttering or 
inscribing seriously and sincerely for cognitive purposes – call it ‘professing’ – is not limited to 
asserting.  Understanding is often couched in and conveyed by sy mbols that are not, and do not 
purport to be, true.  Where such symbols are sen tential, I call them felicitous falsehoods.  I 
contend that we cannot understand the cognitive contributions of science, philosophy, or even our 
ordinary take on things, if we fail to account for such symbols.  Let’s look at some cases: 
 Curve smoothing: Ordinarily, each data point is s upposed to represent an independently 
ascertained truth.  (The temperature at t
1,,the temperature at t2, . . .) By interpolating between and 
extrapolating beyond these truths, we expect to di scern the pattern they in stantiate.  If the curve 
we draw connects the data points, this is reas onable.  But the data rarely fall precisely on the 
curve adduced to account for them .  The curve then reveals a pattern that the data do not 
instantiate.  Veritism would seem to require accepting the data only if we are convinced that they 
are true, and connecting these truths to adduce mo re general truths.  Unwavering commitment to 
truth would seem then to require connecting a ll the data points no matter how convoluted the 
resulting curve turned out to be.  This is not  done.  To accommodate every point would be to 
abandon hope of finding order in most data sets, for jagged lines and complicated curves mask 
  
such a belief. 
5 See L. Jonathan Cohen, An Essay on Belief and Acceptance , (Oxford: Clarendon, 1992) for an argument 
to this effect. 

--- Page 6 ---

 6
underlying regularities.  Nevertheless, it seems cogn itively disreputable to let hope triumph over 
experience here.  Surely we need a better reason to  skirt the data and ignore the outliers than the 
fact that otherwise we will not get the kind of th eory we want.  Nobody, after all, promised that 
the phenomena would accommodate themselves to the kind of theory we want. 
 There are often quite good reasons for thinking that the data ought not, or at least need 
not be taken as entirely accurate.  Sometimes we recognize that our measurements are relatively 
crude compared with the level of precision we ar e looking for.  Then any curve that is within 
some δ of the evidence counts as accommodating the ev idence.  Sometimes we suspect that some 
sort of interference throws our measurements off.  Then in plotting the cu rve, we compensate for 
the alleged interference.  Sometimes the measure ments are in fact accurate, but the phenomena 
measured are complexes only some of whose aspect s concern us.  Then in curve smoothing we, 
as it were, factor out the irrelevant aspects.  Sometimes we have no explanation for the data’s 
divergence from the smooth curve.  But we may be  rightly convinced that what matters is the 
smooth curve the data indicate, not the jagged cu rve they actually instantiate.  Whatever the 
explanation, we accept the curve, taking its proximity  to the data points as our justification.  We 
understand the phenomena as displaying the pattern the curve marks out.  We thus dismiss the 
data’s deviation from the smooth curve as negligible. 
 Ceteris paribus claims: Many lawlike claims in science obtain only ceteris paribus.
6  The 
familiar law of gravity 
 F=Gm
1m2/r2 
  
6 Whether so-called ceteris paribus laws are really laws  is a subject of controversy.  See, for example, 
Erkenntnis 57, 2002, for a range of papers on the issue.  Although for brevity I speak of them as laws, for 
my purposes, nothing hangs on whether th e generalizations in questions really are laws, at least insofar as 
this is an ontological question.  I am interested in the role such generalizations play in ongoing science.  
Whether or not they can (in some sense of ‘can’) be  replaced by generalizations where all the caveats and 
restrictions are spelled out, in practice scientists  typically make no effort to do so.  Nor, often, do they 
know (or care) how to do so. 

--- Page 7 ---

 7
is not universally true, for other forces may be in play.  The force between charged bodies, for 
example, is a resultant of electrical and gravitationa l forces.  Nevertheless, we are not inclined to 
jettison the law of gravity.  The complication th at charge introduces just shows that the law 
obtains only ceteris paribus, and when bodies are ch arged, ceteris are not paribus.  This is no 
news.  ‘Ceteris paribus’ is Latin for ‘other thi ngs being equal’, but it is not obvious what makes 
for equality in a case like this.  Sklar glosses it as ‘other things being normal’ 7, where ‘normal’ 
seems to cash out as ‘typical’ or ‘usual’.  Then  a ‘ceteris paribus law’ states what usually 
happens.  In that case, to construe the law of gr avity as a ceteris paribus law is to contend that 
although there are exceptions, bodies usually attract each other in direct proportion to the product 
of their masses and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance between them. 
 This construal does not always work.  Some laws do not even usually hold.  The law of 
gravity is one.  Snell’s law  
 n
1sini=n2sinr 
which expresses the relation between the angle of in cidence and the angle of refraction of a light 
ray passing from one medium to another, is a second. 8  As standardly stated, the law is perfectly 
general, ranging over every case of refraction.  It is not true of every case, though; it obtains only 
where both media are optically isotropic.  The law th en is a ceteris paribus law.  But it is not even 
usually true, since most media are optically anisotropic. 9  One might wonder why physicists don’t 
simply restrict the scope of the law: ‘For any two optically isotropic media, n 1sini=n2sinr’.  The 
reason is Gricean: expressly restricting the scope of the law implicates that it affords no insight 
into cases where the restriction does not obtain.  Snell’s law is more helpful.  Even though the law 
is usually false, it is often not far from the truth.  Most media are anisotropic, but lots of them – 
  
7 Lawrence Sklar, ‘Philosophy of Science,’ Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy , ed. Robert Audi, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, p. 702. 
8 i and r are the angles made by the in cident beam to the normal and n 1 and n2 are the refractive indices of 
the two media.  
9 Nancy Cartwright, How the Laws of Physics Lie,  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983, pp. 46-47. 

--- Page 8 ---

 8
and lots of the ones physicists are interested in  – are nearly isotropic.  The law supplies good 
approximations for nearly isotropic cases.  So a lthough explanations and cal culations that rely on 
Snell’s law do not yield truths, they are often not off by much.   
 The law is valuable for another reason as well.   Sometimes it is useful to first represent a 
light ray as conforming to Snell’s law, and later introduce ‘corrections’ to accommodate 
anisotropic media.  If we were interested only in  the path of a particular light ray, such a 
circuitous approach would be unattractive.  But if we are interested in optical refraction in 
general, it might make sense to start with a prototypical case, and then show how anisotropy 
perturbs.  By portraying anisotropic cases as perturbations, we point up affinities that direct 
comparisons would not reveal.  The issue then is  what sort of understanding we want.  Showing 
how a variety of cases diverge from the prototypi cal case contributes valuable insights into the 
phenomenon we are interested in.  And what makes the case prototypical is not that it usually 
obtains, but that it cleanly exemplifies the features we deem important. 
 Idealizations: Some laws never obtain.  They characterize ideal cases that do not, perhaps 
cannot, occur in nature.  The ideal gas law repr esents gas molecules as perfectly elastic spheres 
that occupy negligible space and exhibit no mutual  attraction.  There are no such molecules.  
Explanations that adduce the ideal gas law would be epistemically unacceptable if abject fidelity 
to truth were required.  Since helium molecules are not dimensionless, mutually indifferent, 
elastic spheres, an account that represents them as such is false.  If veritism is correct, it is 
epistemically unacceptable.  But, at least if the explanation concerns the behavior of helium in 
circumstances where divergence from the ideal gas law is negligible (roughly, where temperature 
is high and pressure is low), scientists are apt to find it unexceptionable. 
 Stylized facts are close kin of ceteris paribus claims.  They are ‘broad generalizations, 
true in essence, though perhaps not in detail’.
10  They play a major role in economics, constituting 
  
10 Graham Bannock, R.E. Baxter, Even Davis, Penguin Dictionary of Economics, 1998. 

--- Page 9 ---

 9
explananda that economic models are required to  explain.  Models of economic growth, for 
example, are supposed to explain the (stylized ) fact that the profit rate is constant. 11  T h e  
unvarnished fact of course is that profit rates ar e not constant.  All sorts of non-economic factors 
– such as war, pestilence, drought, and political chi canery – interfere.  Manifestly, stylized facts 
are not (what philosophers would call) facts, for the simple reason that they do not obtain.  It 
might seem then that economics takes itself to be required to explain why known falsehoods are 
true.  (Voodoo economics, indeed!)  This cannot be  correct.  Rather, economics is committed to 
the view that the claims it recognizes as stylized facts are in the right neighborhood, and that their 
being in the right neighborhood is something economic models  need to account for.  The models 
may show them to be good approximations in  all cases, or where deviations from the 
economically ideal are small, or where economic factors dominate non-economic ones.  Or the 
models might afford some other account of their often being nearly right.  The models may differ 
over what is actually true, or as to where, to what degree, and why the stylized facts are as good 
as they are.  But to fail to acknowledge the sty lized facts would be to lose valuable economic 
information (for example, the fact that if we  control for the effects of such non-economic 
interference as war, disease, and the president fo r life absconding with the national treasury, the 
profit rate is constant).  Stylized facts figure in  other social sciences as well.  I suspect that under 
a less alarming description, they occur in the natu ral sciences too.  The standard characterization 
of the pendulum, for example, strikes me as a stylized fact of physics.  The motion of the 
pendulum that physics is supposed to explain is a motion that no actual pendulum exhibits.  What 
such cases point to is this: The fact that a stric tly false description is in the right neighborhood is 
sometimes integral to our understanding of a domain. 
  A fortiori arguments from limiting cases:  Some accounts focus on a single, carefully 
chosen case and argue that what holds in that case holds in general.  If so, it does no harm to 
  
11 ‘The profit rate is the level of profits in the economy relative to the value of capital stock.’ Ibid. 

--- Page 10 ---

 10
represent the phenomena as having the features that  characterize the exemplary case.  Astronomy 
sometimes represents planets as point masses.  Mani festly, they are not.  But because the distance 
between planets is vastly greater than their size, their spatial dimensions can safely be neglected.  
Given the size and distribution of planets in the solar system, what holds for properly 
characterized point masses also holds for the pl anets.  Another familiar example comes from 
Rawls.  A Theory of Justice  represents people as mutually disinterested.  Rawls is under no 
illusion that this representation is accurate.  He  recognizes that people are bound to one another 
by ties of affection of varying degrees of strength,  length, and resiliency.  But, he believes, if 
political agents have reason to cooperate even under conditions of mutual disinterest, they will 
have all the more reason to cooperate when ties of  affection are present.  I do not want to discuss 
whether Rawls is right.  I just want to highlight the form of his argument.  If what holds for the 
one case holds for the others, then it does no harm to represent people as mutually disinterested.  
That people are mutually disinterested is far from the truth.  It is possible that no one on Earth is 
wholly indifferent to the fates of everyone else.  But if Rawls is right, the characterization’s being 
far from the truth does not impede its function in his argument. 
 The foregoing examples show that in some cognitive endeavors we accept claims that we 
do not consider true.  But we do not indiscrim inately endorse falsehoods either.  The question 
then is, what makes a claim accepta ble?  Evidently, to accept a claim is not to take it to be true, 
but to take it that the claim’s divergence from truth, if any, is negligible.  The divergence need not 
be small, but whatever its magnitude, it can be safely neglected.  We accept a claim, I suggest, 
when we consider it true enough.  The success of  our cognitive endeavors indicates that we are 
often right to do so.  If so, a claim is acceptable wh en its divergence from truth is negligible.  In 
that case it is true enough. 
 In practical, political, or prudential contex ts, both the acceptance and the acceptability of 
falsehoods are widely recognized.  One can accept, a nd be right to accept the dean’s latest dictim, 
if what matters is that the dean hath said it, not that it is true.  But epistemic contexts are supposed 

--- Page 11 ---

 11
to be different.  Many epistemologists contend that when our concerns are cognitive we should 
accept only what we consider true.  I disagree.  I suggest that to accept that p is to take it that p’s 
divergence from truth, if any, does not matter.  To cognitively accept that p, is to take it that p’s 
divergence from truth, if any, does not matter cognitively.  The falsehood is ‘as close as one 
needs for the purposes at hand.’ 12  In what follows, I take ‘acceptance’ to mean ‘cognitive 
acceptance’. 
 This raises a host of issues.  Perhaps the mo st pressing is to say something about what I 
mean by ‘cognitive’.  A familiar line is that for a consideration to be cognitive is for it to aim at 
truth or to be truth conducive.   Plainly, I can say no such thing.  I suggest rather that a 
consideration is cognitive to the extent that it fi gures in an understanding of how things are.  This 
is admittedly vague, but I am not sure that it is  any worse than untethered remarks about truth-
conduciveness and the like. 
 It might seem that my characterization just postpones the evil day (and not for long 
enough!), since ‘an understanding of how things are’ mu st itself be explicated in terms of truth or 
truth-conduciveness.  To see the problem, compare three concepts – belief, thought, and 
understanding.  Belief aims at truth.  Roughly, a belief fulfills its goal in life only if it is true.
13  
Thought, however, can be aimless.  Musings, fantasies, and imaginings can be fully in order 
whether or not they are true.  Understanding, the argument goes, is more like belief than like 
thought.  Since there is such a thing as misunders tanding, understanding is subject to a standard 
of rightness.  It has an aim.  Misunderstanding evidently involves representing things as they are 
not.  This suggests that the aim of understanding is truth.  If so, it may seem, divergences from 
truth, even if unavoidable, are always cognitive defects. 
  
12 Robert Stalnaker, Inquiry, (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1987), p. 93. 
13 Ralph Wedgwood, ‘The Aim of Belief’, Philosophical Perspectives, forthcoming.  Jonathan Adler, 
Belief’s Ethics, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002. 

--- Page 12 ---

 12
 The argument goes too fast.  That misunderstanding involves representing things as they 
are not does not entail that whenever we represent things as they are not, we misunderstand them.  
At most it indicates that understanding is not indifferent to truth.  But it does not follow that every 
sentence – or for that matter, any sentence – that  figure in an understanding of how things are has 
its own truth as an objective.  Understanding i nvolves a network of commitments.  It is not 
obvious that an aim of the network must be an aim of every, or indeed any, sentential node in the 
network.  A goal of the whole need not be a goal of each of its parts.  I do not expect these 
sketchy remarks to persuade anyone that I am right to loosen the tie between understanding and 
truth.  My hope is that they are enough to persua de you that the jig is not yet up, that a willing 
suspension of disbelief is still in order. 
 Let us turn then to acceptance.  To accept that p, I said, is to take it that p’s divergence 
from truth, if any, is negligible.  In that case, p is true enough.  Whether this is so is manifestly a 
contextual matter.  A sentence can be true enough in  some contexts but not in others.  A variety 
of factors contribute constraints.  Background assumptions play a role.  ‘A freely falling body 
falls at a rate of 32 ft/sec. 2’ is true enough, assuming that the body is within the Earth’s 
gravitational field, that nothing except the Eart h exerts a significant gravitational force on the 
body, that the effects of non-gravitational forces ar e insignificant, and so on.  But even when 
these assumptions are satisfied, the formula is not always true enough, since gravity varies 
slightly with longitude.  Sometimes it matters where in the gravitational field the freely falling 
body is.  Whether ‘G=32ft./sec. 2’ is true enough depends on what we  want the formula for, what 
level of precision is needed for the calculation or  explanation or account it figures in.  There is no 
saying whether a given contention is true enough i ndependently of answering, or presupposing an 
answer to the question ‘True enough for what?’  So purposes contribute constraints as well.  
Whether a given sentence is true enough depends  on what ends its acceptance is supposed to 
serve. 

--- Page 13 ---

 13
 Function is critical too.  If to accept that p is simply to take it that p’s divergence from 
truth does not matter, it might seem that we accep t all irrelevant propositions.  None of my 
projects, cognitive or otherwise, is affected by the truth or falsity of the claim that Ethelred the 
Unready was a wise leader.  So, its divergence from truth, if any, does not matter to me.  Since 
acceptance can be tacit, the fact that I have never considered the issue is not decisive.  
Nevertheless it seems wrong to say that my indifference makes the claim true enough.  The 
reason is that the contention is idle.  It perfo rms no function in my cognitive economy.  Owing to 
my indifference, there is no answer to the question ‘True enough for what?’ 
 Context provides the framework.  Purposes fix the ends. Function is a matter of means.  
The sentences that concern us tend not to have purposes in isolation.  Rather, they belong to 
larger bodies of discourse, such as arguments, expl anations, or theories that have purposes.  The 
function of such a sentence consists in its contribution to such a body of discourse.  In accepting a 
sentence then we treat it in a given context as performing a function in a body of discourse which 
seeks to achieve some end.  Whether ‘G=32ft./sec.
2’ is acceptable depends on whether the body 
of discourse it figures in serves its cognitive purpose – whether, that is, it yields the understanding 
of the domain that we seek. 
 A statement’s divergence from truth is neglig ible only if that divergence does not hinder 
its performing its cognitive function.  Hence whet her a contention is true enough depends not just 
on its having a function, but on what its functi on is – on what role it plays in the account it 
belongs to.  To determine whether a statement is true enough, we thus need to identify its 
function.  It might seem that for cognitive purposes only one function matters.  If the criterion for 
felicity is being true enough, one  might think, the function of all felicitous falsehoods is to 
approximate.  There is, as it were, a tacit ‘more or less’ in front of all such claims.  This will not 
do. 
 One reason is that the proposal is not su fficiently sensitive.  Not all approximations 
perform the same function.  Some are accepted simp ly because they are the best we can currently 

--- Page 14 ---

 14
do.  They are temporary expedients which we hope and expect eventually to replace with truths.  
We improve upon them by bringing them closer to the truth.  Such approximations are, in 
Sellars’s terms, promissory notes that remain to be discharged.  The closer we get to the truth, the 
more of the debt is paid.  They are, and are known to be, unsatisfactory.  But not all 
approximations have this character.  Some are pr eferable to the truths they approximate.  For 
example, it is possible to derive a second-order pa rtial differential equation that exactly describes 
fluid flow in a boundary layer.  The equation, being non-linear, does not admit of an analytic 
solution.  We can state the equation, but cannot solve it.  This is highly inconvenient.  To 
incorporate the truth into the theory would bri ng a line of inquiry to a halt, saying in effect: 
‘Here’s the equation; it is impossible to solve.’  Fluid dynamicists prefer a first-order partial 
differential equation, which approximates the tr uth, but admits of an analytical solution. 14  The 
solvable equation advances unders tanding by providing a close enough approximation that yields 
numerical values which can serve as evidence for or constraints on future theorizing.  The 
approximation then is more fruitful than the trut h.  There is no hope that future inquiry will 
remedy the situation, for it is demonstrable that the second-order equation cannot be solved 
numerically, while the first-order equation can. 15  That reality forces such a choice upon us may 
be disappointing, but under the circumstances it does not seem intellectually disreputable to 
accept and prefer the tractable first-order equati on.  One might say that acceptance of the first-
order approximation is only practical.  It is prefer able merely because it is more useful.  This may 
be so, but the practice is a cognitive one.  Its goa l is to understand fluid fl ow in boundary layers.  
In cases like this, the practical and the theoretical in extricably intertwine.  The practical value of 
  
14 Margaret Morrison, ‘Models as Autonomous Agents,’ Models as Mediators,  ed. Mary S. Morgan and 
Margaret Morrison, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, pp. 56-60. 
15 Conceivably, of course, the equa tions in question will be superceded  by some other understanding of the 
subject, but the fact that the equation we consider true does not have an analytical solution provides no 
reason to think so.  Nor does it provide reason to think that the considerations that supersede it will be 
mathematically more tractable, much less that in the long run science will be free of all such irksome 
equations. 

--- Page 15 ---

 15
the approximation is that it advances understanding of a domain.  A felicitous falsehood thus is 
not always accepted only in default of the truth.  Nor is its acceptance always ‘second best’.  It 
may make cognitive contributions that the unvarnished truth cannot match. 
 Moreover, not all felicitous falsehoods are approximations.  Idealizations may be far from 
the truth, without thereby being epistemically inadequate.  Political agents are not mutually 
disinterested.  They are not nearly mutually di sinterested.  Nor is it the case that most political 
agents are mutually disinterested.  There is no way I can see to construe Rawls’s model as 
approximately true.  Nevertheless, for Rawls’s purposes, the characterization of political agents 
as mutually disinterested is felicitous if the features it highlights are constitutive of fair terms of 
cooperation underlying the basic structure of a demo cratic regime.  There is no reason to think 
that in general the closer it is to the truth, the more felicitous a falsehood. 
 I suggest that felicitous falsehoods figure in cognitive discourse not as mistaken or 
inaccurate statements of fact, but as fictions.  We are familiar with fictions and with reasoning 
about fictions.  We regularly reason within the constraints dictated by a fiction, inferring for 
example that Hamlet may not have been mad, but Ophelia surely was.  We also reason (with 
more trepidation) from a fiction to matters of f act.  We may come to see a pattern in the facts 
through the lens that a fiction supplies.  Fo r example, we might understand the contemporary 
youth gang conception of being ‘dissed’ by refe rence to the wrath of Achilles at Agamemnon’s 
affront.
16  What is needed then is an account of how fictions can advance understanding. 
 This requires explicating another piece of the puzzle – exemplification.  To exemplify is 
to highlight, exhibit, display, or otherwise make manifest. 17  A commercial paint sample consists 
of a patch of color on a card.  The patch is not merely an instance of the color, but a telling 
instance – an instance that exemp lifies the color.  By so doing, the sample equips us to recognize 
the color, to differentiate it fro m similar shades.  The sample th en affords epistemic access to the 
  
16 I am indebted to Amelie Rorty for this example. 

--- Page 16 ---

 16
color.  Although the patch on the sample card has a host of other features – size, shape, location, 
and so on – it standardly does not exemplify them.  Exemplification is selective.  It brings out 
some features of an exemplar by overshadowing, downplaying, or marginalizing others.  Nothing 
in the nature of things dictates that the patch’s co lor is worthy of selection, but its shape is not.  
What, if anything, an item exemplifies depends on its function.  The very same item might 
perform any of a variety of functions.  The patch on the sample card could be used to teach 
children what a rectangle is.  In that case, it woul d exemplify its shape, not its color.  The sample 
card could be used as a fan.  Then the patch woul d not exemplify at all.  Exemplification is not 
restricted to commercial and pedagogical contexts .  Whatever an item exhibits, highlights, or 
displays, it exemplifies.  A poem might exemplify its rhyme scheme, its imagery, its style.  A 
water sample might exemplify its mineral content, its flavor, or its impurities.  Exemplification, I 
have argued elsewhere, is ubiquitous in art and science.18    
 Treating paint samples as paradigmatic exemplars may encourage the idea that 
exemplified features are all like expanses of co lor – homogeneous qualities spread out before us, 
lacking depth and complexity, hence able to be take n in at a glance.  Many are not like that.  Pick 
up a rock containing iron ore.  It might serve as a sample of iron, or of hematite, or of something 
that bears a striking resemblance to your high sc hool algebra teacher.  It can exemplify such 
features only where certain background assumptions are in place.  Not just anyone looking at the 
rock could tell that it exemplified these features. 
 Moreover, although in principle any item can serve as an exemplar and any feature can be 
exemplified, sometimes a good deal of effort is required to bring about the exemplification of a 
recondite feature.  Some of that effort is ment al.  Just as we ignore the shape of the paint sample 
and focus on the color, we can ignore the fact th at the rock looks like your algebra teacher and 
focus on its hardness.  This is a start.  But some irrelevant features so intricately intertwine with 
  
17 See Nelson Goodman, Languages of Art, Indianapolis: Hackett, 1968, pp. 45-67. 

--- Page 17 ---

 17
relevant ones that more drastic measures are calle d for.  If we seek to exemplify some recondite 
features of iron, mental agility alone may not be e nough to bracket the effects of other minerals in 
the rock.  So we refine the ore and filter out the impurities.  The result of our efforts is pure iron.  
It is a product of a good deal of processing 19 which eliminates complicating factors and brings to 
the fore characteristics that are hard to detect a nd difficult to measure in nature.  To facilitate the 
exemplification of the feature of interest, we do not just mentally sideline features we consider 
irrelevant, we physically remove some of them. 
 Even then, we do not just contemplate the bit of iron as we might a paint sample.  We 
subject it to a variety of tests.  We seek to produce circumstances where the features of interest 
stand out.  We not only investigate the iron’s be havior in standard conditions, we study what 
happens in extreme conditions – very high or lo w pressure or temperature, in a vacuum, under 
intense radiation, and so forth.  Although we r ecognize that the test conditions do not ordinarily 
(or perhaps ever) obtain in nature, we take it that  the behavior of the refined metal in the test 
conditions discloses something about the natural or der.  If so, by understanding what happens in 
the lab, we can understand something of what happens in the world.  The connection is, of course, 
indirect.  It involves a complicated extrapolation from situations and materials that are highly 
artificial and carefully contrived.  One might argue  that the lab itself is a fictional setting and the 
conclusions we draw about nature on the basis of our laboratory findings are projections from 
fiction to fact.  I don’t quite want to say that  (although I suspect that Nancy Cartwright does).  
But I do want to point out that experimentation involves a lot of stage setting. 
 There is a tendency to think of experiment s as processes that generate information, hence 
as ways to find things out.  This of course is true.  But it is worth noting that an experiment is not 
  
18 See my Considered Judgment, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997, pp. 171-183. 
19 This is why Nancy Cartwright thinks the laws of physics lie.  The laws are developed on the basis of, and 
are strictly true only of the processed samples, not their naturally occurring counterparts. 

--- Page 18 ---

 18
like an oracle, 20 or an anchorman or a fortune cookie.  It does not just issue a report stating its 
results.  It displays them.  It shows what happe ns to the magnetic properties of iron in conditions 
near the melting point.  The experiment exemplifies its results. 
 No matter how carefully we set the stage, irrelevancies remain.  We do not and ought not 
read every aspect of the experimental result back  onto the world.  Not only are there irrelevant 
features, there are issues about the appropriate vocabulary and level of precision for 
characterizing what occurs.  The fact that the e xperiment occurred in Cleveland is unimportant.  
The fact that the sample has a certain mass or latti ce structure may or may not be significant.  The 
fact that the temperature is within 100° C of the melting point of iron may matter, while the fact 
that it was within 5° of 1500° C does not.  Some f eatures of the iron in the experimental situation 
are telling features.  Others are not.  The telling features are the ones that the experiment discloses 
or makes manifest.  By exemplifying certain features, the experiment brings them to light and 
affords epistemic access to them.  That is its cognitive contribution.  Other features, though 
equally real, are not exemplified.  The experiment embodies an understanding of the phenomenon 
in question through its exemplification of telling features.  By making these features manifest, it 
affords an understanding of the phenomenon. 
 If the cognitive contribution of an exemplar consists in the exemplification of select 
features, then anything that exemplifies exactly t hose features can, in a suitable context, make the 
same contribution.  Return for a moment to the paint sample.  I spoke of it as though it is a 
sample of paint, a telling instance of the stuff you might use to paint the porch.  This is not true.  
The sample on the card does not consist of paint, but of an ink or dye of the same color as the 
paint whose color it exemplifies.  If the sample were  supposed to exemplify the paint itself, or the 
chemical features of the paint, the fact that it is  not paint or has a different chemical composition 
would be objectionable.  But since it exemplifies onl y the color, all that is needed is something 
  
20 Actually, of course, I don’t know how oracles are suppos ed to operate.  I have always assumed that they 
 

--- Page 19 ---

 19
that is the same color as the paint.   The exemplar need not itself be paint.  Similarly in scientific 
cases.  Consider a DNA molecule that exemplifi es its molecular structure.  Anything that 
exemplifies the same structure has the capacity to perform the same function in our understanding 
of DNA.  No more than the paint sample needs to  consist of paint, does the exemplar of DNA’s 
molecular structure need to consist of DNA.  A schematic model that exemplifies the same 
features but has a different material (or even immaterial) substrate could to the job. 
 Here is where felicitous falsehoods enter th e picture.  Something other than paint can 
serve as a paint sample, affording epistemic access to  a color also instantiated by the paint.  
Something other than a molecule can exemplify mo lecular structure, thereby affording epistemic 
access to a structure also instantiated by the molecule .  A felicitous falsehood then is a fiction that 
exemplifies a feature in a context where the ex emplification of that feature contributes to 
understanding.  The utility of such a falsehood is plai n.  It is sometimes inconvenient, difficult, or 
even impossible to bring it about that the phe nomena exemplify all and only the features that 
interest us.  (DNA molecules are very small, charged pions are short lived.)  If we introduce a 
falsehood that exemplifies those features – a bigger, longer-lasting model, for example – we can 
highlight them and display their significan ce for the understanding of the phenomenon in 
question.  By exemplifying features it shares w ith the phenomena, a felicitous falsehood affords 
epistemic access to how things actually are.  The camel’s nose is now officially inside the tent. 
 There is more than one role that such fictions can play.  Some serve as points of 
reference.  We understand things in terms of  them.  In the simplest cases, like the model 
displaying the helical structure of the DNA molecu le, they are simply schemata that exemplify 
factors they share with the phenomena they c oncern.  They qualify as fictions because they 
diverge from the phenomena in unexemplified properties.  (DNA molecules are not made of pipe 
cleaners.)  In other cases, the connection to the fact s is less direct.  No real gas has the properties 
  
simply emit true sentences like ‘Socrates is the wisest of men.’ 

--- Page 20 ---

 20
of the ideal gas.  The model is illuminating though, because we understand the properties of real 
gases in terms of their deviation from the ideal .  In such cases, understanding involves a pattern 
of schema and correction.  We represent the phe nomena with a schematic model, and introduce 
corrections as needed to closer acco rd with the facts.  Different corrections are needed to accord 
with the behavior of different gases. The ficti onal ideal then serves as a sort of least common 
denominator that facilitates reasoning about and co mparison of actual gases.  We ‘solve for’ the 
simple case first, then introduce complications as needed. 
 Acknowledging the role of corrections might  seem to suggest that the detour through 
fictions is just a circuitous route to the truth.  Rather than a simple true description of the behavior 
of neon, we get a complicated truth that makes re ference to deviations from some ideal.  But the 
full cognitive contribution of the exercise resides in th e truth, not the fiction.  I don’t think this is 
right for several reasons.  The first is that sometimes the corrections that would be needed to yield 
a truth are unnecessary or even counterproductive.  A fortiori arguments from limiting cases 
succeed because the corrections ar e unnecessary.  If a consideration holds for one case, even if 
that case is a fiction, it holds for all.  The multiple and complicate ways actual cases diverge from 
the fictive ideal make no difference.  If Rawls’ s argument is sound, ‘correcting for’ ties of 
affection just muddies the waters.  Nor is this the only case where fidelity to the facts can prove a 
hindrance.  It follows from the ideal gas law that as volume goes to zero, pressure becomes 
infinite.  This would not happen.  Given a fixed number of molecules, pressure increases as 
volume decreases – not to infinity, but only to the point where the container explodes.  No one of 
course denies this.  But to understand what woul d happen in the limit, we need to prescind from 
such material inconveniences and pretend that the wa lls of the container are infinitely strong.  We 
need then to introduce not corrections that bring us  back to the facts, but further idealizations.  A 
second reason is that the requisite corrections ofte n yield not truths, but more refined models.  
They supplant one falsehood with another.  A thir d reason is that even where corrections yield 
truths, the fiction may be more than a façon de parler .  It can structure our understanding in a 

--- Page 21 ---

 21
way that makes available information we would not otherwise have access to.  If, e.g., we draw a 
smooth curve that skirts the data and construe th e data as a complex of relevant and irrelevant 
factors (signal and noise), or construe a transacti on in terms of an economic model overlaid with 
non-economic factors which skew the outcome, we impose an order on things, highlight certain 
aspects of the phenomena, reveal connections, patterns and discrepancies, and make possible 
insights that we could not otherwise obtain.  We put ourselves in a position to see affinities 
between disparate occurrences by recognizing them as variations on a common theme. 
    Still, to say that felicitous falsehoods  figure ineliminably in our understanding of 
certain phenomena is not to say that without them we would have no understanding whatsoever 
of those phenomena.  Even without Snell’s law, inspection and instantial induction would provide 
some insight into what happens when light p asses between air and water, or between any other 
two specified media.  What we would lack is a systematic understanding of how the several cases 
are alike.  Felicitous falsehoods configure a domain, enabling us to characterize the phenomena in 
ways that would otherwise be unavailable.  When, for example, we can construe seemingly 
divergent phenomena as variants of a common scheme,  or as perturbations of a regular pattern, or 
as deviations from a simple norm, we see them and their relations to one another in a new light.  
We can discern systematic interconnections that direct inspection of the facts would not reveal.  
The fictions and the configurations of the dom ains that they engender provide conceptual 
resources for representing and reasoning about the phenomena in new and sometimes fruitful 
ways. 
 If I am right, not every theory is a conjunction of sentences all of which are supposed to 
be true.  Rather, a theory may be composed of both factual and fictional sentences, and the 
fictional sentences may play any of several different  roles.  This means that to understand what a 
theory conveys, and to understand the phenomena in terms of the theory requires sensitivity to the 
different roles the different sentences play.  A nd to assess a theory requires determining whether 
the component sentences are true enough for the parts they are assigned to play.  Yablo is 

--- Page 22 ---

 22
investigating the metaphysical implications of the idea that fictions infuse even our must 
fundamental theories. 21  I want to underscore the epistemological implications.  One obvious 
consequence is that it is not plausible to think of  an acceptable theory as a mirror of nature.  Even 
if the goal of a theory is to afford an understandi ng of a range of facts, it need not approach or 
achieve that goal by providing a direct reflection of those facts. 
  I have argued that a variety of components of cognitively acceptable theories neither are 
nor purport to be true.  Rather, they are fictions  that shed light on the phenomena they concern.  
They thereby contribute to our understanding of those phenomena.  Even if my account makes 
sense of models and idealizations in science, a wo rry remains.  My position threatens to make the 
world safe for postmodernist claptrap.  If truth is not required for epistemic acceptability, why 
isn’t a flagrantly false account acceptable?  What  is the objection to claiming that a theory 
attesting to the healing powers of crystals is  as acceptable as the theories constituting mainstream 
crystallography?  We seem to lose a valuable resource if we can’t simply say, ‘Because it is 
false!’  My seemingly wimpy requirement that an acceptable account must yield an understanding 
of how things are gives us what we need.  An  account that yields such an understanding must 
accommodate the facts in a domain.  The accommodation may be indirect.  Strictly false 
idealizations may be deployed.  Detours through stylized facts may be made.  The justification for 
the falsehoods is that they figure in accounts that make sense of the facts.  A cognitively 
acceptable account sheds light on its subject.  Wher e felicitous falsehoods are involved, the light 
may be oblique. 
 A theory can claim to make sense of a range of facts only if it is factually defeasible – 
only if, that is, there is some reasonably determinate, epistemically accessible factual arrangement 
which, if it were found to obtain, would discred it the theory.  A felicitous falsehood is acceptable 
only if the theory or system of thought it belongs to accommodates the epistemically accessible 
  
21 Stephen Yablo, ‘Does Ontology Rest on a Mistake?’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,  
 

--- Page 23 ---

 23
facts.  Exactly what this requires needs to be  spelled out.  The usua l considerations about 
evidence, simplicity, scope, and so forth come into  play.  Even though some of the sentences in a 
theory are not supposed to be true, the way the wo rld is constrains the acceptability of the theory 
they figure in.  If, for example, evidence shows that friction plays a major role in collisions 
between gas molecules, theories that model co llisions as perfectly elastic spheres will be 
discredited.  An acceptable theory must be at least as good as any available alternative, when 
judged in terms of currently available standard s of cognitive goodness.  So such a theory would 
also be discredited by a theory that better satisfi ed those standards.  Neither a defeated nor an 
indefeasible theory is tenable.  Because it is indi fferent to evidence, claptrap is indefeasible.  
Hence it is untenable.  I said earlier that even in  theories that include felicitous falsehoods truth 
plays a role.  We see now what the role is.  A factually defeasible theory has epistemically 
accessible implications which, if found to be false,  discredit the theory.  So a defeasible theory, 
by preserving a commitment to testable consequen ces retains a commitment to truth.  Quine said 
that the sentences of a theo ry face the tribunal of experience as a corporate body. 22  He probably 
believed that although not all the members of the corporation could be separately tested against 
experience, all were supposed to be fine, upstanding truths.  I sugg est that this is not so.  An 
acceptable theory must make its case before the tr ibunal of experience.  But the members of the 
corporation are more various and some a bit shadier than Quine suspected. 
 
  
Supplementary volume 72 ( 1998), pp. 229-261; and ‘Abstract Objects,’ Philosophical Issues, forthcoming.  
22 W. V. Quine,’ ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism,’ From a Logical Point of View, New York: Harper & Row, 
1961, p. 41.
