=== PAGE 1 ===

WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
EMERGENCE AS NON-AGGREGATIVITY AND THE BIASES
OF REDUCTIONISMS
ABSTRACT. Most philosophical accounts of emergence are incompatible with
reduction. Most scientists regard a system property as emergent relative to prop-
erties of its parts if it depends upon their mode of organization-a view consistent
with reduction. Emergence is a failure of aggregativity, in which “the whole
is nothing more than the sum of its parts”. Aggregativity requires four condi-
tions, giving powerful tools for analyzing modes of organization. Differently
met for different decompositions of the system, and in different degrees, the
structural conditions can provide evaluation criteria for choosing decompositions,
“natural kinds”, and detecting functional localization fallacies, approximations,
and various biases of vulgar reductionisms. This analysis of emergence and
use of these conditions as heuristics is consistent with a broader reductionistic
methodology.
KEY WORDS: additivity, aggregativity, emergence, functional localization falla-
cies, heuristics, near-decomposeability, reduction, whole-parts relations
I. INTRODUCTION: REDUCTION AND EMERGENCE
Philosophers commonly suppose that emergent properties are irre-
ducible, but some rather nice things fall out of a reductive account
of emergence. Claims involving emergent properties in discussions
of non-linear dynamics, connectionist modelling, chaos, artiﬁcial
life, and elsewhere give no support for traditional anti-reductionism
or woolly-headed anti-scientism. But reductionists often misinter-
pret their success, claiming more than they can possibly deliver.
Emergent phenomena like those discussed here are often subject
to surprizing and revealing reductionistic explanations.
1 But such
explanations do not deny their importance or make them any less
emergent – quite the contrary: it explains why and how they
are important, and ineliminably so. This requires a broader view
of reduction (and emergence) than common among philosophers,
Foundations of Science 5: 269–297, 2000.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.


=== PAGE 2 ===

270 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
but one scientists would recognize. 2 A reductive explanation of a
behavior or a property of a system is one which shows it to be
mechanistically explicable in terms of the properties of and inter-
actions among the parts of the system (See also Kauffman, 1971).
3
The relevant explanations are causal, but needn’t be deductive or
involve laws – contrary to conventional wisdom (Wimsatt 1976b;
Cartwright 1983).
This account analyzes emergence in terms of dependence of
a system property on the arrangements of the parts – ultimately
therefore on the context-sensitivity of relational parts’ properties
to intra-systemic conditions. Some accounts of emergence suppose
extra-systemic context-sensitivity of system properties.
4 Neither
need be anti-reductionistic. The latter would require ﬁnding a larger
embedding system including the initially extra-systemic properties
engaging the broader context-sensitivities. If an adequate mechan-
istic account could then be provided, a reductive account using the
original system would have failed, but one at a higher level would
have succeeded – (including the original system together with more
variables from its environment).
5
Such level and context or scope switching – a well-hidden
secret of reductionistic approaches – can also be a useful strategy
to remove modeling biases resulting from “perceptual focus” on
objects at a preferred level. These biases can be mutually reinfor-
cing and extremely powerful. They led to the invisibility of false
simplifying assumptions about the structure of groups in models of
group selection (Wade, 1978; Wimsatt 1980b). The models focussed
in a plausible way on genes and individual organisms, making in
the process standard simplifying assumptions appropriate for some
questions at those levels, but not for almost any questions at higher
levels of organization, and equivalent to assuming that groups did
not exist. Not surprizingly, these assumptions led to the conclusion
that group selection was not signiﬁcant! We must work back and
forth between levels to check that features crucial to phenomena at
an upper level are not simpliﬁed out of existence when modelling at
the lower level. On the analysis below, we would have shown that
these group properties were emergent at the higher level, although
consistent with a sensitive reductive analysis.


=== PAGE 3 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 271
Some philosophers who defend “qualia” type accounts of
subjective experience suppose a third (“mystical”) notion of emer-
gence which – if coherent – would be anti-reductionistic. I
won’t consider it here. Finally, many accounts appeal to multiple-
realizeability as a criterion for emergence, and link it with failures
of reduction. I have argued elsewhere (1981a, 1994) that multiple
realizeability is entailed by the existence of compositional levels of
organization, is much broader than commonly supposed, and neither
mysterious nor contrary to reductionism.
Many cases were classically considered as involving emergence
– cases motivating claims that “the whole is more than the sum of
the parts.” – like an electronic oscillator circuit. There’s nothing anti-
reductionistic, mysterious, or inexplicable about being an oscillator.
You hook up an inductance, a capacitor, and a resistor in the right
way with a voltage source. The system oscillates although none
of its parts in isolation do so. Moreover, it is how these disparate
parts are strung together that makes them an oscillator. (Thus, an
oscillator must contain a closed circuit.) A deductive theory relates
properties of the parts to the frequency and amplitude of the oscil-
lator; reductionistic even by the strong conditions of the formal
model of reduction, and also by the weaker characterization given
here. This is intuitively a case of emergence, though it can’t be if we
tie emergence to non-reduceability.
More generally, emergence of a system property relative to the
properties of the parts of that system indicates its dependence
on their mode of organization . It thus presupposes the system’s
decomposition into parts and their properties, and its dependence
is explicated via a mechanistic explanation. Ten out of twelve cases
from Table I below fail one or more of the conditions for aggreg-
ativity, are consistent with totally reductionistic accounts of the
systemic phenomena in question, depend in some way on the mode
of organization of the parts, and are prima facie examples of emer-
gence. Not every counterexample kills an analysis, but too many
which are too central do. These surely qualify. We need an analysis
of emergence consistent with reductionism.
I proceed indirectly by focussing on another question: When
intuitively is a system “more than the sum of its parts”? This
question has been classically connected with discussions of reduc-


=== PAGE 4 ===

272 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
tion and of emergence, and has stimulated a variety of erroneous
but revealing views. How these views arise and may contribute
to species of vulgar reductionism – “Nothing-but-isms” – through
biases in reductionistic problem-solving strategies is discussed at
the end. Their pervasiveness is a back-handed tribute to the impor-
tance of approximations, idealizations, and limiting case arguments
in science. These are powerful tools, but like any tool, they can be
misused – we must learn how to use them properly.
II. AGGREGATIVITY
Emergence should involve some kind of organizational interdepend-
ence of diverse parts, but there are many possible forms of such
organizational interaction, and it is hard to know how to classify
them. One can’t easily turn examples of the organizational inter-
action of diverse parts into a general analysis of emergence. It is
easier to discuss failures of emergence, so I proceed in a backwards
fashion (Wimsatt, 1986), by determining conditions for the system
property not to be emergent (i.e, for it to be a “mere aggregate” of its
parts properties). This has a straightforward, revealing and compact
analysis. Forms of emergence can then be classiﬁed and analyzed
more systematically by looking at how these conditions can fail to
be met. Examples for different properties and decompositions of the
system into parts are given in Table I.
Four conditions seem separately necessary and jointly sufﬁcient
for aggregativity
6 or non-emergence. Aggregativity and emergence
concern the relationship between a property of a system under study,
and properties of its parts. For each condition, the system property
must remain invariant or stable under modiﬁcations of the system
in the speciﬁed way, a kind of independence of the property over
changes in the mode of organization of the parts. This invariance
indicates that the system property is not affected by wide variation
in relationships between and among the parts and their proper-
ties. To be aggregative, the system property would have to depend
upon the parts’ properties in a very strongly atomistic manner,
under all physically possible decompositions – an almost impossibly
strong demand. It is rare indeed that all of these conditions are
met (See Table I). Aggregativity is the complete antithesis of func-


=== PAGE 5 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 273
TABLE I
EXAMPLES OF FAILURES OF AGGREGATIVITY as discussed in
Wimsatt, 1986 (with indications of the decompositions assumed and which
conditions are met)
Examples:
Invariance Conditions:
R= restricted or qualiﬁed
(for some decompositions
only)
IS: QS: RA: CI: Relevant parts
or conditions:
1. mass yes yes yes yes none known. Only
case of true aggrega-
tivity in table.
2. volume R yes yes no not for solvent/solute.or
packing diff. solids
3. critical mass of yes no yes no keep geometrically
ﬁssionable material. and density invariant
(ignoring neutron
absorbers in context)
4. stability of rock pile no/yes no no no
(yes for IS if same =
exactly similar)
5. oxygen binding in
hemoglobin molecule
R no ? no w/i alpha, beta chains
6. gamete frequency
(classical model)
no no no yes units are genes
(these two cases differ
in unit chosen)
7. gamete frequency
(classical model)
yes no no yes units are
chromosomes (w/o
disturbing mitosis)
8. gene effects
(classical model)
yes no yes yes units are genes
(these two cases reﬂect
a change in theory)
9. position effect
(molecular model)
no no no ? units are genes
10. ampliﬁcation ratio in
multi-stage linear ampliﬁer
yes yes yes yes idealization; not found
in Nature (Figure 1)
11. ampliﬁcation ratio in
multi-stage non-linear
ampliﬁer
no yes no? yes analogous natural case
(Figure 2)


=== PAGE 6 ===

274 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
TABLE I
Continued
Examples:
Invariance Conditions:
R= restricted or qualiﬁed
(for some decompositions
only)
IS: QS: RA: CI: Relevant parts
or conditions:
12. solving a nearly-
decomposeable problem
yes yes R yes units are subproblems;
aggregativity usually is
partial or qualiﬁed.
13. computer memory yes yes R yes memory chips having
characteristics
14. ﬁtness (total additivity)
(QS is met if positive
alleles are substituted
for others at same locus
without affecting genome
size) (for different groups
of genes in same organism)
yes no R yes units are genes for a
“quantitative trait”.
15. ﬁtness (partial
additivity-classical)
no? no R no units are genes w. on-0
16. Levins’ ﬁne and coarse
grained ﬁtness functions
yes yes yes yes approximations
invalidate claim of
aggregativity*
Appearances are deceiving: conditions of derivation violate conditionsIS, RA,
CI, even though the composition functions for both the coarse-grained and ﬁne-
grained adaptive functions appear to meet all conditions. This situation should
be generalizeable to many idealizations, or derivations involving approxima-
tions. (See Wimsatt, 1986 and below for details.)
(1) In addition to the advantages of breaking down claims of emergence into
these 4 criteria which can be met in various combinations, thus providing
a ﬁner classiﬁcation of types of emergence, there is a substantial heuristic
advantage in using these criteria in the analysis of complex systems. This
arises because the criteria are met usually under restricted conditions on the
parts decomposition involved, and sometimes with some additional restric-
tions. These criteria then become heuristic templates for uncovering these
conditions, and for ﬁnding parts decompositions which realize these criteria to
the greatest extent. These decompositions are prime candidates for specifying
“natural kinds.” (2) Example #16 shows that a purely formal account in terms
of conditions on the composition function will not do; one needs also to look
at the assumptions made in the derivation of the composition function. (3)
See also sub-aggregativity, neighborhood aggregativity, modular aggregativity,
semi-aggregativity, and near-aggregativity in Wimsatt, 1986 for other kinds of
qualiﬁed aggregativity.


=== PAGE 7 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 275
tional organization. Our reductionistic science to date has focussed
disproportionately upon such properties, or properties which do
somewhat less – meeting some of these conditions, approximately,
some of the time and studying them under conditions in which they
are “well-behaved”. Aggregative or even such “pseudo-aggregative”
properties are treated as relatively fundamental (Martinez, 1992). In
consequence, their import in the description of the natural world has
been substantially exaggerated.
These conditions are: (1) a condition on the intersubstitution or
rearrangement of parts; (2) on size scaling (primarily, though not
exclusively, for quantitative properties) with addition or subtraction
of parts; (3) on invariance under decomposition and reaggregation
of parts; and (4) a linearity condition that there be no cooperative
or inhibitory interactions among parts in the production or real-
ization of the system property. These conditions are not entirely
independent of one another. In fact, there seem to be close connec-
tions between (1) and (3) and between (2) and (4). The conditions
(Wimsatt, 1986) are as follows:
For a system property to be an aggregate with respect to a
decomposition of the system into parts and their properties, the
following four conditions must be met:
Suppose P(S
i)=F { [ p1,p2,::: ,p n(s1)], [p1,p2,::: ,p n(s2)],::: ,
[p1,p2,::: ,p n(sm)]} is a composition function for system property
P(Si) in terms of parts’ properties p1,p2, ::: ,p n, of parts s1,s 2,
::: ,s m The composition function is an equation – an inter-level
synthetic identity, with the lower level speciﬁcation a realization or
instanciation of the system property.
7
1. IS (Inter Substitution) Invariance of the system property under
operations rearranging the parts in the system or interchanging any
number of parts with a corresponding numbers of parts from a
relevant equivalence class of parts. (cf. commutativity of compos-
ition function).
2. QS (Size scaling) Qualitative Similarity of the system property
(identity, or if a quantitative property, differing only in value) under


=== PAGE 8 ===

276 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
addition or subtraction of parts. (cf. recursive generability of a class
of composition functions).
3. RA (Decomposition and ReAggregation) Invariance of the
system property under operations involving decomposition and
reaggregation of parts. (cf. associativity of composition function).
4. CI (Linearity) There are noCooperative orInhibitory interactions
among the parts of the system which affect this property.
Note that conditions IS and RA are obviously relative to given
parts decompositions, as are (less obviously) QS and CI. A system
property may meet these conditions for some decompositions, but
not for others. Table I presents different examples of aggregativity
and its failure – species of emergence (Many of these examples are
discussed in Wimsatt, 1986).
Figure 1 illustrates the ﬁrst three conditions for the ampliﬁca-
tion ratio in an (idealized) multi-stage linear ampliﬁer. The system
property, total ampliﬁcation ratio, is the product of the component
ampliﬁcation ratios (Figure 1a), a composition function which is
commutative (Figure 1b, condition IS), and associative (Figure 1d,
condition RA), and shows qualitative similarity when adding or
subtracting parts (Figure 1c, condition QS). (This example seems
to violate the 4th condition (non-linearity), but we act as if it
doesn’t: geometric rates of increase are treated linearly here (and in
other relevant cases) because it is the exponent which is theoretic-
ally signiﬁcant for the properties we are interested in.) Subjective
volume grows linearly with the exponent (as our decibels scale
reﬂects), and both of them grow linearly with addition of compo-
nents to the chain. The 4th condition is found for cooperative
interactions in the hemoglobin molecule: the four subunits take
up and release oxygen more efﬁciently by being organized into
a tetramer than they would as four independent units. (A mono-
meric hemoglobin can be found for comparison in the lamprey.)
The staged linear ampliﬁers are interesting because they show that
aggregativity does not literally mean “additivity” – here multiplic-
ative relations do equally well.
8 (Exponential growth is also much
more common in biology than linear relations.)
The linear ampliﬁer of Figure 1a–d is case 10 of Table I. To meet
all criteria, we must assume that each sub-ampliﬁer is exactly linear


=== PAGE 9 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 277
Figure 1. Conditions of Aggregativity illustrated with idealized linear un-
bounded ampliﬁers.
throughout the entire range – from the smallest input to the largest
output – required of the entire system. No real-world ampliﬁers
here: this is an idealization, which I will return to below.
Even this simple story has some important limits however.
Ampliﬁers are themselves integrated functional wholes with differ-
entiated parts – which cannot be permuted with impunity. (That is
why we need circuit diagrams to assemble and to understand them –


=== PAGE 10 ===

278 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
we cannot put them together in just any fashion!) Even the parts are
integrated wholes. If you cut randomly through a resistor or capa-
citor, the pieces do not perform like the original. This is interesting:
testing these conditions against different ways of decomposing the
system is revealing of its organization . This suggests broader uses
for the conditions and the analysis.
We aren’t done yet: all examples so far (Figures 1a–1d) have
the ampliﬁers arranged in series. This is an implicit organizational
constraint on the whole system – readily accepted because our
common uses of ampliﬁers connect them in this way. But we could
also connect them differently, as in the three series-parallel networks
diagrammed in Figure 1e, and then the invariances in total ampli-
ﬁcation ratio,A, disappear. To calculate their ampliﬁcation ratios,
we make three (simplifying) assumptions: (1) branching parallel
paths divide currents equally; (2) converging parallels add currents;
(3) serial circuits (included aggregated sub-assemblies) multiply
signal strengths (as before). In Figure 1e, starting with a signal of
magnitude 1 unit, and following these rules we get:
For the ﬁrst circuit,A = [(A1 + A2 + A3)/3] x A4.
For the second circuit,A = [(A1 + A2)/2] x [(A3 + A4)/2]
For the third circuit,A = [(A1 x A3)/2] + [(A2 x A4)/2]
If all component ampliﬁers, A1, A2, A3, A4 have equal ampliﬁc-
ation ratios, a,t h eA’s of these circuits are all equal. They each have
two staged subassemblies, each with a net ampliﬁcation ratio of a,
soA= a a = a
2. (For these ideal linear ampliﬁers, parallating
at any stage has no effect: the signal is just multiplied by the same
amount along each path, so they collectively have the same effect
as a single ampliﬁer with the same ampliﬁcation ratio.) But the
decreased amplifying depth reducesA from a
4 to a2, so changing
to any of these modes from a strictly serial circuit decreases the
ampliﬁcation ratio. But there is worse to come:
Suppose that the ampliﬁcation ratios of the component ampliﬁers
are not equal.
If A1 = a,A 2=2 a,A 3=4 a,a n dA 4=8 a,t h e n
circuit 1 = [(7/3) a] 8a = 56/3 a2 = 18.67a2.
circuit 2 = (3/2) a 6a =9 a2.
circuit 3 = (5/2) a2 + (10/2) a2 =7 . 5a2.


=== PAGE 11 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 279
For comparison, all of them in series (as above) would give
64a4. So how the ampliﬁers are connected together does make a
difference. Despite ﬁrst appearances, ampliﬁcation ratio is not an
aggregative property, both because it is not invariant across decom-
positions internal to the ampliﬁers, or internal to their parts, and
also because it is not invariant across aggregations of the ampliﬁers
which are not serially organized. (This covers manipulations at three
levels of organization: rearrangements of parts of the ampliﬁer parts,
rearrangements of parts of the ampliﬁers, and rearrangements of the
ampliﬁers.)
Finally, we have assumed that each sub-ampliﬁer is exactly linear
throughout the entire range from the smallest input to the largest
output – required of the entire system. They must multiply input
signals of different frequencies and amplitudes by the same amount
over this entire range. This is an idealization – case 10 of Table I.
Real-world ampliﬁers are approximately linear through given power
and frequency ranges of input signals. (See Figure 2a and case 11 of
Table I). (Frequency correction curves are published so that the user
can restore linearity by “boosting” different frequencies by different
amounts, but these curves are themselves functions of the amplitude
of the input signal.) The ampliﬁers – not perfectly linear to begin
with – become increasingly non-linear outside these ranges. They
are most commonly limited on the low side by insensitivity to inputs
below a certain value, and on the high side by not having enough
power to keep the transformation linear. So with real ampliﬁers the
order of the ampliﬁers does matter, even in the serial circuit.
Thirty years ago hi-ﬁ systems had separate pre-ampliﬁers and
ampliﬁers. Hooked up in the right order, they worked just ﬁne. In
the wrong order, the ampliﬁer would be too insensitive to detect
the signal from the phono-cartridge, but small amounts of “white
noise” it generated internally would be ampliﬁed enough to “fry”
the downstream pre-amp. So-called linear ampliﬁers really mean
approximately linear over a given range, within a speciﬁed toler-
ance, ". Different uses require different tolerances and ranges, so
a system may be treated as linear for some purposes, but not for
(more demanding) others. (See below for more on the implications
of tolerances).


=== PAGE 12 ===

280 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
Figure 2. Varieties of Partial Aggregativity illustrated with ampliﬁers which are
linear only within a bounded range.
The ampliﬁers may be linear through a large enough range that
there is some adjustability – some restricted intersubstituteability
among the components, yielding “partial” or “sub”-aggregativity,
(Figure 2b) or “neighborhood” aggregativity (Figure 2c). Restricted
kinds of intersubstitutability (see also “modular” aggregativity,
Wimsatt, 1986) can also help characterize different modes or dimen-
sions of organization in many kinds of complex systems. Similar
qualiﬁcations for supposedly aggregative properties arise in discus-
sions of additive ﬁtness components, and ﬁne vs. coarse-grained


=== PAGE 13 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 281
patterns of environmental change (Wimsatt, 1999). Indeed, the
appearance of common and unqualiﬁed aggregativity is a chimera
– usually a product of uninspected assumed constancies, idealiza-
tions, and overlooked possible dimensions of variation . The ampli-
ﬁer case demonstrates how known idealizations and uninspected
assumptions (treating ampliﬁers and their parts as unbreakable
modules because they are commonly treated as such in our theory
and practice, and considering only serially organized ampliﬁers
because these modes are common for functional reasons) can lead
us to exaggerate the aggregativity of a property. In the analysis of
complex system properties, such kinds of errors are so easy to
commit that they are almost the rule rather than the exception,
ontributing to design failures in engineering, modelling errors and
errors of experimental design in science, and conceptual errors in
philosophy.
But some properties at least seem like paradigmatic aggreg-
ative properties. The great conservation laws of physics – those of
mass (case 1), energy, (now replaced by the hybrid, mass-energy),
momentum,a n d net charge , (if we include its sign) in effect
indicate that these properties actually do ﬁll the bill. They appear
aggregative under any and all decompositions. Indeed, that’s why
there are conservation laws for them! Curiously, some properties
you might have expected to don’t measure up. Thus,volume,( T a b l e
I, case 2) isn’t aggregative, if we consider solvent-solute interactions
in chemistry. If you dissolve salt in water, the volume of the water +
salt will be less than that of the water before the salt was added, and
surely less than their volumes taken independently and separately.
(So sometimes the whole is less than the sum of its parts!)
A system property may be aggregative for some decompositions
but not for others, or, more generally, any of the conditions may be
met for some decompositions, but not for others. (This is probably
most common.)
This has critical importance in theory construction: these vari-
ations allow for and suggest feedback between these criteria and
the choice of decompositions of a system for further analysis. We
look for invariances, so these conditions are treated as desiderata
and we experiment with alternative descriptions of and manipu-
lations on the system hoping to ﬁnd ways to make them work –


=== PAGE 14 ===

282 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
decomposing, cutting, pasting, and adjusting until they are satis-
ﬁed to the greatest degree possible. Furthermore, we will tend
to regard decompositions better meeting aggregativity conditions
as “natural”, because they provide simpler and less context-
dependent regularities, theory, and mathematical models involving
these aspects of their behavior.
9
Other central grounds for regarding decompositions and the
parts produced as “natural” include ‘robustness’ (Levins, 1966;
Wimsatt, 1981a), and more enigmatically, ‘generative entrench-
ment’ (Wimsatt, 1986). Other heuristics are also used with these
conditions in constructing and validating decompositions – see the
reductionistic problem solving strategies discussed in my 1980b,
1985, and 1997. These heuristics have systematic biases, which
may give misleading results. One of the most systematic biases in
discussions of supposedly aggregate behavior is to generate it under
very special conditions or strong constraints on the system and its
environment, which are then forgotten in subsequent discussions.
These four conditions are sufﬁciently formal in character to
suppose that we could move right to an evaluation of the properties
found in the equations of theories. But I show elsewhere (Wimsatt,
1999, 1986) that we can’t properly do so without considering at
least (1) the choice of a parts-decomposition, (2) idealizations and
assumptions made in the description of a system, and (3) further
idealizations and approximations made in the derivation of equa-
tions relating system-level and parts-level properties.
10 Examples#7
and #8 from Table I reveal how the apparent aggregativity of a
system property depends upon the decomposition used.
Moreover one cannot simply look at the form of an expression
relating system and parts’ properties to tell whether a system prop-
erty is aggregative. You need to look also at the assumptions made
in deriving the “composition function” for the system property, and
make sure that all of them are empirically adequate for the case in
question. This places important limitations on a formalistic account
of aggregativity, for it is not enough to look at the equations in the
ﬁnished empirically adequate theories. You also have to know how
you got there, because the approximations you made along the way
cannot be forgotten in evaluating aggregativity.


=== PAGE 15 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 283
III. AGGREGATIVITY AS A HEURISTIC FOR EV ALUATING
DECOMPOSITIONS, AND OUR CONCEPTS OF NATURAL KINDS
These cases have yielded many interesting features of claims of
aggregativity or partial aggregativity. Seeing them together suggests
interactions among the development of theory, methods of decom-
position, and experimental design, and what we make of what
we have found. Together they give a very different picture of the
nature and uses of aggregativity than commonly assumed, and have
further implications for the assessment (and biases) of reductionistic
methodologies.
(1) From Table I, we see that very few system properties are aggreg-
ative functions of parts’ properties, suggesting that emergence – as
failure of aggregativity – is extremely common; the rule, rather than
the exception. (The conservation laws of physics pick out aggreg-
ative properties, but little else does.) So this analysis could – perhaps
fairly – be criticized as yielding a very weak notion of emergence.
Nonetheless it accords with intuitions of most scientists, who are not
willing to give up either their reductionism or their emergence, and
who agree with its classiﬁcation of particular cases.
(2) But then one might wonder why the temptation for “Nothing but-
ism”– the ontological war-cry of what Dennett (1995) calls “greedy
reductionism” – is so strong. We see statements quite regularly in
science like “Genes are the only units of selection”, “Organisms
are nothing but bags of genes”, “The mind is nothing but neural
activity”, “Social behavior is reducible to or nothing more than
the behavior of individuals.” If total aggregativity is so rare, why
are claims like these so common? They clearly aren’t claiming
full-blown aggregativity in the sense explicated here. While true
aggregativity requires invariance of the system property under all
decompositions and reaggregations, we may (fallaciously) think of
behavior at higher levels as being aggregates of the behavior of
parts for particular decompositions which do show this invariance
– or show it only approximately. Such properties look aggreg-
ative for some decompositions, but reveal themselves as emergent,
or context or organization-dependent for other decompositions or
conditions. This is particularly clear in the discussion of multi-


=== PAGE 16 ===

284 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
locus genetic systems in the context of a theory, population genetics,
which currently emphasizes the evolutionary role of additive ﬁtness
interactions, and ignores the central role of epistasis (Wade, 1996;
Wimsatt, 2002, 1980b). Pointing to such practices naturally changes
our focus of investigation from how to specify relations between
system and parts’ properties to looking at the reasons for, process of,
and idealizations used in choosing a decomposition, and the broader
effects of that choice.
(3) Properties may be aggregative for some decompositions and
not for others, or more so for some than for others. If so, the
degree of aggregativity may be used, consciously or unconsciously
– but in any case quite rationally – as a criterion for choosing
among decompositions: we will tend to see aggregative or more
aggregative decompositions as natural decompositions, and their
parts as instances of natural kinds, because these decompositions
provide simpler and less context-dependent regularities, theory, and
mathematical models for the behavior they capture. These may be
particularly revealing cuts on nature, but we must not make too
much of this fact. We will tend to see these parts as special, and
to make “nothing but” style reductionistic claims particularly for
them. This is a pervasive kind of functional localization fallacy – a
move from the claim that a decomposition is particularly powerful
or revealing to the claim that the entites and forces it yields are all
that matters (Wimsatt, 1974; Bechtel and Richardson, 1992). Such
“nothing-but” claims are false or methodologically misleading if
taken to suggest that one shouldn’t bother to construct models or
theories of the system at levels or with methods or decompositions
other than that of the parts in question, or that these preferred
entities are the only “real” ones (Wimsatt, 1994).
(4) To the extent that partial aggregativity leads to greater physical
or functional modularity of the parts (likely in evolving systems
Wimsatt, 1981b: 141–142), it will tend to promote a consilience
or robustness of parts’ boundaries individuated using different
properties of the system. Greater robustness of the parts under
that decomposition – a standard criterion of objecthood (Wimsatt,
1981a) – will also strongly contribute to the judgement that this is
a decomposition into natural or real parts . Such claims are prima


=== PAGE 17 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 285
facie reasonable. (Robustness is a degree-property, so justifying
these claims is not an all-or-nothing affair.) These judgements are
all context-sensitive, so they still don’t support “nothing-but” style
claims.
(5) The four conditions all specify invariance of the system property
under operations on the parts. For quantitative properties one can
easily generate criteria for approximate or local aggregativity, in
which variation of the system property within" are tolerated for
various values of " (Wimsatt, 1986). In (1974) I used this strategy
to describe different degrees of near-decomposeability or modu-
larity in systems. Tolerances are useful theoretical tools because
we use quantitative or formal qualitative frameworks as templates
which nature may meet in varying degrees. For particularly adapt-
able frameworks which can be ﬁtted to nature in various places in
different possible ways, we may try many such mappings, looking
for “best ﬁts”. (Maximizing the “coefﬁcient of determination” or
r-value of an equation in a linear regression is a simple example.)
Using “tolerances” for key qualitative concepts is a particularly
useful strategy in a messy, inexact, and approximate world which
has many regularities and stable patterns, but few exceptionless
generalizations.
(6) Since approximations are frequently used to produce equa-
tions of aggregative form, evaluating a property as aggregative
depends upon the accuracy of the approximation under the condi-
tions – which requires investigation. This may take two forms, with
different consequences:
(a) Emphasizing conditions for accuracy focuses attention upon
the context-dependence of system properties, with failure of
aggregativity often leading to using or studying the system
under different conditions, hoping to ﬁnd conditions under
which its behavior is more aggregative, or other conditions
where it may be qualitatively different. (Here the search simpli-
ﬁes conceptualization and analysis of data, and will also likely
generate better experimental control – indicating conditions
one should attempt to realize or avoid.) If conditions for
aggregative behavior are found, we will be tempted (see (3)


=== PAGE 18 ===

286 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
above) to regard that as the real nature of the system, however
unjustiﬁed that may ultimately be.
(b) Emphasizing the requiredaccuracy highlights our purposes and
demands of our applications, adjusting demands or methods as
required – using methods suited to the study of non-aggregative
behavior (for greater accuracy) or weaker methods treating it
as aggregative (for less). Awareness of our role in classifying
the property as aggregative may make us more self-critical of
our idealizations, and of possible biases in our problem-solving
heuristics (Wimsatt, 1987, 1980b, 1985). Such awareness is
important, but ﬁxation on it may yield complementary errors:
the view that classiﬁcation of the system property is merely
instrumental, or – even less accurately – is just conventional
or socially determined. (‘Determines’ is commonly misused in
such contexts – equivocating between “plays a role in determ-
ining” and “by itself, is sufﬁcient to uniquely determine.”)
(7) One can also assess aggregativity in past and present theories of
the relation of system and parts’ properties. In doing so, one must
look not only at the ﬁnal derived equations, but also at their deriv-
ation, to see if the idealizations and approximations used assume
one or more of the conditions of aggregativity, and whether they
are legitimate for the conditions at hand. One may thereby derive
an aggregative model, and also come to understand its conditions of
applicability. As the genetic and environmental examples treated in
the longer version of this paper in my (2002) show, apparent units of
aggregation can be very misleading, and the respects in which they
can be treated as aggregates quite limited.
(8) One can track systematic changes in our view of the relation
between system and parts’ properties, both analyzing their status in
historically important disputes, and comparing their changing status
in successively better theories of a phenomenon. Does this raise
Hempel or Nagel’s worries (Wimsatt, 1986) – that aggregativity and
emergence are really about our knowledge of the world, not about
the world itself? But this information is just what a sophisticated
realist needs – to see how the world changes as viewed through our
theories, when our theories change. As long as you can tell one from


=== PAGE 19 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 287
the other – object of study from tool of access – you’re okay, and
you need to be able to varyboth to assess and separate these effects.
This shows that in at least some cases, a standard argument for
theory-relativity can be turned to the opposite conclusion – to get
at the world behind the theories . Criteria for aggregativity can be
viewed either as statements about ontological relations in the world,
or as tools for constructing and characterizing theories. It’s just that
these are different uses. If one make their aims clear, there are no
inescapable threats to objectivity.
(9) Earlier reductionistic theories of the behavior of a system will
tend to have more simplifying assumptions, controlled variables,
and assumed constancies, and predicates treated as monadic or of
reduced order than later ones. With more realistic theories (with
higher order relational properties and more complex interactions
between parts), the degree and kinds of emergence postulated of
system properties should tend to increase with increasingly detailed
speciﬁcation of the internal structure and environmental relations of
the system in the model. This is just the opposite of that predicted
on the classical positivist model of emergence, which saw emer-
gence disappearing with the progress of science, but appears to
be just what is actually happening with recent increased interest in
the study of complex systems . Consider, for example the increased
talk of holism and emergence accompanying the rising interest in
non-linear dynamics (systems which violate (at least) the fourth
condition for aggregativity). Though this move towards holism often
goes along with a lot of loose (and sometimes misleading) anti-
reductionist talk, it is clearly a conﬁrmation of the strategy of
analysis for the concept of emergence advanced here.
IV . REDUCTIONISMS AND BIASES REVISITED
I will now use this analysis to address some broader questions
concerning reductionism – particularly how it is used and perceived
in the context of an incomplete analysis – i.e our usual situation! The
four conditions of aggregativity represent a powerful approximate
and adjustable framework. In any given case one could evaluate
how well each condition is met across different decompositions of


=== PAGE 20 ===

288 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
a system into parts. The better a decomposition meets these condi-
tions, the more easily we can treat it as factoring the system into a set
of modular parts having monadic, intrinsic, or context-independent
properties. With particularly simple and theoretically productive
decompositions, we will tend to view these parts and properties
as instances of natural kinds, as robust, and to regard the system
as “nothing more” than the collection of its parts. We have here
turned an architectonic distinction between kinds of properties into
a search heuristic for ﬁnding preferred, simple, “maximally reduc-
tionistic” decompositions of systems into parts – decompositions
which lead readily to extremes of “nothing but” talk and disciplinary
imperialism.
A reductive explanation of a behavior or a property of a system
is one showing it to be mechanistically explicable in terms of the
properties of and interactions among the parts of the system. What
does this kind of explanation have to do with “nothing but” style
reductionism? In principle, nothing – but in practice, they are tempt-
ingly connected – and confused. With total knowledge of a system,
the two species of “reduction” are clearly distinguishable, but with
increasing degrees of ignorance about a system, they come to look
more and more alike! In our state of partial knowledge, it is not
surprizing that they should often be confused. A closer look at what
we do in conditions of partial ignorance is especially important
for ﬁelds and for explanatory tasks whose major questions are still
“in process”, and just the kinds of judgements we should seek for
limited, fallible, and error-prone scientists.
A system which is aggregative for a given decomposition is
almost trivially mechanistically explicable: the parts all have the
property in question, and enter into the explanation of how the
system has it in the same simple way. Relationships with other
parts are usually either monadic (i.e., nonexistent) or of relatively
low order, and would tend to meet strong conditions of symmetry
and homogeneity. The system would be relatively uninteresting: its
parts would show no functional differentiation. But none of these
conditions follow from saying that the properties of a system are
mechanistically explicable. So to say that the behavior of a system
is totally explicable in terms of the behavior of its parts isnot to say
that it is an aggregative function of the parts. (The inference does


=== PAGE 21 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 289
go the other way. That might contribute to the confusion. But given
the rarity of true aggregativity, even this fallacious inference doesn’t
explain much: there are too few occasions to invoke it.)
But now suppose that early in the investigation of a system (say,
an organism) we think we know a good set of parts (say, the collec-
tion of its genes). If we don’t yet know the diversity of ways in
which these genes may interact with each other and with the phys-
ical conditions in the the organism (on all of the relevant size and
time scales), we may tend to treat their interactions as all alike. We
may do so either in a ﬁrst-order simpliﬁed model of the system,
which we simulate or analyze to explore its behavior, or in the “out
of sight out of mind” blissful ignorance which often accompanies
our view of a complex task before we have really gotten into it. In
either case we are likely to overestimate how aggregative the system
is, how simple it will be to understand its behavior, and to make the
most simple-minded reductionistic claims about what can be learned
from studying it at the lowest (or indeed only at the lowest!) level.
(My 1979, 1980b, and 1985 provide examples of how reductionistic
approaches often involve these assumptions, and how they emerge
– and can cause trouble in seemingly benign applications of often
effective reductionistic problem-solving heuristics.)
Thus, e.g., I think this – the aggregative character of models at
early stages of a mechanistic investigation – explains (1) the charac-
teristic oversimpliﬁcations in early claims made for the human
genome project, and (2) the subsequent (necessary) broadening of
the project to make it viable. (This included adding parallel compar-
ative studies of a diversity of genomes of other species at different
phylogenetic distances to determine what varies across those species
groups, and to get some idea of its signiﬁcance; and developmental
and physiological studies at a variety of levels of organization of
the expression of the genetic traits of interest). It also explains (and
predicts) (3) the increasing moderation of claims for what we will
learn from it. Finally, (4) if I am right, explanations which come out
of it will also be far more contextual and qualiﬁed (and may involve
the discovery of qualitatively new kinds of mechanisms and inter-
actions). This pattern – these four changes in the character of the
program and the claims made for it – are not only explicable after
the fact, but predictable in advance, given the normally applicable


=== PAGE 22 ===

290 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
reductionistic research strategies and their biases (see 1980b and
1985).
This pattern is not a necessary one. There are many technologies
[e.g., the computer, the automobile, or the airplane] for which early
projections – indeed, projections at almost every stage – have under-
estimated their potential for development and their impacts on our
way of life. So it is striking that we can explain this one, and how
common it is.
I neglect here the obvious political purposes served by exag-
gerating how much could be achieved with how little. They aren’t
needed to explain the phenomena, which arise simply out of
cognitive biases, but the phenomena are also often overdetermined,
and reductionistic claims often do serve political ends, inside and
outside of academe. (And most of the offending claimants do (or
should, if they are honest) start with the disclaimer, “In principle,
::: ”. Yes, the road to hellis paved with good intentions!)
11 If we are
to assess these claims fairly, we must recognize the limitations of
our knowledge, the heuristic character of our tools, and the speciﬁc
biases which are likely to result from their application. Such wide-
spread knowledge earlier of how we tend to construct models and
theories, and how we make claims in contexts of partial ignorance
might well have produced a better project, pursued at a more reason-
able pace, with more realistic ends, and at lower cost to the other
ﬁelds which we will have to support and develop in any case in
order to decode the texts we ﬁnd in “the book of life”.
But this chastening scepticism about reductionism appears to
run counter to the facts. If this is true, why should reductionist
methodologies have appeared to be so successful? In 1985, I noted
four general properties of heuristic principles,
12 the last of which is
particularly relevant here. A heuristic principle succeeds in part by
transforming a problem into a different but related problem (which
is easier to solve). But if it does so very effectively, there will be a
strong tendency to identify the new problem as the old one – saying,
“Now that we’ve clariﬁed the problem so that it can be solved,::: ”o r
some such thing! In this way quite substantial changes in a paradigm
can be hidden – particularly a cumulative string of such changes,
each too small to be regarded as “fundamental”. I think that this
kind of ex post facto reiﬁcation is central to the exaggeratedly high


=== PAGE 23 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 291
opinion we have of reductionistic methodologies, and more gener-
ally to the largely mistaken belief that work elaborating a paradigm
is merely playing out options which are already given.
But wait a minute, hasn’t the reduction succeeded? Well, it has
and it hasn’t: its successes are often genuine, but quite misleading
– it will often succeed via a series of subtle shifts in the question
such that important aspects of the original question have not been
answered. And by shifting them outside of the bounds of the new
science, there will be a natural tendency to downgrade their impor-
tance. We work on problems that yield to our methods, and we all
have a tendency to overestimate their power, and the importance and
centrality of our own ﬁeld. (It’s what we know best after all!) Scient-
ists share with others a bias which is quite general across ﬁelds and
contexts.
13 So questions that can’t be addressed using our own very
successful methods must be not very scientiﬁc, not very important,
or both! This sounds like it’s worth a good laugh, but not so fast: it
may be even more dangerous than failing to solve a problem – we
may now even fail to recognize that it exists!
The whole of embryology was differentiated out of the study of
heredity with the rise of classical transmission genetics, between
1900 and 1926, even though developmental phenomena had ﬁgured
centrally there earlier, and were regarded through much of this
period as important constraints on the form of acceptable theories
of heredity.
14 Morgan was originally sceptical of Mendelism for
that very reason – until the spectacular successes of their research
program led them to simply ignore its quite paradoxical inadequa-
cies on that score. Development again achieved the promise of a
resurgence in genetics in the early 1960’s with the discovery of
the lac operon – the ﬁrst account of how a gene could perform
a complex and conditional control function in the expression of a
trait, but a simplistic and incorrect promise it turned out to be. The
genetics of elephants (or any eucaryote) was not like the genetics
of bacteria after all – especially not the developmental genetics
of metazoa. Development is now again at center stage (acceler-
ating since the late 1970’s or early 1980’s) for various reasons.
Important aspects of it can now be studied molecularly, and we have
discovered some extremely powerful and general large-scale gene
complexes (the related HOM, HOX and DHOX families) which


=== PAGE 24 ===

292 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
give us a handle on many more (but far from all) developmental
phenomena. Is this a triumph for reductionism? In part, but it has
succeeded in this by entraining and using a successively broader
diversity of kinds of data and theories from other sources, and recog-
nizing a whole new cast of causal entities. This very diversity of
major players makes it much less reductionistic. The methodology
(and even more, the rhetoric!) are still quite reductionistic (in the
character of the heuristics used), but neither the ontology nor the
epistemology are anywhere close!
NOTES
* This paper is part of a longer one prepared originally for a festschrift for
Richard Levins. The paper in that extended form will appear in my (2002).
My thoughts here owe a lot to 2 writers – Ernest Nagel and Richard Levins.
Some distinctions are noted by Nagel in his classic, “Wholes, Sums and
Organic Unities” – though we diverge in what we make of them. Levins’
germinal essay “Complexity” (1973) and his distinction between aggregate,
engineering, and evolved systems, was the immediate stimulus for this
analysis and also inﬂuenced my 1974. Stuart Glennan, Peter Taylor, Bill
Bechtel, Paul Humphries, and those acknowledged in my 1986 gave useful
comments on prior versions.
1. Herbert Simon’s new essay on complexity (1996, chapter 7) adopts this view
of emergence. See also Kauffman, 1992.
2. Wimsatt, 1976a, 1976b, 1979. For recent similar views, see Sarkar 1992,
Waters 1990 and Bechtel and Richardson 1993. Some characterized by
Waters (1990) as anti-reductionists are better viewed as opposing the standard
philosophical analysis of reduction. (I do not cede ownership of the term to
philosophers.) Most scientists see reductionism as a species of explanatory
mechanistic materialism which may not even involve laws or theories, as
those terms are traditionally understood by philosophers. (See the discussion
of “particularistic mechanism” in Wimsatt, 1992.)
3. For a complementary account of the relation between causation and mechan-
istic explanation, see Glennan 1992.
4. There is a curious mis-match here: such philosophers also talk about
“supervenience” – a relation between a system property and lower-level
realizations of that property in which there is a many-one relationship
from micro-states to that higher level property, using micro-state variables
that are solely intra-systemic. Now called “narrow supervenience”, this is
contrasted with “wide” supervenience, where the mappings depend also
on the context of the system (e.g. Rosenberg (1978) on ﬁtness). Philos-
ophers of mind often mistakenly see “wide supervenience” as irrelevant to


=== PAGE 25 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 293
their problems. Reductionistic biases (Wimsatt, 1980b) can lead us to think
that narrow supervenience will do when “wide supervenience” is required.
So we slip into treating ﬁtness as a property of organisms (or even of
genes), rather than as a relation between organism and environment. Moss
(1992) catalogues ways in which we have attributed properties to genes
that are properly characteristics of the cellular milieu or larger entities.
McClamrock (1995) argues that our Cartesian heritage has mislead us –
seeing consciousness as an organismally or computationally “inner” prop-
erty, rather than a fundamentally relational set of properties of a developed,
socialized, embodied brain (Wimsatt, 1976a gives an early statement of this
view).
5. As urged by Sarkar (1989, 1992) this corrects earlier analyses (1976a, 1976b),
where I called an account reductionistic if there were a mechanism at any
level or combination of them which explained the phenomena – even if it
included mechanisms at a higher level or external to the system in question.
In drawing the distinction, I would now require explicitly relativising an
account to two (or more) reference levels: (1) a bottom level – the lowest
level at which speciﬁc parts of a mechanism must be invoked to explain the
phenomena (so an explanation of “position effect” requires characterizing an
operon as a genetic control structure and how it works, but not the atomic
physics accounting for the relevant electron orbitals which yield the binding
which occurs.) (2) a top level – drawing the system boundaries broadly
enough so that all relevant parts of the mechanisms involved are included.
[Still broader things may sometimes be required, but taken for granted, as
features of solar and planetary dynamics may be crucial to evolutionary
processes on a variety of different time scales.] This “multi-level reduction-
istic analysis” picks out the appropriate levels for objects, processes, and
phenomena, and explicates their relations to complete the explanatory task
with no further mystery.
6. These are relevant and important criteria, but may not be completely inde-
pendent, and thus fail to be separately necessary (in all combinations). They
seem sufﬁcient, but I’d welcome additional sensible requirements: each gives
new handles on tough cases or special circumstances. This ‘heuristic’ attitude,
ﬁrst urged upon me 25 years ago by Dick Levins, makes sense – aggregat-
ivity emerges in most cases as highly conditional and qualiﬁed, with little
or no foundational signiﬁcance. But it may have lots of practical import: by
choosing decompositions of the system to maximize their ﬁt, these criteria
can help us choose good boundaries around objects and parts of objects,
acting as tools of discovery in theory formulation and construction .S e e
below.
7. Some philosophers distinguish synthetic identities from realizations or
instanciations. It doesn’t matter here, but see my 1994, note 30, pp. 228–229.
8. Addition, multiplication, and other operations (e.g., logical disjunction) could
be appropriate in different contexts. The context of the parts properties, the
system property, the question being asked, the purposes of the investiga-


=== PAGE 26 ===

294 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
tion, and the relevant applicable theories can all play important roles in such
judgements.
9. This realization was brought most strikingly to my attention by Sergio
Martinez in the context of a historical discussion of and argument for the
robustness of primary qualities. He points out that in the 17th century some-
thing very much like aggregativity was used, together with robustness, as a
criterion for natural kinds. See Martinez, 1992.
10. These approximations are endemic in the formal sciences, and in all attempts
I know to build mathematical models of phenomena. Ramsey (1990) gives an
analysis of the role of approximations in theory construction and justiﬁcation.
11. In 1976b I discuss the purported meaning and testability of these in principle
claims, and show that they are better seen as corollaries of identity (or local-
ization) claims which don’t make impossible demands on our computational
capabilities.
12. More recently (Griesemer and Wimsatt, 1989), I have added a ﬁfth – the
explicit recognition that heuristics are purpose-relative–they are normally
designed and introduced for a given purpose, which they could be expected
to perform quite well. With this success, they are likely to be applied in other
contexts where they do less well. Knowing the original purpose of a heuristic
(or tool) may thus be very useful in determining the conditions under which
(and why) it is likely to break down.
13. Abbott (2001) provides a revealing analysis of a related phenomenon.
His example dealt with tendencies of the very rich and very poor to see
themselves as closer to the norm than they actually were, but his mech-
anism seems importantly genralizeable. His proposed mechanism involves
tendencies to exaggerate perceived differences among positions near our
own, and contracting differences among positions further away. This leads
to systematic and predictable metrical distortions exaggerating the cent-
rality/importance of one’s own position. [Indeed, just such distortions char-
acterize our visual worlds]. I urge that this is a quite general property of
perspectives and of any perspectival view of the world.
14. See Allen’s (1979) biography of Morgan, Mainschein’s (1991) study of
Wilson, Conklin, Morgan, and Harrison, Darden (1992) on early theory
construction in genetics, and Wimsatt (1992) on the early history of linkage
mapping.
REFERENCES
Abbott, A.: 2001, Chaos of disciplines. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ch.
6. This analysis will appear as ch. 8 of his forthcoming book, Chaos among the
Disciplines.
Allen, G.: 1979, Thomas Hunt Morgan: The Man and His Science . Princeton:
Princeton University press.


=== PAGE 27 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 295
Bechtel, W. and R.C. Richardson: 1992, Discovering Complexity: Decomposi-
tion and Localization as Scientiﬁc Research Strategies . Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Callebaut, W.: 1993, Taking the Naturalistic Turn, or How Real Philosophy of
Science is Done. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Cartwright, N.: 1983, How the Laws of Physics Lie. London: Cambridge U. P.
Darden, L.: 1992,Theory Change in Science: Strategies from Mendelian Genetics.
New York: Oxford U. P.
Dennett, D.: 1995, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Downes, S. M.: 1992, The Importance of Models in Theorizing: A Deﬂationary
Semantic View. In D. Hull, M. Forbes and K. Okruhlik (eds.), PSA-1992.E a s t
Lansing: The Philosophy of Science Association, 1: 142–153.
Glennan, S. S.: 1992, Mechanisms, Models, and Causation , Ph. D. dissertation,
Department of Philosophy, The University of Chicago.
Griesemer, J. and W. Wimsatt: 1989, Picturing Weismannism – Case Study of
Conceptual Evolution. In M. Ruse (ed.), What Philosophy of Biology is Not ,
(Festschrift for David Hull) Dordrecht: Martinus-Nijhoff, 75–137.
Kauffman, S.: 1971, Articulation of Parts Explanations in Biology and the
Rational Search for Them. In R. Buck and R.S. Cohen (eds.), PSA-1970.
Dordrecht: Reidel, 257–272.
Kauffman, S.: 1993, The Origins of Order: Self-organization and Selection in
Evolution. London: Oxford U. P.
Levins, R.: 1966, The Strategy of Model Building in Population Biology,
American Scientist: 421–431.
Levins, R.: 1968, Evolution in Changing Environments , Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Levins, R.: 1973, Complexity. In C.H. Waddington (ed.), Towards a Theoretical
Biology, v. 3. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press
Levins, R. and R.C. Lewontin: 1985, The Dialectical Biologist , Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Lewontin, R.C.: 1978, Adaptation, Scientiﬁc American, September.
Mainschein, J.: 1991, Transforming Traditions in American Biology, 1880–1915.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University press.
Martinez, S.: 1992, Robustness and Objectivity, draft ms. in English, 1992
(Spanish version published in Dianoia, (Annual of Instituto de Investigaciones
Filosoﬁcas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico)), 1992.
McClamrock, R.: 1991, Marr’s Three Levels: A Re-Evaluation, Minds and
Machines 1: 185–196.
Moss, L.: 1992, A Kernel of Truth? On the Reality of the Genetic Program. In
D. Hull, M. Forbes and K. Okruhlik (eds.), PSA-1992, volume 1. East Lansing:
The Philosophy of Sciences Association, 335–348.
Nagel, E.: 1961, The Structure of Science, New York: Harcourt Brace & World.
Ramsey, J.L.: 1990,Meta-Stable States: The Justiﬁcation of Approximative Proce-
dures in Chemical Kinetics, 1923–1947 . Ph.D., Committee on Conceptual
Foundations of Science, University of Chicago.


=== PAGE 28 ===

296 WILLIAM C. WIMSATT
Rosenberg, A.: 1978, The Supervenience of Biological Concepts, Philosophy of
Science 45: 368–386.
Sarkar, S.: 1992, Models of Reduction and Categories of Reductionism, Synthese
91: 167–194.
Schank, J.C. and W.C. Wimsatt: 1993, ModelBuilding 2.0, Simulation software
to run on the Macintosh family for teaching model building and its critical
analysis. Part of the BioQUEST library of Strategic Simulations. New York:
Academic Press.
Simon, H.A.: 1962, The Architecture of Complexity, reprinted in hisThe Sciences
of the Artiﬁcial. MIT Press, 1981. 3rd. ed., 1996.
Wade, M.J.: 1996, Adaptation in Subdivided Populations: Kin Selection and Inter-
demic Selection. In M. Rose and G. Lauder (eds.), Adaptation.N e wY o r k :
Academic Press, 381–405.
Waters, K.: 1990, Why the Anti-reductionist Consensus Won’t Survive the Case
of Classical Mendelian Genetics. In A. Fine, M. Forbes and L. Wessels (eds.),
PSA-1990. East Lansing: The Philosophy of Science Association, 1: 125–139.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1971, Some Problems with the Concept of ‘Feedback’. In R.C.
Buck and R.S. Cohen (eds.), PSA-1970 (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, vol. 8), Dordrecht: Reidel, 241–256.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1974, Complexity and Organization. In R. Buck and R.S. Cohen
(eds.), PSA-1972, Boston Studies in Phil. Sci. 20: 67–86.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1976a, Reductionism, Levels of Organization and the Mind-Body
Problem. In G.G. Globus, G. Maxwell and I. Savodnik (eds.), Consciousness
and the Brain. New York: Plenum, 199–267.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1976b, Reductive Explanation – A Functional Account. In A.C.
Michalos, C.A. Hooker, G. Pearce and R.S. Cohen (eds.), PSA-1974 (Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, volume 30) Dordrecht: Reidel, 671–710.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1979, Reduction and Reductionism. In P.D. Asquith and H.
Kyberg (eds.), Current Research in Philosophy of Science . East Lansing,
Michigan: The Philosophy of Science Association, 352–377.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1980b, Reductionistic Research Strategies and their Biases in the
Units of Selection Controversy. In T. Nickles (ed.), Scientiﬁc Discovery-vol.II:
Case Studies. Dordrecht: Reidel. 213–259.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1981a, Robustness, Reliability and Overdetermination. In R.
Brewer and B. Collins (eds.), Scientiﬁc Inquiry and the Social Sciences .S a n
Francisco, Jossey-Bass. (festschrift for Donald Campbell)
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1985, Heuristics and the Study of Human Behavior. In D.W.
Fiske and R. Shweder (eds.), Metatheory in Social Science: Pluralisms and
Subjectivities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 293-314.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1986, Forms of Aggregativity. In A. Donagan, N. Perovich and M.
Wedin (eds.), Human Nature and Natural Knowledge, (Festschrift for Marjorie
Grene), Dordrecht: Reidel, 259–293.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1987, False Models as means to Truer Theories. In M. Nitecki
and A. Hoffman (eds.), Neutral Models in Biology. London: Oxford University
Press, 23–55.


=== PAGE 29 ===

EMERGENCE AND REDUCTIONISMS 297
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1992, Golden Generalities and Co-opted Anomalies: Haldane
vs. Muller and the Drosophila Group on the Theory and Practice of Linkage
mapping. In S. Sarkar (ed.), The Foundars of Evolutionary Genetics. Martinus-
Nijhoff, Dordrecht, 107–166.
Wimsatt, W.C. and J.C. Schank: 1993, Modelling – A Primer , 230 page lab
manual/textbook accompanying BioQUEST software (Schank and Wimsatt,
1993) to teach model building and its critical analysis using as examples single
species growth equations (logistic and minimum-density limited logistic) and a
model of blending inheritance, showing that we can use false models to build
better ones. New York: Academic Press.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1994, The Ontology of Complex Systems: Levels, Perspectives,
and Causal Thickets. In M. Matthen and R. Ware (eds.), Biology and Society:
Reﬂections on Methodology, Canadian Journal of Philosophy 20: 207–274.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 1997, Functional Organization, Functional Analogy, and Func-
tional Inference, Evolution and Cognition 3(2): 102–133.
Wimsatt, W.C.: 2002, Re-Engineering Philosophy for Limited Beings: Piecewise
Approximations to Reality. Cambridege: Harvard U. P.
Department of Philosophy
Committee on Evolutionary Biology and
Committee on the Conceptual Foundations of Science
University of Chicago
E-mail: w-wimsatt@uchicago.edu


=== PAGE 30 ===
