--- Page 2 ---

EVERY THING MUST GO

--- Page 3 ---

This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 4 ---

Every Thing Must Go
Metaphysics Naturalized
JAMES LADYMAN
and
DON ROSS
with
DAVID SPURRETT
and
JOHN COLLIER
1

--- Page 5 ---

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© James Ladyman, Don Ross, David Spurrett, and John Collier 2007
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2007
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
Biddles Ltd, King’s Lynn, Norfolk
ISBN 978–0–19– 927619–6
135791 08642

--- Page 6 ---

in the case of metaphysics we ﬁnd this situation: through the form of its
works it pretends to be something that it is not
Rudolf Carnap
ant is a mass term for anteaters
Daniel Dennett

--- Page 7 ---

For Caragh and Nelleke

--- Page 8 ---

Preface
This is a polemical book. One of its main contentions is that contemporary
analytic metaphysics, a professional activity engaged in by some extremely
intelligent and morally serious people, fails to qualify as part of the enlightened
pursuit of objective truth, and should be discontinued. We think it is impossible
to argue for a point like this without provoking some anger. Suggesting that
a group of highly trained professionals have been wasting their talents—and,
worse, sowing systematic confusion about the nature of the world, and how to
ﬁnd out about it—isn’t something one can do in an entirely generous way. Let
us therefore stress that we wrote this book not in a spirit of hostility towards
philosophy or our fellow philosophers, but rather the opposite. We care a great
deal about philosophy, and are therefore distressed when we see its reputation
harmed by its engagement with projects and styles of reasoning we believe bring
it into disrepute, especially among scientists. We recognize that we may be
regarded as a bit rough on some other philosophers, but our targets are people
with considerable inﬂuence rather than novitiates. We think the current degree
of dominance of analytic metaphysics within philosophy is detrimental to the
health of the subject, and make no apologies for trying to counter it.
Lest the reader suppose on the basis of the above remarks that the whole book
is a campaign of aggressive destruction, we emphasize that they describe only
part of the ﬁrst chapter. Having argued there that analytic metaphysics as it is
now practised is irrelevant to our metaphysical project, we spend the rest of the
book attempting to encourage truly natural istic metaphysics by example. For
reasons related to our naturalism, and stated early in the text, we expect that
our particular positive account of the nature of the world will be deemed mainly
or perhaps even entirely incorrect by future philosophers who will know future
science. This is likely to be the fate of any generalizations of wide scope based on
limited empirical observations. But we hope the kind of metaphysic we construct
here—one motivated by currently pursued, speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypotheses, and
having as its sole aim to bring these hypotheses advanced by the various special
sciences together into a comprehensive world-view—will go on being constructed
by others for as long as science itself is carried out.
The structure of the book is as follows. Chapter 1, as indicated above, is
partly destructive in aim. It is intended to persuade the reader that standard
analytic metaphysics (or ‘neo-scholastic’ metaphysics as we call it) contributes
nothing to human knowledge and, where it has any impact at all, systematically
misrepresents the relative signiﬁcance of what we do know on the basis of science.
We go on to explain and defend our particular form of naturalism, and our
view of the relationship between physics and the rest of science. This is the most

--- Page 9 ---

viii Preface
accessible chapter of the book, and it is possible that some readers, who are more
interested in philosophers’ attitudes towards science than in metaphysics per se,
may want to read only it.
Chapter 2, by contrast, will seem to most philosophers to be the most
conventional part of the book. Here we assemble foundations for the metaphysics
to come on the basis of a particular position, ‘ontic structural realism’ (OSR),
that we defend as the best synthesis of several decades of reﬂection and argument
in the philosophy of science on the debate between empiricists and scientiﬁc
realists, particularly in the light of the history of science and the relationships
between successful theories and their successors. This provides the conceptual
framework within which we then consider relationships among contemporary
theories in different sciences so as to construct a uniﬁed world picture.
Chapters 3 and 4 constitute the heart of our positive naturalistic metaphysics,
so we hope the reader will indulge their considerable length and complexity. In
Chapter 3 we ask which among possible unifying principles are motivated by
advanced physical theory as we now ﬁnd it. We furthermore show how OSR is
motivated directly by this physical theory, thus exemplifying our principle from
Chapter 1 that the input for philosophizing must come from science. In Chapter 4
we inquire as to how the general image of reality suggested by contemporary
(fundamental) physics can be reconciled—composed into one world with—the
many special sciences that appear to have quite different theoretical structures
and commitments. On the basis of this investigation we propose a theory of
ontology—of what there is—that we call Rainforest Realism (RR) because of
the relatively lush ontology it propounds.
In Chapter 5 we show how our naturalistic metaphysics, which consists in the
combination of OSR and RR, achieves consilience among a wide variety of facts
about the sciences, including the ways in which they investigate and understand
causal claims, the status of scientiﬁc la ws, and the principles of classiﬁcation and
arrangements of reality into types that scientists use as they discover and reﬁne
predictive and explanatory generalizations. The combined position, our positive
naturalistic metaphysics, is called ‘ Information-Theoretic Structural Realism’
(ITSR), for reasons that will become evident. In Chapter 5 the reader who
struggled through the often dense material in Chapters 3 and 4 will receive her
payoff, as she sees the progress that ITSR permits us to make on a range of major
preoccupations in the philosophy of science.
Finally, the brief Chapter 6 orients our metaphysic in the context of work by
other philosophers that is closest in positive content to ours. We ﬁrst ask how our
general account differs from that of Kant, since strong afﬁnities will have occurred
to some readers. A similar question, and for similar reasons, is asked about our
relationship to the philosophy of Daniel Dennett. We next consider traditional
points of issue between realism and empiricism, showing that we side with realists
on some, with empiricists on others, and that we reject the underlying terms of
debate on still others. At this point we explain why it is appropriate to regard our

--- Page 10 ---

Preface ix
view as a kind of ‘neo-positivism’, despite our allowing for the signiﬁcance of a
minimalist positive metaphysics where the positivists insisted on none. Finally,
before concluding, we note the arguments of an ultimately anti-naturalist theistic
philosopher who argues for supernaturalism on the grounds that if one doesn’t
adopt it one will be forced to a theory exactly like the one we give in this book.
The theist considers this the basis for a conclusion by reductio; we agree, but
make the opposite judgement about what is absurd.
This book began as a collaboration among four authors. As the project
developed, the two of us (Ladyman and Ross) found our thinking shifting in a
more empiricist direction than any of us had started from, and under the impetus
of this we increasingly drove the project in a direction of our own. The other two
original authors, however, David Spurrett and John Collier, were so important as
consultants and researchers throughout the project that they are acknowledged
on the cover and title page. They also wrote parts of three chapters, as is indicated
in the Contents.
Our next greatest debt of thanks goes to Nelleke Bak, who checked the
entire manuscript for consistency (while also formatting our references). This
is obviously more important in a co-authored work than is normally the case
for a philosophy manuscript. This is a long book that states many propositions;
without Nelleke’s diligence and acumen, we would have produced a book that
more than once proclaimed P and∼ P, and would thus have implicitly announced
every proposition altogether.
The following colleagues and friends read our ﬁrst draft and commented tren-
chantly and constructively on it in detail: Jimmy Doyle, Katherine Hawley, Chris
Honey, Harold Kincaid, Ausonio Marras, Alex Rosenberg, Emma Ruttkamp,
and David Wallace, and an anonymous reader for Oxford University Press. The
book is very much better than it was thanks to their assistance, though we repeat
the standard mantra of authors tha t the remaining errors were made at our
insistence.
For their long-standing inﬂuence on our ideas, for discussion of many of the
issues we address, for their encouragement of the project, and for comments
on speciﬁc parts of the text, we thank Dan Dennett and Bas van Fraassen. In
a similar vein, Collier acknowledges Cliff Hooker and Kai Neilson. The other
great intellectual debt that we owe is to Steven French for the breadth and depth
of his work on the subject matter of Chapters 2 and 3 and its profound inﬂuence
on Ladyman. Much of our articulation and defence of OSR is derived from
previously published joint work by French and Ladyman. We are also grateful
to the following people for discussions and other help concerning some or all
of the issues we address: Alexander Bird, Harvey Brown, Jeremy Butterﬁeld,
Michael Esfeld, Hannes Leitgeb, Samir Okasha, Oliver Pooley, Simon Saunders,
and Finn Spicer.
We had institutional support for which we are grateful. Ladyman enjoyed the
support of a Philip Leverhulme Prize that enabled a trip to South Africa to work

--- Page 11 ---

x Preface
with Ross to ﬁnalize the manuscript. Ross enjoyed an appointment as a Benjamin
Meeker Visiting Professor at the University of Bristol in 2004 that facilitated
the main collaboration with Ladyman. Ro ss also received substantial travel and
other research ﬁnancing from the Center for Ethics and Values in the Sciences
at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. He also enjoyed support from the
University Research Committee of the University of Cape Town.
We have presented our work in progress at meetings in Bristol, Sydney, Halifax,
Oxford, Pietermaritzburg, and St Johns, and extend our thanks accordingly. This
project was conceived and sustained at the annual International Philosophy of
Science Conference held each year at the Inter-University Centre in the wondrous
World Heritage Site of Dubrovnik, Croatia. We heartily thank the Directors of
the workshop and the people of Dubrovnik for their repeated hospitality.
JL & DR
Cape Town, South Africa, August 2006

--- Page 12 ---

Contents
1. In Defence of Scientism 1
Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett
2. Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism 66
James Ladyman and Don Ross
3. Ontic Structural Realism and the Philosophy of Physics 130
James Ladyman and Don Ross
4. Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science 190
Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier
5. Causation in a Structural World 258
Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett
6. Conclusion—Philosophy Enough 298
Don Ross and James Ladyman
References 311
Index 339

--- Page 13 ---

This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 14 ---

1
In Defence of Scientism
Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett
1.1 NATURALISTIC METAPHYSICS
The aim of this book is to defend a radically naturalistic metaphysics. By this we
mean a metaphysics that is motivated exclusively by attempts to unify hypotheses
and theories that are taken seriously by contemporary science. For reasons to
be explained, we take the view that no alternative kind of metaphysics can be
regarded as a legitimate part of our collective attempt to model the structure of
objective reality.
One of our most distinguished predecessors in this attitude is Wilfrid Sellars.
He expressed a naturalistic conception of soundly motivated metaphysics when
he said that the philosopher’s aim should be ‘knowing one’s way around with
respect to the subject matters of all the special [scientiﬁc] disciplines’ and ‘building
bridges’ between them (1962, 35). It might of course be wondered whether or
why science has any role for non-specialist bridge-builders. The argument that
there is a useful such role must, for the naturalist, be by way of demonstration.
We aim to provide such a demonstration later in the book (Chapters 4 and 5),
when we turn to positive claims and build speciﬁc bridges. First, however, there
is work of a destructive sort that needs to be done.
There is a rich tradition of naturalistic metaphysics in Western philosophy.
Competing strongly with this tradition—often within the body of a single
philosopher’s work—is a tradition which aims at domesticating scientiﬁc dis-
coveries so as to render them compatible with intuitive or ‘folk’ pictures of
structural composition and causation. Such domestication is typically presented
as providing ‘understanding’. This usage may be appropriate given one everyday
sense of ‘understanding’ as ‘rendering more familiar’. However, we are interested
here in a sense of ‘understanding’ that is perhaps better characterized by the

--- Page 15 ---

2 In Defence of Scientism
word ‘explanation’, where an explanation must be true (at least in its most gen-
eral claims). We argue that a given metaphysic’s achievement of domestication
furnishes no evidence at all that the metaphysic in question is true, and thus no
reason for believing that it explains anything.
Quine (1969), in arguing for the naturalization of epistemology, claimed
that the evolutionary processes that designed people should have endowed
us with cognition that reliably tracks truth, on the grounds that believing
truth is in general more conducive to ﬁtness than believing falsehood. This
is an empirical hypothesis, and it may well be a sound one. However, it
does not imply that our everyday or habitual intuitions and cognition are
likely to track truths reliably across all domains of inquiry. We believe it
to be probable that human intelligence, and the collective representational
technologies (especially public languages) that constitute the basis for what
is most biologically special about that intelligence (see Clark 1997, 2004,
Ross forthcoming b), evolved mainly to enable us to navigate complex social
coordination games (Byrne and Whiten 1988, 1997; Whiten and Byrne 1997;
Ross 2005, forthcoming a). People are probably also relatively reliable barometers
of the behavioural patterns of animals they get to spend time observing, at making
navigational inferences in certain sorts of environments (but not in others), and
at anticipating aspects of the trajectories of medium-sized objects moving at
medium speeds. However, proﬁciency in inferring the large-scale and small-
scale structure of our immediate environment, or any features of parts of the
universe distant from our ancestral stomping grounds, was of no relevance to
our ancestors’ reproductive ﬁtness. Hence, there is no reason to imagine that our
habitual intuitions and inferential responses are well designed for science or for
metaphysics.
Fortunately, people learned to represent t he world and reason mathematic-
ally—that is, in a manner that enables us to abstract away from our familiar
environment, to a degree that has increased over time as mathematics has
developed—and this has allowed us to achieve scientiﬁc knowledge. Since this
knowledge can be incorporated into uniﬁed pictures, we also can have some
justiﬁed metaphysics. Based as it is on incomplete science, this metaphysics
probably is not true. However, if it is at least motivated by our most care-
ful science at time t, then it is the best metaphysics we can have at t. We
will argue for a metaphysics consistent with and motivated by contemporary
science by, in the ﬁrst place, contrasting it with the kind of metaphysics
that has arisen through the tradition of domestication. There are various
ways of trying to discover the character of the latter. One way that is not
very reliable (because too dependent on unveriﬁable conjectures about his-
tory) is to ask what metaphysical pictures might have worked well for our
early hominid ancestors. Two better ways infer our habitual tendencies in
metaphysical reasoning from assumptions encoded in natural languages, and
from the efforts of our most important philosophers when they work in the

--- Page 16 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 3
spirit of domestication, as most do some of the time and some do all of
the time.
Lakoff and Johnson (1980) and Lakoff (1987) have done pioneering work
at uncovering habitual metaphysics, at least among English speakers, by the
linguistic route. They document the extent to which the deep metaphors of
English, which govern everyday inferences made in that language, are structured
according to an implicit doctrine of ‘containment’.¹ On this doctrine, the world is
a kind of container bearing objects that change location and properties over time.
These objects cause things to happen by interacting directly with one another.
Prototypically, they move each other about by banging into one another. At least
as important to the general picture, they themselves are containers in turn, and
their properties and causal dispositions are to be explained by the properties and
dispositions of the objects they contain (and which are often taken to comprise
them entirely).
Though we are closely informed about the deep metaphorical structure of only
a tiny proportion of human languages, it seems likely that the structure described
above is reﬂected in most of at least the Western ones, including the ancient
Western ones. It may thus be thought unsurprising that the earliest known
Western philosophy puzzled itself over ways in which the apparently endless
regress of containment might be stopped. Thales suggested that everything is
ultimately ‘made of ’ water. Other early philosophers suggested air and ﬁre
instead. Popular consensus eventually settled down, for a long time, on the idea
that all corporeal things are made of mixtures of four basic elements—earth,
water, air, and ﬁre—with differences among kinds of things to be explained
by reference to differences in elemental proportions. Then science replaced
the four elements with tiny, indivisible, ultimate particles—ﬁrst early modern
corpuscles, then atoms, then systems of subatomic particles still often conceived in
popular imagination as sub-microscopic solar systems, whose ‘stars’ and ‘orbiting
planets’ are supposedly the new ultimate constituents from which everything is
composed.
The modern mereology has in some ways strengthened the commitments of
the containment metaphor. Aristotle, famously, had a complex and multi-faceted
concept of causation. Causation to the modern domesticating metaphysician is,
by contrast, typically identiﬁed with what Aristotle called ‘efﬁcient causation’. A
characteristic of efﬁcient causation, in the context of the containment metaphor,
is that it is imagined to ‘ﬂow’ always from ‘inside out’. Thus the ultimate
constituents of the world that halt the regress of containment are also taken to
be the ultimate bearers of causal powers, which somehow support and determine
¹ Here are some of their examples of everyday English phrases that encode the implicit metaphysic
of containment: There was a lot of good running in the race; Halfway into the race Ir a no u to f
energy; How did Jerry get out of washing the windows?; Outside of washing the windows, what
else did you do?; He’s immersed in washing the windows right now; We’re out of trouble now; I’m
slowly getting into shape; He fell into a depression (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 31–2).

--- Page 17 ---

4 In Defence of Scientism
the whole ediﬁce of (often complex) causal relations that constitute the domain
of observable dynamics.
The metaphysics of domestication tends to consist of attempts to render
pieces of contemporary science—and, at least as often, simpliﬁed, mythical
interpretations of contemporary science—into terms that can be made sense of
by reference to the containment metaphor. That is, it seeks to account for the
world as ‘made of ’ myriad ‘little things’ in roughly the way that (some) walls
are made of bricks. Unlike bricks in walls, however, the little things are often
in motion. Their causal powers are usually understood as manifest in the effects
they have on each other when they collide. Thus the causal structure of the
world is decomposed by domesticating metaphysics into reverberating networks
of what we will call ‘microbangings’—the types of ultimate causal relations that
prevail amongst the basic types of little things, whatever exactly those turn out to
be. Metaphysicians, especially recently, are heavily preoccupied with the search
for ‘genuine causal oomph’, particularly in relation to what they perceive to be
the competition between different levels of reality. ² We will argue that this is
profoundly unscientiﬁc, and we will reject both the conception of causation and
levels of reality upon which it is based.
We will argue in this book that, in general, the domesticating metaphysics ﬁnds
no basis in contemporary science. Some successful science, and some reasonable
metaphysics, were done in the past on the basis of it. However, the attempt to
domesticate twenty-ﬁrst-century science by reference to homely images of little
particles that have much in common with seventeenth- and eighteenth-century
mechanistic and materialist metap hysics is forlorn. There are, we will argue, no
little things and no microbangings. Causation does not, in general, ﬂow from
the insides of containers to their outsides. The world is in no interesting ways
like a wall made of bricks in motion (that somehow manages not to fall apart),
or, in the more sophisticated extension of the metaphor dominant since modern
science, like a chamber enclosing the molecules of a gas. Indeed, it is no longer
helpful to conceive of either the world, or particular systems of the world that
we study in partial isolation, as ‘made of ’ anything at all. ³
As we will discuss in Chapter 5, the containment metaphor and its accompa-
nying ontology of little things and microbangings has more problems than its
mere failure to follow from science. It cannot be defended by someone on the
grounds that psychological repose and cultural familiarity are values that might
be defended against the objective truth. This is because the increasing heights of
abstraction in representation achieved by science over the past century have now
carried its investigations so far beyond the reaches of our ancestral habitation
that the containment metaphor can no longer be applied to the scientiﬁc image
² We take it that ‘causal oomph’ is a synonym of ‘biff ’ (Armstrong 2004). We discuss this in 5.2.
³ We do not intend here to impugn the accounts of composition that are ubiquitous in the
special sciences. Rather our target is the metaphysical idea of composition discussed further in 1.2.3.

--- Page 18 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 5
without doing at least as much violence to everyday intuitions as does our
denial of the metaphor. This emerges most clearly in the struggles of professional
domesticators—that is, (some) philosophers. Much recent metaphysics, in trying
to save a version of the habitual picture that has already been transformed by
half-digested science, ends up committed to claims that are as least as shocking to
common sense as anything we will urge. For example, Trenton Merricks (2001)
is led to deny the existence of tables and chairs because he thinks physics tells
us that they decompose without residue into atoms, and he denies that baseballs
can break windows because he thinks that windows must be broken by particular
atomic constituents of a baseball, thus rendering the effects of the ball as a whole
causally otiose. (We return to Merrick’s work in 1.2.3 below.)
According to the account we will give, science tells us many surprising things,
but it does not impugn the everyday status of objects like tables and baseballs.
These are, we will argue, aspects of the world with sufﬁcient cohesion at our scale
that a group of cognitive systems with practically motivated interest in tracking
them would sort them into types for book-keeping purposes. They are indeed
not the sorts of objects that physics itself will directly track as types; but this is a
special instance of the more general fact that physics, according to us, does not
model the world in terms of types of objects in the ﬁrst place.
We can imagine some readers worrying that our whole effort here will rely on
a premise to the effect that scientiﬁc objectivity is all that matters, or that if it
comes into conﬂict with our desire to feel at home in our own ‘Lebenswelt’ then
it is the second that must always give way. We depend on no such premise. People
who wish to explore the ways in which the habitual or intuitive anthropological
conceptual space is structured are invited to explore social phenomenology. We
can say ‘go in peace’ to Heideggerians, noting that it was entirely appropriate that
Heidegger did not attempt to base any elements of his philosophy on science,
and focused on hammers—things that are constituted as objects by situated,
practical activity—rather than atoms—things that are supposed by realists to
have their status as objects independently of our purposes—when he reﬂected on
objects. We, however, are interested in objective truth rather than philosophical
anthropology. Our quarrel will be with philosophers who claim to share this
interest, but then fail properly to pay attention to our basic source of information
about objective reality.
There is another set of philosophers who are broadly naturalistic in the sense
that, like us, they allow science priority over domesticating conceptual analysis,
but whose perspective ﬁts uncomfortably with our understanding of metaphysics
as consisting in uniﬁcation of science. These are philosophers such as Cartwright
(1999) and Dupré (1993) who argue, on the basis of reﬂections on the ontology
implied by science, that the world is not metaphysically uniﬁed. The objection
will naturally be raised for us that, by our deﬁnition of naturalistic metaphysics,
generation of arguments for disunity is not naturalistic metaphysical inquiry. We
indeed claim that if the world were fundamentally disuniﬁed, then discovery of

--- Page 19 ---

6 In Defence of Scientism
this would be tantamount to discovering that there is no metaphysical work to
be done: objective inquiry would start and stop with the separate investigations
of the mutually unconnected special sciences. By ‘fundamentally disuniﬁed’ we
refer to the idea that there is no overarching understanding of the world to be had;
the best account of reality we could establish would include regions or parts to
which no generalizations applied. Pressed by Lipton (2001), Cartwright (2002)
seems to endorse this. However, she admits that she does so (in preference to
non-fundamental disunity) not because ‘the evidence is … compelling either way’
(2002, 273) but for the sake of aesthetic considerations which ﬁnd expression in
the poetry of Gerald Manley Hopkins. Like Hopkins, Cartwright is a lover of ‘all
things counter, original, spare, strange’ (ibid). That is a striking motivation to be
sure, but it is clearly not a naturalistic one. Similarly, although Dupré’s arguments
are sometimes naturalistic, at least as often they are in service of domestication.
He frequently defends speciﬁc disunity hypotheses on the grounds that they
are politically or ethically preferable to unifying (‘imperialistic’) ones. (See
especially Dupré 2001, and Ross 2005, chs. 1 and 9.) The urge to try to
make the world as described by science safe for someone’s current political and
moral preferences may even be the main implicit motivation for most efforts at
domestication.
We must admit that the hypothesis that metaphysics is possible is itself a
metaphysical hypothesis, but this is a purely semantic point, arising simply from
the fact that in the normal arrangement of domains of inquiry, there is no
named level of abstraction beyond th e metaphysical. (By contrast, wondering
whether physics is uniﬁed is metaphysics, wondering whether chemistry is uniﬁed
is physics, and so on.) Our substantive claim is that the worthwhile work to
be done by naturalistic metaphysics consists in seeking uniﬁcation, but this
is not based on an analysis of ‘metaphysics’. Let us just stipulate, then, that
inquiry into the possibility or impossibility of metaphysics is ‘metametaphysics’.
Then naturalistic metametaphysics, we hold, s hould be based on naturalistic
metaphysics, which should in turn be based on science. At various points in
the discussion to come, we engage with naturalistic advocates of disunity as we
do with fellow naturalists in general. When we do, we will avoid pedantically
announcing ourselves as shifting into metametaphysics. Otherwise we will assume
that naturalistic metaphysics is possible, and that we are successfully doing some
of it here.
Jonathan Lowe (2002) has two arguments against naturalized metaphysics:
(i) ‘to the extent that a wholly naturalistic and evolutionary conception of human
beings seems to threaten the very possibility of metaphysical knowledge, it
equally threatens the very possibility ofscientiﬁc knowledge’ (6). Since natural
selection cannot explain how natural scientiﬁc knowledge is possible, the
fact that it cannot explain how m etaphysical knowledge is possible gives us
no reason to suppose that such knowledge is not possible.

--- Page 20 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 7
(ii) Naturalism depends upon metaphysical assumptions.
In response, we maintain that even if one granted the tendentious claim that
natural selection cannot explain how natural scientiﬁc knowledge is possible, we
have plenty of good reasons for thinking that we do have such knowledge. On
the other hand, we have no good reas ons for thinking that a priori metaphysical
knowledge is possible. With respect to Lowe’s second claim, it is enough to point
out that even if naturalism depends on metaphysical assumptions, the naturalist
can argue that the metaphysical assumptions in question are vindicated by the
success of science, by contrast with the metaphysical assumptions on which
autonomous metaphysics is based which are not vindicated by the success of
metaphysics since it can claim no such success.
1.2 NEO-SCHOLASTIC METAPHYSICS
In this section we describe the philosophical environment that motivates our
project. Our core complaint is that during the decades since the fall of logical
empiricism, much of what is regarded as ‘the metaphysics literature’ has proceeded
without proper regard for science. The picture is complicated, however, by
t h ef a c tt h a tm u c ha c t i v i t yi nw h a ti sc l a s s i ﬁ e da sp h i l o s o p h yo fs c i e n c ei s
also metaphysics, and most of this work is scientiﬁcally well informed. This
book is an exercise in metaphysics done as naturalistic philosophy of science
because we think that no other sort of metaphysics counts as inquiry into
the objective nature of the world. In this and the following few sections,
we aim to show why, despite the fact that our book is about metaphysics,
almost all of our discussion from Chapter 2 onward will engage with problems
and disputes emanating from the philosophy of science and from science
itself.
As long as science enjoys signiﬁcant prestige there will be attempts to
pass off as science ideological pursuits, such as intelligent design ‘theory’ ( sic)
and ‘hermeneutic economics’ (Addleson 1997), and attempts to challenge or
undermine the epistemic credentials of science. ⁴ We have nothing to add to the
contributions of those who have criticized these attempts.⁵Though we follow the
logical positivists and empiricists in concerning ourselves with the ‘demarcation
problem’, our concern here is not with populist pseudo-science. It is instead
with a sophisticated cousin of pseudo-science, pseudo-naturalist philosophy,
especially as this occurs in metaphysics. Espousal of ‘naturalism’ is widespread
in philosophy, but explicit criteria for being consistently naturalist are rare. In
1.3 below we provide a new formulation of the naturalist credo. First, in the
⁴ For example, Dupré (2001), Harris (2005).
⁵ Kitcher (1982) and Pennock (2000) are outstanding examples.

--- Page 21 ---

8 In Defence of Scientism
present section we sketch some of the historical background to the emergence of
‘neo-scholastic’ metaphysics, and in the next section we argue against it. ⁶
Around a century ago, Bertrand Russell rejected the dominant philosophical
idealism of his day, and most of the principles of speculative metaphysics that
had supported it. In its place he proposed and helped to develop an approach
to epistemology and metaphysics based on the logical analysis of claims justiﬁed
by empirical experience, particularly by empirical science. The logical positivists
brieﬂy carried Russell’s programme to extremes, believing that by reduction of all
empirically signiﬁcant statements to reports about sense-data they could do away
with metaphysics altogether. In this ambition they of course failed—not least
because one of their central working concepts, that of a ‘sense-datum’, is itself a
scientiﬁcally unsupported one. Their understanding of ‘empirical signiﬁcance’ in
terms of the veriﬁcationist theory of meaning was likewise a piece of metaphysics
they did not derive from science. Although many philosophers in the twentieth
century regarded metaphysics as a relic of earlier ages, it never ceased to be done,
even by those who intended to avoid it.
Though positivism and its successor, logical empiricism, died as seri-
ous philosophical options, they expired gradually. The most persuasive criti-
cisms of logical empiricism were given by logical empiricists themselves (for
example, Hempel 1950), and the basic ideas behind Quine’s famous (1951)
work of destruction were anticipated by prior insights of, among others, Carnap
(see Creath 1991). Nevertheless, for at least twenty years after the origi-
nal core commitments of positivism had all been surrendered—so, into the
1970s—philosophers often conveyed roughly the following message to their
students:
The technical aims of positivism and logical empiricism—to show how all meaningful
discourse can be reduced to, or at least rigorously justiﬁed by reference to, reports of
observations regimented for communication and inference by formal linguistic conven-
tions—have been shown to be unachievable. Nevertheless, the positivists, following the
lead of Hume and Russell before them, introduced into (non-continental) philosophy a
profound respect for empirical science and its pre-eminence in all inquiry that continues
to be the basis of the philosophical project. We may no longer believe in the veriﬁcationist
theory of meaning, in the myth of the given, or in the analytic–synthetic distinction.
Nevertheless, it is in the spirit of th e positivists that we can say, with Quine, ‘philosophy
of science is philosophy enough’. (Quine 1953[1966], 151) ⁷
Of course, if the positivists are wrong in fact, however right they might have
been in aim and spirit, then metaphysics can’t be regarded as impossible or
⁶ The term ‘neo-scholastic’ metaphysics i s fairly widely used among philosophers of science.
We owe our usage of it to Ross and Spurrett (2004) but it is so apt that we suspect it has been
independently invented on many occasions.
⁷ This imaginary quotation distils what Ross was taught by an almost unanimous consensus
among his graduate school professors in the 1980s.

--- Page 22 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 9
foolish on the basis of their arguments. A key breakthrough in the rehabilitation
of metaphysics came in the mid-1970s, when Kripke’s Naming and Necessity
(1973), and a series of papers on meaning in science by Hilary Putnam (gathered
in Putnam 1975b), convinced many philosophers to believe in both metaphysical
reference relations, and in the mind-independent reality of the objects of suc-
cessful scientiﬁc theories. ⁸ Thanks to Putnam and David Lewis, trips to possible
worlds became standard instruments of philosophical argument.
Initially, this sort of metaphysics could be indulged in guiltlessly by philoso-
phers who admired the positivists, because it was profoundly respectful of science.
Indeed, in providing philosophers with a way of regarding leading scientiﬁc the-
ories as literally true—rather than just instrumentally useful or descriptively
adequate to experience—it seemed to pay science even deeper tribute than pos-
itivism had done. In its early days the metaphysical turn was partly inspired by
interpretative problems about meaning continuity arising from the philosophical
history of science championed by Kuhn. Such history became a core part of
philosophy’s subject matter; and the metaphysics of essences, natural kinds, and
rigid designation gave philosophers a means of avoiding the relativist path that
was bound to end in the tears of sociology. Indeed, some philosophers (especially
followers of a particular interpretation of the later Wittgenstein) followed social
scientists in regarding the reborn metaphysics as ‘scientistic’ (Sorrell 1991). We
wish this charge were better justiﬁed than it is.
The revival of metaphysics after the implosion of logical positivism was accom-
panied by the ascendancy of naturalism in philosophy, and so it seemed obvious
to many that metaphysics ought not to be ‘revisionary’ but ‘descriptive’ (in Peter
Strawson’s terminology, 1959). That is, rather than metaphysicians using ratio-
nal intuition to work out exactly how the absolute comes to self-consciousness,
they ought instead to turn to science and concentrate on explicating the deep
structural claims about the nature of reality implicit in our best theories. So, for
example, Special Relativity ought to dictate the metaphysics of time, quantum
physics the metaphysics of substance, and chemistry and evolutionary biology
the metaphysics of natural kinds. However, careful work by various philosophers
of science has shown us that this task is not straightforward because science,
usually and perhaps always, underdetermines the metaphysical answers we are
seeking. (See French 1998, 93). Many people have taken this in their stride and
set about exploring the various options that are available. Much excellent work
has resulted.⁹However, there has also been another result of the recognition that
science doesn’t wear metaphysics on its sleeve, namely the resurgence of the kind
of metaphysics that ﬂoats entirely free of science. Initially granting themselves
⁸ Fodor (2004) also sees the Kripke and Putnam arguments for referential realism as the moment
when analytical philosophy broke free of its Quinean moorings, on the basis of wishful thinking
rather than sound argument.
⁹ See Butterﬁeld (2006) for recent exemplary work.

--- Page 23 ---

10 In Defence of Scientism
permission to do a bit of metaphysics that seemed closely tied to, perhaps even
important to, the success of the scientiﬁc project, increasing numbers of philoso-
phers lost their positivistic spirit. The result has been the rise to dominance of
projects in analytic metaphysics that have almost nothing to do with (actual)
science. Hence there are now, once again, esoteric debates about substance,
universals, identity, time, properties, and so on, which make little or no reference
to science, and worse, which seem to presuppose that science must be irrelevant
to their resolution. They are based on prioritizing armchair intuitions about the
nature of the universe over scientiﬁc discoveries. Attaching epistemic signiﬁcance
to metaphysical intuitions is anti-naturalist for two reasons. First, it requires
ignoring the fact that science, especially physics, has shown us that the universe
is very strange to our inherited conception of what it is like. Second, it requires
ignoring central implications of evolutionary theory, and of the cognitive and
behavioural sciences, concerning the nature of our minds.
1.2.1 Intuitions and common sense in metaphysics
The idea that intuitions are guides to truth, and that they constitute the basic
data for philosophy, is of course part of the Platonic and Cartesian rationalist
tradition.¹⁰ However, we have grounds that Plato and Descartes lacked for
thinking that much of what people ﬁnd intuitive is not innate, but is rather a
developmental and educational achievement. What counts as intuitive depends
partly on our ontogenetic cognitive makeup and partly on culturally speciﬁc
learning. Intuitions are the basis for, and are reinforced and modiﬁed by,
everyday practical heuristics for getting around in the world under various
resource (including time) pressures, and navigating social games; they are not
cognitive gadgets designed to produce systematically worthwhile guidance in
either science or metaphysics. In light of the dependence of intuitions on species,
cultural, and individual learning histories, we should expect developmental and
cultural variation in what is taken to be intuitive, and this is just what we ﬁnd. In
the case of judgements about causes, for example, Morris et al. (1995) report that
Chinese and American subjects differed with respect to how they spontaneously
allocated causal responsibility to agents versus environmental factors. Given
that the ‘common sense’ of many contemporary philosophers is shaped and
supplemented by ideas from classical physics, the locus of most metaphysical
discussions is an image of the world that sits unhappily between the manifest
image and an out of date scientiﬁc image. ¹¹
¹⁰ DePaul and Ramsey (1998) contains a number of papers assessing the epistemic status of
intuition in philosophy though none of them are primarily concerned with the role of intuition in
analytic metaphysics.
¹¹ It is ironic that the most prominent defender of antirealism about scientiﬁc knowledge, namely
Bas van Fraassen, is also one of the ﬁercest conte mporary critics of speculat ive metaphysics not least
because it has nothing to do with science (see especially his 2002).

--- Page 24 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 11
While contemporary physics has become even more removed from common
sense than classical physics, we also have other reasons to doubt that our common
sense image of the world is an appropriate basis for metaphysical theorizing.
Evolution has endowed us with a generic theory or model of the physical world.
This is evident from experiments with very young children, who display surprise
and increased attention when physical objects fail to behave in standard ways. In
particular, they expect ordinary macroscopic objects to persist over time, and not
to be subject to fusion or ﬁssion (Spelke et al. 1995). For example, if a ball moves
behind a screen and then two balls emerge from the other side, or vice versa,
infants are astonished. We have been equipped with a conception of the nature
of physical objects which has been transformed into a foundational metaphysics
of individuals, and a combinatorial and compositional conception of reality that
is so deeply embedded in philosophy that it is shared as a system of ‘obvious’
presuppositions by metaphysicians who otherwise disagree profoundly.
This metaphysics was well suited to the corpuscularian natural philosophy of
Descartes, Boyle, Gassendi, and Locke. Indeed, the primary qualities of matter
which became the ontological basis of the mechanical philosophy are largely
properties which form part of the manifest image of the world bequeathed to
us by our natural history. That natural history has been a parochial one, in the
sense that we occupy a very restricted domain of space and time. We experience
events that last from around a tenth of a second to years. Collective historical
memory may expand that to centuries, but no longer. Similarly, spatial scales of
a millimetre to a few thousand miles are all that have concerned us until recently.
Yet science has made us aware of how limited our natural perspective is. Protons,
for example, have an effective diameter of around 10
− 15m, while the diameter of
the visible universe is more than 10 19 times the radius of the Earth. The age of
the universe is supposed to be of the order of 10 billion years. Even more homely
sciences such as geology require us to adopt time scales that make all of human
history seem like a vanishingly brief event.
As Lewis Wolpert (1992) chronicles, modern science has consistently shown us
that extrapolating our pinched perspective across unfamiliar scales, magnitudes,
and spatial and temporal distances misleads us profoundly. Casual inspection
and measurement along scales we are used to suggest that we live in a Euclidean
space; General Relativity says that we do not. Most people, Wolpert reports, are
astounded to be told that there are more molecules in a glass of water than there
are glasses of water in the oceans, and more cells in one human ﬁnger than there
are people in the world (ibid. 5). Inability to grasp intuitively the vast time scales
on which natural selection works is almost certainly crucial to the success of
creationists in perpetuating foolish controversies about evolution (Kitcher 1982).
The problems stemming from unfamiliar measurement scales are just the tip of
an iceberg of divergences between everyday expectations and scientiﬁc ﬁndings.
No one’s intuitions, in advance of the relevant science, told them that white
light would turn out to have compound structure, that combustion primarily

--- Page 25 ---

12 In Defence of Scientism
involves something being taken up rather than given off (Wolpert 1992, 4), that
birds are the only living descendants of dinosaurs, or that Australia is presently
on its way to a collision with Alaska. As Wolpert notes, science typically explains
the familiar in terms of the unfamiliar. Thus he rightly says that ‘both the ideas
that science generates and the way in which science is carried out are entirely
counter-intuitive and against common sense—by which I mean that scientiﬁc
ideas cannot be acquired by simple inspection of phenomena and that they
are very often outside everyday experience’ (ibid. 1). He later strengthens the
point: ‘I would almost contend that if something ﬁts with common sense it
almost certainly isn’t science’ (ibid. 11). B. F. Skinner characteristically avoids
all wafﬂing on the issue: ‘What, after all, have we to show for non-scientiﬁc or
pre-scientiﬁc good judgment, or common sense, or the insights gained through
personal experience? It is science or nothing’ (Skinner 1971, 152–3).
However, in exact reversal of this attitude metaphysicians place great emphasis
on preserving common sense and intuitions. Michael Loux and Dean Zim-
merman explain the methodology of metaphysics as follows: ‘One metaphysical
system is superior to another in scope in so far as it allows for the statement of
satisfactory philosophical theories on more subjects—theories that preserve, in
the face of puzzle and apparent contradiction, most of what we take ourselves
to know’ (2003, 5). Here is a conception of metaphysics according to which
its function is to reassure the metaphysician that what they already believe is
true. Yet philosophers are often completely deluded when they claim that some
intuition or other belongs to common sense. Not only are genuine common-
sense intuitions the product of cultural learning, but philosophers who have
spent years customizing their cognition with recondite concepts and philosoph-
ical technology, as well as habituating themselves to interpreting the world in
terms of speciﬁc philosophical theories, do not share as many intuitions with
the folk as they usually suppose. What metaphysicians take themselves to know
by intuition is independent of the latest scientiﬁc knowledge and is culturally
speciﬁc.
Lewis famously advocated a metaphysical methodology based on subjecting
rival hypotheses to a cost–beneﬁt analysis. Usually there are two kinds of cost
associated with accepting a metaphysical thesis. The ﬁrst is accepting some kind
of entity into one’s ontology, for example, abstracta, possibilia, or a relation
of primitive resemblance. The second is relinquishing some intuitions, for
example, the intuition that causes antedate their effects, that dispositions reduce
to categorical bases, or that facts about identity over time supervene on facts
about instants of time. It is taken for granted that abandoning intuitions should
be regarded as a cost rather than a beneﬁt. By contrast, as naturalists we are
not concerned with preserving intuitions at all, and argue for the wholescale
abandonment of those associated with the image of the world as composed of
little things, and indeed of the more basic intuition that there must be something
of which the world is made.

--- Page 26 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 13
There are many examples of metaphysicians arguing against theories by
pointing to unintuitive consequences, or comparing theories on the basis of
the quantity and quality of the intuitions with which they conﬂict. Indeed,
proceeding this way is more or less standard. Often, what is described as intuitive
or counterintuitive is recondite. For example, L. A. Paul (2004, 171) discusses
the substance theory that makes the de re modal properties of objects primitive
consequences of their falling under the sortals that they do: ‘A statue is essentially
statue shaped because it falls under the statue-sort, so cannot persist through
remoulding into a pot’ (171). This view apparently has ‘intuitive appeal’, but
sadly, ‘any counterintuitive consequences of the view are difﬁcult to explain
or make palatable’. The substance theory implies that two numerically distinct
objects such as a lump of bronze and a statue can share their matter and their
region, but this ‘is radically counterintuitive, for it seems to contradict our usual
way of thinking about material objects as individuated by their matter and region’
(172). Such ways of thinking are not ‘usual’ except among metaphysicians and
we do not share them.
Paul says ‘[I]t seems, at least prima facie, that modal properties should super-
vene on the nonmodal properties shared by the statue and the lump’ (172).
This is the kind of claim that is regularly made in the metaphysics literature.
We have no idea whether it is true, and we reject the idea that such claims can
be used as data for metaphysical theorizing. Paul summarizes the problem for
the advocate of substance theory as follows: ‘This leaves him in the unfortunate
position of being able to marshal strong and plausible commonsense intuitions
to support his view but of being unable to accommodate these intuitions in
a philosophically respectable way’ (172). So according to Paul, metaphysics
proceeds by attempts to construct theories that are intuitive, commonsensical,
palatable, and philosophically respectable. The criteria of adequacy for meta-
physical systems have clearly come apart from anything to do with the truth.
Rather they are internal and peculiar to philosophy, they are semi-aesthetic,
and they have more in common with the virtues of story-writing than with
science.
The reliance on intuitions in metaphysics often involves describing a situation
that is intuitively possible and then concluding something important about the
actual world from the ‘existence’ of this possible world. For example, Sider tells us
that it is clearly possible to imagine a world consisting of matter that is inﬁnitely
divisible: ‘Surely there is a gunk world in which some gunk is shaped into a giant
sphere’ (1993, 286). ¹² Surely? Lowe tells us that ‘it seems that an individual
material sphere could exist as a solitary occupant of space’ (2003b, 79). He goes on
to claim that while it may not be ‘causally possible’ for an individual organism to
be an isolated existent, it is nonetheless ‘metaphysically possible’. This is justiﬁed
on grounds that ‘two different individuals cannot both individuate, or help to
¹² The term ‘gunk’ was established by Lewis (1991).

--- Page 27 ---

14 In Defence of Scientism
individuate, each other. This is because individuation in the metaphysical sense is
a determination relation … As such, individuation is an explanatory relation’ (93,
his emphasis) in the metaphysical sense of ‘explanatory’. He goes on: ‘Certainly,
it seems that any satisfactory ontology will have to include self-individuating
elements, the only question being which entities have this status—space-time
points, bare particulars, tropes, and individual substances all being among the
possible candidates’ (93). Certainly? None of these ‘obvious’ elements of reality
(including the pseudoscientiﬁc ‘space-time points’) are known to either everyday
intuition or science.
In the course of this brief survey we have encountered a number of sui
generis versions of ordinary and/or scientiﬁc notions, namely, individuation,
determination, explanation, and possibility. With these and other inventions,
metaphysicians have constructed a hermitically sealed world in which they
can autonomously study their own special subject matter. ¹³ We return to
individuation in depth in Chapter 3 where we reject on scientiﬁc grounds
the idea that ontology depends on self-individuating elements. For now, we
merely note that the candidates for such elements that Lowe identiﬁes are all
pure philosophical constructions. As Glymour puts it: ‘the philosopher faces the
dragons in the labyrinth of metaphysics armed only with words and a good
imagination’ (1999, 458).¹⁴
There are ways in which intuitions could be useful. As discussed by Dennett
(2005, 31–2), the artiﬁcial intelligence researcher Patrick Hayes (1979) thought
at one time that the best method for trying to simulate our minds in computers
or robots was to try to discern, by introspection, our ‘naïve physics’ (people’s
behaviourally manifest theory of how the physical world works), axiomatize this
theory, and then implement it as the inference engine of a working android.
This work, though it proved to be harder than Hayes expected and he did not
ﬁnish it, is of some interest and value. Of course, Hayes did not imagine that
naïve physics corresponded to true physics. As Dennett notes, philosophers who
speculatively elaborate on intuitions might, if they were sophisticated in the way
that Hayes was, be interpreted as doing introspective anthropology.¹⁵Obviously,
this would not be metaphysics—the attempt to discover general truths about the
objective world. However, what Dennett goes on to say about his critical target,
the activity of neo-scholastic philosophers of mind, can with equal justice be said
about many metaphysicians:
¹³ Another example is the composition relation as st udied by metaphysicians that we discuss in
1.2.3.
¹⁴ Of course, as Glymour mentions, metaphysicians usually also use logic and set theory to
formulate their theories. From our perspective this does not confer any extra epistemic status on
their activity, but it may bamboozle the outsider or the student into supposing that the activity has
much in common with mathematics and science.
¹⁵ In fact, introspective anthropology is done all the time, and most people regard it as highly
valuable. Its expert practitioners are mainly writers of ﬁction. We do not recommend turning their
job over to philosophers.

--- Page 28 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 15
They have proceeded as if the deliverances of t heir brute intuitions were not just
axiomatic-for-the-sake-of-the-project but true, and, moreover, somehow inviolable … One
vivid … sign of this is the curious revers al of the epithet ‘counterintuitive’ among
philosophers of mind. In most sciences, there are few things more prized than a
counterintuitive result. It shows something surprising and forces us to reconsider our
often tacit assumptions. In philosophy of mind a counterint uitive ‘result’ (for example, a
mind-boggling implication of somebody’s ‘theory’ of perception, memory, consciousness
or whatever) is typically taken as tantamount to a refutation. This affection for one’s
current intuitions … installs deep conservatism in the methods of philosophers. (Dennett
2005, 34)
As Dennett then says, methodological conservatism is not invariably bad pol-
icy—science certainly implements it, though not with respect to intuitions.
However, as we noted in 1.1, neo-scholastic metaphysicians cannot even defend
their project by falling back on a general defence of conservatism, since in the
service of defending one intuition they frequently outrage other ones; we gave
the example of Merricks’s (2001) denial that tables and chairs exist and that
baseballs can break windows.
We do not deny that intuitions in one sense of the term are important to
science. It is frequently said of, for example, a good physicist that he or she has
sound physical intuition. Economists routinely praise one another’s ‘economic
intuitions’—and routinely break the bad news to struggling graduate students
that they lack such intuitions. However, the meaning of ‘intuitions’ in these
uses differs sharply from the metaphysician’s. The physicist and economist
refer to the experienced practitioner’s trained ability to see at a glance how
their abstract theoretical structure probably —in advance of essential careful
checking—maps onto a problem space. Intuitions in this sense have nothing to
do with deliverances of putative untrained common sense. Furthermore, even the
intuitions of the greatest scientist are regarded by other scientists as heuristically
and not evidentially valuable. By contrast, for neo-scholastic metaphysicians
intuitive judgements are typically all that ever passes for evidence. ¹⁶
1.2.2 A priori metaphysics
Representing the resurgent voice of the analytic metaphysicians here again is
Lowe: ‘metaphysics goes deeper than any merely empirical science, even physics,
because it provides the very framework within which such sciences are conceived
and related to one another’ (2002, vi). According to him the universally applicable
concepts that metaphysics studies include those of identity, necessity, causation,
¹⁶ Much of our critique of the role of intuitions in metaphysics applies to other areas of
philosophy. Weatherson (2003) argues against the weight that has been given to intuitions in
epistemology post-Gettier. He defends the traditional conceptual analysis of knowledge against
Gettier cases on this basis. From our perspective, the role of intuitions in that analysis is just as
suspect as their role in undermining it.

--- Page 29 ---

16 In Defence of Scientism
space and time. Metaphysics must say what these concepts are and then address
fundamental questions involving them such as whether causes can have earlier
effects. Metaphysics’ other main job according to Lowe, is to systematize the
relations among fundamental metap hysical categories such as things, events,
properties, and so on. We might reasonably ask how we could proceed with these
tasks. Lowe follows Frank Jackson (1998) and many others in advocating the
familiar methodology of reﬂecting on our concepts (conceptual analysis). But
why should we think that the products of this sort of activity reveal anything
about the deep structure of reality, rather than merely telling us about how
some philosophers, or perhaps some larger reference class of people, think
about and categorize reality? Even those fully committed to a conception of
metaphysics as the discovery of synthetic a priori truths shy away from invoking
a special faculty of rational intuition that delivers such knowledge; rather they
usually just get on with their metaphysical projects and leave the matter of
explaining the epistemology of metaphysics for another occasion. Ted Sider
defends this strategy by pointing out that lack of an epistemological foundation
for science and mathematics does not prevent practitioners from getting on with
the business of advancing the state of knowledge in these domains (2001, xv).
However, the appropriateness of this comparison is precisely what is at issue
here. Mathematics and science have undoubtedly borne fruits of great value; a
priori metaphysics has achieved nothing remotely comparable, if it has achieved
anything at all.¹⁷
According to Lowe, it is the job of metaphysics to tell us what is possible, but
he concedes that which of the possible fundamental structures of reality exist can
be answered only with empirical evidence. In his (2006) he outlines a view of the
goal of metaphysics that we endorse:
[R]eality is one and truth indivisible. Each special science aims at truth, seeking to portray
accurately some part of reality. But the various portrayals of different parts of reality must,
if they are all to be true, ﬁt together to make a portrait which can be true of reality as a
whole. No special science can arrogate to itself the task of rendering mutually consistent
the various partial portraits: that task can alone belong to an overarching science of being,
that is to ontology. (4)
However, we differ with Lowe on how this task is to be accomplished, because
we deny that a priori inquiry can reveal what is metaphysically possible.
Philosophers have often regarded as impossible states of affairs that science has
come to entertain. For example, metaphysicians conﬁdently pronounced that
non-Euclidean geometry is impossible as a model of physical space, that it is
impossible that there not be deterministic causation, that non-absolute time is
impossible, and so on. Physicists learned to be comfortable with each of these
¹⁷ The extent to which the epistemology of science and mathematics is a mystery is overstated in
our view. We take it that philosophy of science has signiﬁcantly illuminated the nature and basis of
scientiﬁc inference and justiﬁcation.

--- Page 30 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 17
ideas, along with others that confound the expectations of common sense more
profoundly.
1.2.3 Pseudo-scientiﬁc metaphysics
As a consequence of the recognition that neither deductive nor inductive logic
can fully account for scientiﬁc knowledge of unobservables, most scientiﬁc realists
admit that fallible appeals to the explanatory power of claims about unobservable
causes of observable phenomena are our only source of epistemic access to the
former. Some metaphysicians have realized that they can imitate science by
treating their kind of inquiry as the search for explanations too, albeit in a
different domain.¹⁸ Taking the familiar explanatory virtues of unity, simplicity,
non-ad hocness, and so on, they can now argue with each other about whose
particular metaphysical package scores highest on some loosely weighted vector of
these virtues and requires the fewest unexplained explainers. On the basis of such
reasoning, metaphysics is now often regarded as if it were a kind of autonomous
special science, with its explananda furnished by the other sciences. ¹⁹
There are three ways in which analytic metaphysicians who rhetorically emulate
science sometimes or often fail to follow through on their naturalistic pretence:
(1) They ignore science even though it seems to be relevant.
(2) They use outdated or domesticated science rather than our best contemporary
science.
(3) They take themselves to be able to proceed a priori in the investigation of
matters upon which they claim science does not bear.
It is rare to ﬁnd metaphysicians defending (1), and arguing that if science and
metaphysics seem to conﬂict the latter may trump the former, but here is a
breathtaking declaration of philosophical arrogance from Peter Geach: ‘ … ‘‘at
the same time’’ belongs not to a special science but to logic. Our practical
grasp of this logic is not to be called into question on account of recondite
physics … A physicist who casts doubt upon it is sawing off the branch he sits
upon’ (1972, 304). Note that the ‘recondite’ physics we are being advised not
to take metaphysically seriously is Special Relativity. ²⁰ In a similar vein, Ned
Markosian (2005) is happy to defend mereological atomism, the thesis that there
is a ‘bottom level’ to reality, composed of simples, despite his concession that
the empirical evidence does not support this. There are, he thinks, good a priori
¹⁸ For an explicit defence of the use of IBE in metaphysics by analogy with the use of IBE in
science see Swoyer (1983).
¹⁹ See, for example, Bealer (1987).
²⁰ Michael Tooley defends his theory of time by proposing an alternative to Special Relativity
(1997, ch. 11) in which there is absolute simultaneity. He does this on metaphysical grounds,
though he claims support from the phenomena of quantum entanglement. We return to these issues
in 3.7.1.

--- Page 31 ---

18 In Defence of Scientism
grounds for believing it. Physicists do not believe there are such things as good
a priori grounds for holding beliefs about the constitution of the physical world,
and we suggest that only a foolhardy philosopher should be willing to quarrel
with them on the basis of his or her hunches.
However, it is much more common for metaphysicians to ignore science
without acknowledging or defending the idea of doing so. Alyssa Ney notes that
‘very few of those philosophers who call themselves physicalists spend any time
worrying about what physicists are actually up to’ (forthcoming a, 1). A good
example of this is Markosian again, who deﬁnes physical objects as all and only
those that have spatial locations, and physicalism as the view that all objects are
physical objects. Leaving aside the worry that this will allow irreducible mental
properties provided they are spatially located (as Ney points out, forthcoming
a, 15), Markosian’s proposal would condemn most of the entities posited by
fundamental physics to the status of non-physical including the universe itself.
In general in the philosophy of mind, in debates about perception, semantic
content, and self-knowledge, it is common to proceed without paying any
attention to science. Consider, for example, Jaegwon Kim’s (1998) Mind in
a Physical World . Despite its commitment to physicalism, it has no index
entry for ‘physics’ and not a single work of physics appears in the list of
references. Kim’s argument, however, depends on non-trivial assumptions about
how the physical world is structured. One example is the deﬁnition of a ‘micro-
based property’ which involves the bearer ‘being completely decomposable into
nonoverlapping proper parts’ (1998, 84). This assumption does much work in
Kim’s argument—being used, inter alia, to help provide a criterion for what is
physical, and driving parts of his response to the charge, an attempted reductio,
that his ‘causal exclusion’ argument against functionalism generalizes to all
non-fundamental science.²¹ As well as ignoring physics, Kim, and much of the
metaphysical philosophy of mind of which he is a prominent exponent, ignores
most of the interesting questions about the mind that scientists investigate. ²²
It is not always straightforward to spot cases of (2) and (3), because many
contemporary metaphysicians explicitly claim t o be naturalists and to be taking
the scientiﬁc image as their explanandum. Indeed, many populate their discus-
sions with scientiﬁc examples. In particular, they make recourse to examples
from physics, for the obvious reason that, as the scientiﬁc discipline that makes
the most general claims about the universe, physics most closely approaches
metaphysics in scope. Unfortunately metaphysicians seem implicitly to assume
that (a) non-actual physics can be used as part of the explananda for metaphysics,
²¹ For more on this charge, and rejoinders to Kim’s response, see Ross and Spurrett (2004),
Marras (2000), Bontly (2001), and Kim (2005).
²² For an eloquent critique of Kim on these grounds see Glymour (1999). Like Glymour we
hold Kim’s work in the highest regard as an exemplar of its kind. Our intention is to draw attention
to the fact that something has gone awry when the very best philosophical work in a given domain
is so estranged from science.

--- Page 32 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 19
and that (b) this is acceptable because whatever the actual details of mature
physics, they will somehow be able to ‘dock’ with the non-actual physics in
question at some level of abstraction or generality, so that philosophers need not
worry about or even pay attention to those details. For an explicit defence of
(b) here is Frank Jackson:
it is reasonable to assume that physical science, d espite its known inadequacies, has
advanced sufﬁciently for us to be conﬁdent of the kinds of properties and relations that
are needed to give a complete account of non-sentient reality. They will be broadly of a
kind with those that appear in current physical science … (1998, 7)
We reject both (a) and (b).
There are several kinds of uses of non-actual physics regularly encountered in
metaphysics. Among them are appeals to obsolete features of classical physics,
and reliance on intuitions or common-sense conceptions of the material world.
For example, Lewis explicitly states that his doctrine of ‘Humean supervenience’
is based on a model of the world in which the fundamental physical properties of
a ‘world like ours’ are local, ‘perfectly natural intrinsic properties of points, or of
point-sized occupants of points’ and declares himself that this picture is ‘inspired
by classical physics’ (1999, 226). Van Inwagen (1990) assumes for the purposes
of his metaphysical argument the truth of atomism, understood as the view
that all (material) things ultimately decompose into mereological atoms, where
a mereological atom lacks proper parts. None of these assumptions, on which
are based arguments of considerable attention in the metaphysics literature, ﬁnds
any basis in contemporary science. Kim’s micro-based properties, completely
decomposable into non-overlapping proper parts, and Lewis’s ‘intrinsic properties
of points, or of point-sized occupants of points’ both fall foul of the non-
separability of quantum states, something that has been a well-established part
of microphysics for generations. It is still hard to improve upon Schrödinger’s
formulation, in which the term ‘entanglement’ was coined:
When two systems, of which we know the states by their respective representatives, enter
into temporary physical interaction due to known forces between them, and when after a
time of mutual inﬂuence the systems separate again, then they can no longer be described
in the same way as before, viz. by endowing each of them with a representative of its own.
Iw o u l dn o tc a l lt h a tone but rather the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, the one
that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought. By the interaction the
two representatives [the quantum states] have become entangled. (1935, 555) ²³
It is also hardly news that the conﬂict between quantum mechanics and general
relativity comes to the fore when considering very small scales, especially points.
( This is one of the motivations for string theory, which does not postulate
inﬁnitesimal objects or processes.) So Lewis’s world of ‘perfectly natural intrinsic
properties of points, or of point-sized occupants of points’ seems highly unlikely
²³ We return to this issue in Chapter 3.

--- Page 33 ---

20 In Defence of Scientism
to be the actual one. Van Inwagen’s Democritean image of a world mereologically
composed of simple atoms corresponds to it even less; this image has no more in
common with reality as physics describes it than does the ancient cosmology of
four elements and perfect celestial spheres. Yet Van Inwagen does not market his
work as history of (early modern) philosophy; it is supposed to be contemporary
metaphysics.
Consider also Lewis’s discussion of the distinction between internal and
external relations in his (1986). He asks us at one point to ‘consider a (classical)
hydrogen atom, which consists of an electron orbiting a proton at a certain
distance’ (62). There are not, nor were there ever, any ‘classical hydrogen
atoms’. At the same time that physicists came to believe in protons, they also
became aware that the laws of classical mechanics could not apply to electrons
orbiting them. Indeed the notion of an electronic orbit has about as much
relation to the common-sense notion of an orbit as the mathematical notion
of compactness has to the everyday notion of compactness, which is to say
hardly any. Lewis thus encourages his readers to think that his metaphysics is
addressed to the scientiﬁc image of the world rather than the manifest one,
but he gives the game away because ‘classical’ here means nothing other than
‘commonsensical’. Note that we are not arguing that what Lewis goes on to do
with his account of internal and external relations is affected one way or the other
by how he chooses to introduce the distinction; he could of course have used
another example. Our point is that the rhetorical effect of his ﬁctitious example
is to suggest that his metaphysics has something to do with science when it
does not.
When it comes to debates about the nature of matter in contemporary
metaphysics it tends to be assumed that there are two possibilities: either there
are atoms in the sense of partless particles, or there is ‘gunk’ in the sense of matter
whose every part has proper parts (inﬁnitely divisible matter). ²⁴ This debate
is essentially being conducted in the same terms as it was by the pre-Socratic
philosophers among whom the atomists were represented by Democritus and the
gunkists by Anaxagoras. In early modern philosophy Boyle, Locke, and Gassendi
lined up for atomism against gunkists Descartes and Leibniz. It is preposterous
that in spite of the developments in the scientiﬁc understanding of matter that
have occurred since then, contemporary metaphysicians blithely continue to
suppose that the dichotomy between atoms and gunk remains relevant, and that
it can be addressed a priori. Precisely what physics has taught us is that matter in
the sense of extended stuff is an emergent phenomenon that has no counterpart in
fundamental ontology. Both the atoms in the void and the plenum conceptions
of the world are attempts to engage in metaphysical theorizing on the basis of
extending the manifest image. That metaphysicians continue to regard the world
²⁴ This debate becomes particularly baroque in the hands of Daniel Nolan (2004) who considers
whether the inﬁnite divisibility in question is denumerable or higher-order.

--- Page 34 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 21
as a spatial manifold comprising material objects that must either have smallest
spatial parts or be made of inﬁnitely divisible matter is symptomatic of their
failure to escape the conﬁnes of the domestic realm.
Similar points are pertinent to the debate about composition among analytic
metaphysicians. A good part of most of the special sciences concerns the particular
kinds of composition relevant to their respective domains. For example, biologists
concern themselves with how cells compose multicellular organisms, economists
with how individual markets compose economies, chemists with how oxygen and
hydrogen compose water, and so on. Metaphysicians do not dirty their hands
with such details but seek instead to understand something more fundamental,
namely the general composition relation itself. But why suppose that there is
any such thing? It is supposed to be the relation that obtains between parts
of any whole, but the wholes mentioned above are hugely disparate and the
composition relations studied by the special sciences are sui generis.W eh a v en o
reason to believe that an abstract composition relation is anything other than an
entrenched philosophical fetish.²⁵
Composition in real science as opposed to metaphysics is usually a dynamic
and complex feature that is much more interesting than its metaphysical
counterpart. Consider, for example, the notion of composition at work in
economics. Economic models are typically models of ‘systems’, which are taken
to participate in larger systems. However, the relations between systems and
sub-systems are not compositional in the philosopher’s sense because they are
model-relative. A system is distinguished by reference to variables that can be
treated as endogenous, that is, as having their values co-determined as a set given
some simultaneous choice of another set of variables as exogenous. Economists
freely admit that interesting phenomena typically admit of multiple parsings
along different endogenous/exogenous boundaries for varying predictive and
explanatory purposes. In general, though economists are mainly concerned, most
of the time, to discover which variables are ‘control levers’ for which others, their
theoretical structure ﬁnds no use for the kind of rigid distinction between causal
relations and compositional relations that neo-scholastic metaphysicians assume
as fundamental. The case of composition in the physical sciences is similar. Water,
for example, is composed by oxygen and hydrogen in various polymeric forms,
such as (H
2O)2,( H 2O)3, and so on, that are constantly forming, dissipating,
and reforming over short time periods in such a way as to give rise to the familiar
properties of the macroscopic kind water. ²⁶ The usual philosophical identity
claim ‘water is H
2O’ ignores a fascinating and complex scientiﬁc account that is
still not complete.
²⁵ Cf. Paul’s mention of the ‘primitive relation of fusing, already a part of standard ontology’
(2004, 173). Again ‘fusion’ in the metaphysician’s sense has nothing to do with real composition,
and the ‘standard’ ontology appealed to here is standard, if at all, only among metaphysicians.
²⁶ See Van Brakel (1986).

--- Page 35 ---

22 In Defence of Scientism
A key general grievance we raise against traditional metaphysicians is that
in continuously constructing simplistic caricatures of science, they render it
substantially less interesting than it really is. Donald Davidson (1970) and Jerry
Fodor (1974) both take it as true of physics that it discovers causal laws that
take the form of exceptionless generalizations relating atomic events. ²⁷ This is
notwithstanding the fact that thus understood physical laws have numerous
counterexamples, a point made forcefully by Russell (1913) while arguing that
the laws physicists do produce are laws of functional interdependence, not
statements of regularities. As we discuss in Chapter 3, Davidson’s and Fodor’s
picture ﬁnds even less support from contemporary fundamental physics than it
did from the physics known to Russell.
Next consider Merricks’s Objects and Persons (2001), which, like van Inwagen
(1990), defends the radical view that there are no statues, rocks, tables, stars,
or chairs—only ‘elementary particles’ and people. The general idea here is
that, given mereological atomism, the things additively composed out of atoms
without residue are metaphysically redundant. (Merricks thinks that people are
not composed of atoms, though their bodies are.) This is apparently supposed
to be naturalistic, since Merricks declares that he has ‘in mind here the atoms
of physics, not Democritus’ (2001, 3), and also that what he says about these
atoms should be considered as ‘placeholders for claims about whatever microscopic
entities are actually down there ’ (2001, 3, emphasis added). That is, no matter
what physics does, Merricks is conﬁdent that it will deliver atoms of the sort he
requires for his arguments.
In a symposium on Merricks’s book, Lowe (2003a) objects that it is ‘hubristic’
for philosophers to dictate to physicists about what is real in their domain of study,
and suggests that physicists might be ‘mystiﬁed and irritated’ by Merricks’s line
of argument. (We imagine them laughing, in the unlikely event that they notice
at all.) Merricks (2003b, 727) responds by claiming that Lowe’s ‘invocation of
Physics is a red herring’ because Merricks’s metaphysic doesn’t depend on him
having any knowledge about disciplines that study what he says doesn’t exist, and
because all the relevant experts need to secure their authority in a given domain,
including physics, is ‘nucleons and electrons (or more fundamental entities)
arranged’ so as to present like (for example) helium. So, according to Merricks,
as a metaphysician he is entitled to take as a premise for his arguments a claim
about (what he takes to be) a matter of physical fact (that the world decomposes
into atoms). On the other hand, the metaphysician apparently need not know
anything about physics in order to make assertions about whether physicists are
ontologically confused. As we discuss in detail in Chapter 3, none of the main
contending theories in fundamental physics give the slightest encouragement to
Merricks’s conviction that the world is mereologically composed of any little
²⁷ Davidson (1970) actually suggests, but without ex plaining, that the ‘exceptionless’ criterion
could be ‘relaxed’. (See 5.5 and also Glymour 1999.)

--- Page 36 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 23
things at all. But the point is that Merricks doesn’t think this matters. All that
does matter for metaphysics, it seems, is that people who know just a bit of
superﬁcial science are comfortable with thinking about a world made out of
ultimate little things and collisions amongst them.
Crawford Elder (2004) is a metaphysician who attempts to restrain his fellow
philosophers from deriving scientiﬁcally hilarious conclusions that amount to
reductios of their intuitions. However, Elder thinks that the way to do this is
to show that the hilarious conclusions in question don’t follow in the fantasy
world of ultimate little things and microbangings. (See, for instance, the example
Elder considers in which ‘microparticles’ composing ‘host objects’ ‘hurtle’ at
one another in ‘a microphysical mêlée’ (94–6). The world, it seems, is like a
pinball machine, though Elder doesn’t mention ﬂashing lights or funny sound
effects.) All of his counter-arguments also depend on similar intuitions about
this imaginary world, and are similarly irrelevant to what the actual world
is like. Furthermore, Elder often says things that make it doubtful that he
is merely donning the pretence of his opponents’ bad assumptions for the
sake of argument. ‘With rare and strange exceptions,’ he pronounces at one
point, in what seems to be propria persona, ‘we suppose that extended objects
of any kind cannot simultaneously occupy two discontinuous spatial regions’
(15). Physics knows nothing of the class of ‘extended objects’; and the physical
objects that occupy two or more discontinuous spatial regions are basic and
ubiquitous.
What we mean to draw attention to here is Elder’s implicit assertion that clas-
sical objects are the standard case, while entangled objects are exotic. Elsewhere,
Elder trots out what he considers ‘the most scientiﬁcally grounded picture’ of
alteration in fundamental physica l composition that an opposing metaphysician
might appeal to. This turns out to involve, once again, ‘the subatomic micropar-
ticles that future physics will discover to be the truly fundamental building blocks
of the physical world—‘‘physical simples’’ ’ (51). Elder doesn’t commit himself
to believing in this picture; but on the basis of what evidence does he consider
it to be the ‘most scientiﬁcally grounded’ one? That other philosophers tirelessly
entertain it? Eventually he drops his careful agnostic guard about what he takes
physics to hold: ‘It really is true that each individual microphysical movement, in
the complex microphysical event that the physicalist identiﬁes as shadowing the
cause in a typical special-science transaction, causes some other microphysical
movement’ (108). If this is indeed ‘really true’ then, as we will see in later
chapters, Elder knows it on the basis of something other than science.
Finally, we exhibit David Armstrong deﬁning metaphysical naturalism as
the doctrine that everything that exists is in space and time, despite the
fact that contemporary physics takes very seriously the idea that spacetime
itself is emergent from some more fundamental structure (Armstrong 1983).
Metaphysical naturalism, of all things. Note that all of these examples are, aside
from ignoring science, models of professional philosophy, being clearly written,

--- Page 37 ---

24 In Defence of Scientism
carefully argued, and responsive to the objections of those with opposing views.
They are all centrally placed in the literature. Mainstream contemporary analytic
metaphysics has, like the nineteenth-century metaphysics against which Russell
revolted, become almost entirely a priori. Metaphysics informed by real physics
is much less common.
In 1.1 we announced our resistance to the ‘domestication’ of science. It would
be easy to get almost any contemporary philosopher to agree that domestication
is discreditable if the home for which someone tries to make science tame is
a populist environment. Consider, for example, the minor industry that seeks
to make sense of quantum mechanics by analogies with Eastern mysticism.
This is obviously, in an intellectual context much less rigorous than that of
professional philosophy, an attempt to domesticate physics by explaining it in
terms of things that common sense thinks it comprehends. Few philosophers
will regard the gauzy analogies found in this genre as being of the slightest
metaphysical interest. Yet are quantum processes any more like those described
by Newtonian physics than they are like the temporal and spatial dislocations
imagined by mystics, which ground the popular comparisons? People who
know almost no formal physics are encouraged by populists to ﬁnd quantum
mechanics less wild by comparing it to varieties of disembodiment. Logically,
this is little different from philosophers encouraging people who know a bit
of physics to make quantum accounts seem less bizarre by comparing them
to what they learned in A-level chemistry. ²⁸ We might thus say that whereas
naturalistic metaphysics ought to be a branch of the philosophy of science, much
metaphysics that pays lip-service to naturalism is really philosophy of A-level
chemistry.
One response to what we’ve said so far would demand a justiﬁcation for
our evident commitment to the view that philosophy of A-level chemistry is a
bad thing at all. Science itself, after all, ma kes use of ﬂatly non-actual scenarios
and notions, including frictionless planes, perfectly elastic collisions, ideal gasses,
etc. As Hüttemann (2004, 20) argues, un-instantiated laws can be established
in science, and consequently bear explanatory weight. For such laws to be
established, we need reasons for thinking that the closer conditions get to some
(possibly unattainable) limit, the more the behaviour of a system approximates
an ideal indicated by the un-instantiated law. One of Hüttemann’s examples
concerns a law specifying the speciﬁc heat of a sample of lithium ﬂuoride crystal.
The law in question supposes a crystal entirely devoid of impurities. Even without
ever having an example of such a crystal, we can rank the behaviour of samples
we do have with respect to the extent of their impurities and the degree to which
they conform to the law, and thereby justify thinking that the law holds in the
limiting case.
²⁸ Non-British readers may be unfamiliar with this. We refer to the idea of a scientiﬁc education
that gets as far as the solar system model of atomic structure and no further.

--- Page 38 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 25
However, examples of use of non-actual science by philosophers differ from
scientists’ uses of idealizations in two crucial ways. First, scientiﬁcally moti-
vated justiﬁcations for the non-actual physics, along the lines just sketched
in Hüttemann’s example, are not offered by the philosophers. Second, it is
typically the case that whole non-actual worlds, such as ‘Newtonian worlds’,
are discussed by neo-scholastic metaphysicians, rat her than ideal tendencies that
may be partially manifest in more rea listic settings. Scientiﬁc idealizations and
approximations are usually accompanied by explicit statements of the contexts
in which they are appropriate and/or the degrees of freedom for which they
are accurate. Scientiﬁc idealization and approximation is about local not global
verisimilitude.²⁹
Remembering that metaphysics is supposed to be about the general structure
of reality, let us ask ourselves what worth there could be in philosophical thought
experiments that begin with the metaphysician declaring, for example, that she
will be considering a ‘Newtonian world’ for simplicity (or some other reason).
The actual world cannot be Newtonian in this sense. Newton himself realized as
much when he noted that more than gravity would be needed to hold objects
together. In fact, it is dubious to suppose that Newtonian mechanics could be
true in the required sense and matter still exist, since we have learned that the only
matter with which we have any acquaintance is not governed by Newton’s laws.
Furthermore, Newtonian mechanics always left unanswered questions about,
for example, the cause and propagation of gravitational forces, why inertial and
gravitational mass seem to be equal in magnitude for all objects, whether energy
is conserved, and also about the nature of space and time. Newtonian physics
was a research programme that attempted to extend an incomplete theory, which
ultimately led to the recognition that it was after all a false theory. This is why
the presupposition that philosophers’ bogus physics can serve as a placeholder for
whatever real physics turns out to say cannot be invoked in this case. Even if there
could be Newtonian worlds, there are no grounds for thinking that whatever
answers we get to metaphysical questions by considering thought experiments
about them tell us anything about how things are in the actual world.
Refusal to take seriously the implications of living in a world that has turned
out not to be Newtonian is also exempliﬁed when philosophers imagine that
the strange features of quantum physics can be contained. So it is often claimed
that although quantum mechanics seems to imply indeterminism and single-case
probabilities, these can be conﬁned to the microscopic level. Plainly, however,
if there is indeterminism among quantum events and there is any coupling
of them to macroscopic events, as there surely is, then the indeterminism will
infect the macroscopic. For a homely example that sufﬁces to make the point,
imagine a physicist deciding that she’ll go for lunch after exactly so many clicks
of the Geiger counter. It also seems that quantum entanglement contributes
²⁹ See Wallace (2001).

--- Page 39 ---

26 In Defence of Scientism
to many macroscopically observable properties of things, like their speciﬁc heat
capacities. (Entanglement ﬂatly contrad icts Kim’s proposal that everything is
exhaustively structured by micro and ‘micro-based’ properties, as deﬁned earlier,
and destabilizes the whole neo-scholastic basis for distinguishing between micro-
level and macro-level properties.) Philosophers simply obfuscate in pretending
that the macroscopic world could be just like it is even if there wasn’t all that
quantum weirdness, as if the latter was an add-on at the level of the very small and
not a fundamental aspect of the world. The metaphysician may claim that in the
absence of a solution to the measurement problem quantum mechanics cannot
teach us any metaphysical lessons. However, we know from Bell’s theorem that
any empirically adequate successor to quantum mechanics will have to violate
local realism and hence some part or other of the ‘common-sense’ intuitions of
metaphysicians.³⁰
Metaphysicians surely know that contemporary physics is hugely more com-
plicated and less intuitively comprehensible than either classical physics or toy
worlds based on features of classical physics. Most, however, resist the obvious
lesson that any attempt to learn about the deep structure of reality from thought
experiments involving domesticated physics is forlorn. If it really doesn’t matter
that classical physics is false then we might as well do our metaphysical theorizing
on the basis of Aristotelian or Cartesian physics. But then the absurdity would
be patent. Nobody who assumed an Aristotelian distinction between forced and
natural motion, and then declared that key parts of what she said about the world
were to be understood as placeholders for ‘whatever story about proper places
and fundamental substances physics eventually says are real’, would be taken
seriously. Yet metaphysicians considering possible worlds consisting of only a few
particles are as likely to arrive at deep truths about the universe on that basis as
if they considered a world consisting of, for example, only a single unactualized
potentiality.
We cannot go back to anti-metaphysical positivism. This book is not hostile
to metaphysics; indeed, it is an exercise in metaphysics. However, we think
that the kind of intellectual atmosphere that led Hume, and later Russell, the
Vienna Circle, and Reichenbach, to denounce whole leading branches of the
philosophy of their times as scholastic have arisen again. It seems, inductively,
that such moments recur endemically in the discipline. We suppose this happens
mainly because philosophers inevitably spend most of their time arguing with one
another, until they forget that there is anyone else around or any important source
of opinions besides rational arguments. When philosophy becomes institutionally
solipsistic, however, it risks making itself intellectually and culturally irrelevant.
No scientist has any reason to be interested in most of the conversation that now
goes on under the rubric of metaphysics. We are dismayed that a large part of our
profession deserves to be ignored by those who actually interrogate nature in the
³⁰ Again, see Chapter 3.

--- Page 40 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 27
ﬁeld and the lab. Fortunately, in philosophy’s previous episodes of detachment
from empirical inquiry, the Humes, Russells, and Carnaps have turned up when
needed to save the enterprise from itself. While not claiming a mantle of their
magnitude, we are here embarked on a mission of disciplinary rescue in their
spirit.
In setting out upon this mission, we require some criteria for determining
when purportedly naturalist metaphysics has descended into philosophy of A-
Level chemistry, or some other variety of pseudo-naturalism. Simply transforming
the presuppositions we identify into negative commandments won’t do the job.
Furthermore, we think that contemporary science provides evidence for some
positive metaphysical claims and theses. Following all our critical remarks in this
section, we can only move on to sketch these after ﬁrst stating the conditions
under which we think that positive metaphysics can be appropriately motivated.
1.3 THE PRINCIPLE OF NATURALISTIC CLOSURE
In this section we explicitly formulate the fully naturalistic principles that
constitute the ground rules for our project. The discussion in the section above
indicates the sort of metaphysics we eschew by citing instances. Socrates would
remind us that this can’t in itself constitute a substantive claim. We require
some proper principle which distinguishes what we regard as useful from useless
metaphysics.
Note that in stating this as our aim, we immediately distance ourselves from the
positivists and align our attitude more closely with that of Peirce and pragmatism.
As Putnam (1995) reminds us, both the positivists and the pragmatists sought to
demarcate the scientiﬁc from the unscientiﬁc by use of veriﬁcationist principles.
However, Putnam emphasizes that ‘for the positivists, the whole idea was that the
veriﬁcation principle should exclude metaphysics … while for the pragmatists the
idea was that it should apply to metaphysics, so that metaphysics might become
a responsible and signiﬁcant enterprise’ (293, his emphasis).
Why should radical methodological naturalists suppose that there is any
‘responsible and signiﬁcant’ job for metaphysics to do? Our answer is that one
of the important things we want from science is a relatively uniﬁed picture
of the world. We do not assert this as a primitive norm. Rather, we claim,
with Friedman (1974) and Kitcher (1981), that it is exempliﬁed in the actual
history of science. Scientists are reluctant to pose or to accept hypotheses that
are stranded from the otherwise connected body of scientiﬁc beliefs. This is
rational, reﬂecting the fact that a stranded hypothesis represents a mystery,
and therefore calls out for scientiﬁc work aimed at eliminating it. It also
reﬂects the fact that an important source of justiﬁcation for a hypothesis
is its standing in reciprocal explanatory relationships—networked consilience
relationships—with other hypotheses (see Thagard 1992). (Good hypotheses

--- Page 41 ---

28 In Defence of Scientism
are also, of course, expected to have at least some relatively direct independent
evidence in their favour.) However, evaluating the global consilience network is
not a task assigned to any particular s cience, partly because important efﬁciency
considerations recommend disciplinary specialization. Metaphysics, as we will
understand it here, is the enterprise of critically elucidating consilience networks
across the sciences.
The reader will have noticed that this justiﬁcation of metaphysics, and indeed
its identiﬁcation of the nature of justiﬁabl e metaphysics, is pragmatic in character.
Our appeal to pragmatism here is in turn based on one meta-methodological and
one epistemological claim that we endorse. The meta-methodological claim is
that there is no such thing as ‘scientiﬁc method’, by which we mean: no particular
set of positive rules for reasoning that all and only scientists do or should follow.
There are of course many observed prohibitions (for example, ‘Do not induct
on samples known to be selected in unrepresentative ways’ and ‘Do not invent
data’), but these apply to all sound reasoning, not to distinctively ‘scientiﬁc’
reasoning. Thus science is, according to us, demarcated from non-science solely
by institutional norms: requirements for rigorous peer review before claims may
be deposited in ‘serious’ registers of scientiﬁc belief, requirements governing
representational rigour with respect to both theoretical claims and accounts of
observations and experiments, and so on. We do not suppose that these norms
are arbitrary or products of path-dependent historical factors. They are justiﬁed
by the fact that individual human beings are poorly prepared by evolution to
control complex inductive reasoning across domains that did not pose survival
problems for our ancestors. We can, however, achieve signiﬁcant epistemological
feats by collaborating and by creating strong institutional ﬁlters on errors. This
point gives rise in turn to the epistemological claim mentioned at the beginning
of the paragraph. Since science just is our set of institutional error ﬁlters for
the job of discovering the objective character of the world—that and no more
but also that and no less— science respects no domain restrictions and will
admit no epistemological rivals (such as natural theology or purely speculative
metaphysics).³¹ With respect to anything that is a putative fact about the world,
scientiﬁc institutional processes are absolutely and exclusively authoritative.
Still following Putnam (1995), we can now note two other respects in
which our pragmatist attitude to metaphysics resembles Peirce’s rather than
the positivists’. First, with Peirce we emphasize that scientiﬁc (and useful
metaphysical) reasoning is a community enterprise and is not, except on rare
occasions such as the achievements of Darwin and Einstein, reliably supported by
feats of individual reasoning—let alone consequences of reﬂection on intuitions.
³¹ Thus the very popular idea, recently championed by Gould (1999), that religion and science
provide complementary accounts of different domains of reality must be rejected except where—as
Gould sometimes implies —some particular religion, or religion in general, is interpreted as making
no factual claims. Any fact any religion purports to establish will, if there is any evidence for it at
all, be a target for scientiﬁc explanation.

--- Page 42 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 29
Second, we stress that what sound metaphysics should be connected with are
substantial bodies of scientiﬁc results taken together, rather than individual
claims taken one at a time. (Positivists, of course, discovered this second point
themselves: this was the path that led through Carnap to Quine.) These points
are connected to one another by the following claim: individuals are blessed with
no epistemological anchor points, neither uninterpreted sense-data nor reliable
hunches about what ‘stands to reason’. The epistemic supremacy of science rests
on repeated iteration of institutional error ﬁlters.
In the previous section we rejected the idea that scientiﬁcally disconnected
metaphysics should step into the breach wherever science has in principle
nothing to say. We follow Peirce in endorsing a non-positivist version of
veriﬁcationism—a version that is universally respected by the institutional
practices of science. This veriﬁcationism consists in two claims. First, no
hypothesis that the approximately consensual current scientiﬁc picture declares
to be beyond our capacity to investigate should be taken seriously. Second, any
metaphysical hypothesis that is to be taken seriously should have some identiﬁable
bearing on the relationship between at least two relatively speciﬁc hypotheses that
are either regarded as conﬁrmed by institutionally bona ﬁde current science or
are regarded as motivated and in principle conﬁrmable by such science.
With respect to the ﬁrst aspect of this veriﬁcationism, let us be clear that
‘capacity’ is to be read in a strong modal sense. In saying that something is
beyond our capacity to investigate we do not just mean that it’s beyond our
practical capacity—because we would have to last too long as a species, or travel
too far or too fast or use a probe no one now has any idea how to build. We
refer instead to parts of reality from which science itself tells us information
cannot, in principle, be extracted for receipt in our region of spacetime or in
regions of spacetime to which we or our instruments could in principle go.
Suppose that the Big Bang is a singular boundary across which no information
can be recovered from the other side. ³² Then, if someone were to say that ‘The
Big Bang was caused by Elvis’, this would count, according to our principle,
as a pointless speculation. There is no evidence against it—but only for the
trivial reason that no evidence could bear on it at all. We take it that the
claim about Elvis is obviously uninteresting. Our point here, however, is that
it is not just uninteresting because it is silly and unmotivated. Claims that
the Big Bang was caused by God, or by the action of a black hole, would be
uninteresting, in the imagined circumstances, in exactly the same sense. Unlike
the claim about Elvis, they may have evident psychological motivations. Typical
motivations for the claim about God are various and often complex, though
they almost invariably include instances of attempted domestication of science
(in our sense). The imagined claim about the black hole is more obviously
³² We do not assert that this is so. This question was regarded as closed until a few years ago, but
has recently become controversial again.

--- Page 43 ---

30 In Defence of Scientism
domesticating. Why, if the Big Bang were truly a singularity in the sense of being
an information boundary, would a black hole be any more likely to be involved
in its generation than Elvis or God or an inﬁnity of other things someone could
imagine? Black holes seem plausible only because they are appropriately scaled
entities for interacting with very large cosmic events on our side of the boundary.
The explanation is (relatively) attractive only because it is familiar. An aspect of
leaving science undomesticated is recognizing that it itself may tell us that there
are questions we absolutely cannot answer because any attempted answer is as
probable as any other. This does not imply that we should look to an institution
other than science to answer such questions; we should in these cases forget about
the questions.³³
It should be clear from what has just been said that our veriﬁcationism, unlike
that of the logical positivists, is not a claim about meaning. The statement ‘The
Big Bang was caused by Elvis’ is perfectly meaningful in all reasonable senses of
the term. When we call the statement ‘pointless’ we intend nothing technical.
We mean only that asking it can make no contribution to objective inquiry. (It
might, of course, make a contribution to comedy or art.)
The second claim stated as constitutive of our veriﬁcationism is, so far,
ambiguous in three ways that require sorting out.
First, ‘identiﬁable bearing on’ is a weasel phrase, open to multiple readings.
Let us thus make its intended meaning more precise. Naturalism requires that,
since scientiﬁc institutions are the instruments by which we investigate objective
reality, their outputs should motivate all claims about this reality, including
metaphysical ones. We have stated our view that the point of metaphysics is
to articulate and assess global consilience relations across bodies of scientiﬁcally
generated beliefs. Thus one natura list constraint on metaphysics might be
expressed as follows:
Any new metaphysical claim that is to be taken seriously should be motivated
by, and only by, the service it would perform, if true, in showing how two or
more speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypotheses jointly explain more than the sum of what is
explained by the two hypotheses taken separately, where a ‘scientiﬁc hypothesis’
is understood as an hypothesis that is taken seriously by institutionally bona ﬁde
current science.
This proposal clearly calls for an account of explanation that allows us to make
clear sense of the idea that someone could have ‘more’ explanation given one
structure of beliefs than another. Here, we rely on a substantial body of work on
scientiﬁc explanation by Philip Kitcher (1981, 1989). Kitcher’s basic idea is that
³³ Science might posit the existence of a region of spac etime that is absolutely inaccessible in
the sense that we can obtain no information b earing on any of its properties other than whatever
relations with other regions licensed inferring its existence in the ﬁrst place. Then any hypotheses
about these other properties w ould be pointless metaphysics.

--- Page 44 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 31
uniﬁcation of science consists in maximizing the ratio of kinds of phenomena
we can explain to the number of kinds of causal processes ³⁴ we cite in the
explanations. We make progress toward such maximization every time we show
that two or more phenomena are explained by a common argument pattern.
An argument pattern is a kind of template for generating explanations of new
phenomena on the basis of structural similarity between the causal networks
that produced them and causal networks that produced other, already explained
phenomena. Lest the idea be thought too vague, let us quote Kitcher’s ofﬁcial
introduction of argument patterns in full:
A schematic sentence is an expression obtained by replacing [at least] some … nonlogical
expressions occurring in a sentence with d ummy letters. Thus, starting with the sentence
‘Organisms homozygous for the sickling allele develop sickle-cell anaemia,’ we can
generate a number of schematic sentences: for example, ‘Organisms homozygous for A
develop P’a n d‘ F o ra l lx,i f x is O and A then x is P’…A s e t o f ﬁlling instructions for a
schematic sentence is a set of directions for replacing the dummy letters of the schematic
sentence, such that for each dummy letter, there is a direction that tells us how it should
be replaced. For the schematic sentence ‘Organisms homozygous for the sickling allele
develop sickle-cell anaemia,’ the ﬁlling instructions might specify that A be replaced by
the name of an allele and P by the name of a phenotypic trait. A schematic argument
is a sequence of schematic sentences. A classiﬁcation for a schematic argument is a set
of statements describing the inferential characteri stics of the schematic argument: it tells
us which terms of the sequence are to be regarded as premises, which are inferred from
which, what rules of inference are used, and so forth. Finally, a general argument pattern
is a triple consisting of a schematic argument, a set of sets of ﬁlling instructions, and a
classiﬁcation for the schematic argument. (Kitcher 1989, 432)
Kitcher goes on to exemplify application of the argument-pattern concept
by constructing the argument patterns for three large-scale scientiﬁc theories:
classical genetics, Darwinian selection theory, and Dalton’s theory of the chemical
bond. Ross (2005, 377–8) constructs the argument pattern for neoclassical
microeconomics. We have a uniﬁed world-view to the extent that we use a
smaller rather than a larger number of argument patterns in science, and to the
extent that what get used as schematic sentences in these argument patterns are
themselves derived from other non-ad hoc argument patterns.
It will be noted that this account of uniﬁcation is given in terms of the
expressions of propositional descriptions of scientiﬁc discoveries and general-
izations. To this extent it might appear to be positivistic in one of the senses
we’ve rejected. However, our claim (and Kitcher’s claim) is not that science
consists of argument patterns, but that our being able to describe our scientiﬁc
knowledge in terms of a compact set of argument patterns reﬂects our (collect-
ively) knowing how to use a compact set of problem-solving strategies —ways
³⁴ Later (in Chapter 5) we will justify substituting ‘information transmitting processes’ for ‘causal
processes’ in any use of the concept of causation that is, like Kitcher’s, general and metaphysical
rather than parochial to a special science.

--- Page 45 ---

32 In Defence of Scientism
of designing experiments and other measurement procedures—when confront-
ed with new phenomena. The body of direct scientiﬁc knowledge consists of
problem-solving strategies, and our ability to communicate this knowledge by
means of a compact set of argument patterns is diagnostic of uniﬁed science.
(Beginning in Chapter 2, we will a ssimilate schematic arguments to what we will
call structures.)
In case this is thought to be too abstract to be put to operational use, note
that Paul Thagard (1992 and elsewhere) has constructed connectionist learning
networks that successfully predict features of scientiﬁc theory on the basis of
inducting argument patterns from exemplars. It is true that the argument for
Kitcher’s version of uniﬁcation cannot be derived as an analytical principle that
is independent of all instances; the claim is that it applies to what scientists regard
as prize-worthy achievements.
A second ambiguous idea that occurs in our second veriﬁcationist claim
requires attention. What does ‘speciﬁc’ mean in the phrase ‘speciﬁc scientiﬁc
hypothesis’?
The history of veriﬁcationism warns us of both the importance and the
difﬁculty of this issue. The positivists, in trying to arrive at their principle of
empirical signiﬁcance, struggled in vain with the problem of ﬁnding a criterion
strict enough to exclude unscientiﬁc speculation, but liberal enough to avoid
ruling out any claims that might matter to scientists (Hempel 1965, ch. 4).
If one allows that any claim that itself is relevant to science is an empirically
signiﬁcant scientiﬁc hypothesis, then it becomes trivially easy to make almost any
metaphysical hypothesis come out as scientiﬁcally relevant. Suppose one granted
that ‘All objects people can see without instruments are larger than atoms’ is
a signiﬁcant scientiﬁc hypothesis. Almost all of the metaphysics we instanced
as scientiﬁcally irrelevant a few pages ago can be demonstrably connected, by
putatively explanatory relations, to statements at this level of generality. To have
teeth, a naturalistic restriction on metaphysics must block the justiﬁcation of
metaphysical hypotheses only by reference to such purely generic and qualitative
truths. But ‘speciﬁc’ is vague. Suppose we tried to make it precise enough to
deﬁne an exact line between overly generic scientiﬁc hypotheses and the kind
which we think should motivate metaphysical ideas? In that case, the history of
positivism warns us, we would inevitably invite counterexamples derived from
the fact that there is no canonical, pre-deﬁnable kind of statement of hypotheses
that scientists regard as important. An attempt to analyse ‘speciﬁc’ in a way
precise enough to block trivial justiﬁcation of most metaphysics would inevitably
become an arbitrary ban on many metaphysical hypotheses that important groups
of scientists do ﬁnd interesting.
The positivists made a fundamental mistake in seeking a principle for demar-
cating scientiﬁc from unscientiﬁc speculation by logical and semantic analysis.
The problem with this approach is that the analytic generalizations used for
demarcation must either be regarded as a priori or as tautologies, in which case

--- Page 46 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 33
they cannot be thought to be derived from science. A naturalistic demarcation
principle should be based on reference to criteria that are empirically observed
to regulate the practices of science. The principle at which we aim should not be
trotted out as an analysis of the concept of ‘sound metaphysics’, and should not
govern kinds of linguistic entities or propositions. What we should attempt to
articulate is a heuristic principle, something that reminds us which sorts of criti-
cal questions should be addressed to philosophers when they offer metaphysical
proposals. It must be clear enough in its intended force to rule out clear cases of
neo-scholastic metaphysics, but it need not be something that could be applied
algorithmically.
This might seem to be special pleading on our part. It might be thought that,
after thundering about our intention to scourge the land of bad metaphysics,
we’ve now just admitted that we can’t even exactly say what bad metaphysics is.
However, while our point above is obviously ‘pleading’ of a sort—don’t ask us
to do the impossible, please—our pragmatist framework of assumptions saves
it from being ad hoc. We demarcate good science—around lines which are
inevitably fuzzy near the boundary—by reference to institutional factors, not to
directly epistemological ones. (Again, this reference is indirectly epistemological,
and not irreducibly sociological, if the institutional factors that make science
epistemologically superior themselves admit of epistemological justiﬁcation, as
they do.) This in turn implies that our principle must have the status of a
normative heuristic, not that of a logical analysis. It also suggests a strategy
for rendering the requirement of ‘speciﬁcity’ less vague. We can do this not
by reference to representational (syntactic or semantic) properties of hypotheses
themselves, but by reference to well-understood norms of scientiﬁc practice that
are identiﬁed empirically.
Here, then, is such a norm. Almost all successful participants in ‘ bona ﬁde
institutional science’—on which we will say more below—learn in gradu-
ate school, or soon after, which sorts of hypotheses one can not propose as
the targets of investigation in a grant proposal to a ‘serious’ foundation or
funding agency with non-zero prospects of success. Of course, there will be
many hypotheses with respect to which judgements will differ as to how far
above zero their funding prospects should be estimated to be. And some
work that many or even most people would judge to be unimportant or silly
actually gets proposed and funded. However, any physicist would agree that
a study aimed at testing the claim that ‘All objects people can see without
instruments are larger than atoms’ would not be worth writing up for fund-
ing.³⁵ The problem is not, of course, that the claim is unscientiﬁc, let alone
empirically insigniﬁcant. The problem is that the claim is generic rather than
speciﬁc.
³⁵ We invite the reader to imagine a physicist, fresh from reading Nolan (2004), writing a grant
proposal to investigate the idea that the universe is made of hypergunk (see n. 23 above).

--- Page 47 ---

34 In Defence of Scientism
It is ﬁne for our purposes if our veriﬁcationist principle errs on the side of
permissiveness, allowing, in principle, ‘importance’ to be bestowed on some
metaphysical claims motivated by slightly eccentric or dull speciﬁc scientiﬁc
hypotheses. The principle is intended as a negative heuristic that blocks neo-
scholastic metaphysics. This sort of metaphysics is, we suggested in the previous
section, partly distinguished by substituting the philosophy of A-level chemistry
for the philosophy of actual science when it tries to link itself to science and
thus justify its conception of itself as naturalistic. The kinds of generic—often
true—principles that comprise A-level chemistry are just the sorts of things that
are not targets of investigation in projects that earn research grants.
Again, we stress that speciﬁcity is not a feature that is necessarily correlated with
empirical signiﬁcance as the positivists intended that idea. The generic claims that
often motivate neo-scholastic metaphysics have no special epistemological features
in common. Some of them are clear truths (as is the case with our example); others
are folk approximations to the truth that are so approximate that the best semantic
designation for them is: false. This just serves to emphasize that a consistent
naturalist should aim only at a kind of demarcation principle quite different
from the positivists’ criterion of cognitive signiﬁcance. We seek a principle,
referenced to the institutional factors that make science epistemically superior,
for distinguishing well-motivated from ill-motivated metaphysical proposals; we
do not seek a principle for separating sense from nonsense.
Some philosophers will worry that if we index speciﬁcity to fundable research,
we relativize the motivators for metaphysical revision to particular moments in
the history of science. Others will raise a closely related worry that, in declaring
that generic scientiﬁc hypotheses should not motivate metaphysical revisions, we
are ignoring the fact that generic hypotheses do sometimes get refuted or revised
by scientiﬁc progress—and that when they do, this is typically the basis for
our most important metaphysical adjustments. This would indeed be a decisive
objection if someone tried to operationalize empirical signiﬁcance by reference to
fundable activity. Again, however, that is not what we propose to do; fundability
is simply being suggested as a proxy indicator (in the economist’s sense) of
what is likely to be scientiﬁcally interesting. Hypotheses we would regard
as unacceptably generic (when used as the basis for motivating metaphysical
innovations) are indeed sometimes overturned. But when they fall, they do so
under pressure from accumulated results based on investigations of more speciﬁc
phenomena with which the generic hypothesis in question is inferentially related.
Typically, the accumulated results in question amount to substantial sets of
data. Thus the same work investigating speciﬁc hypotheses that motivated the
rejection of the generic hypothesis would be expected also to motivate portentous
metaphysical adjustments. On the issue of temporal relativity, we see no direct
objection to indexing the naturalistic constraints on metaphysical hypotheses
to historically adjustable norms. After all, the point of such a constraint is
to require metaphysicians to be motivated by what the scientiﬁc communities

--- Page 48 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 35
with which they are contemporary ﬁnd signiﬁcant; we should not demand that
metaphysicians be more prescient than the scientists of their times.
One consequence of naturalism that cannot be avoided is that if our current
scientiﬁc image of the world changes much, as we suppose it will, then it will
then turn out that the best current metaphysics is substantially wrong. Neither
we nor anyone else can do better than articulate the best metaphysical picture
the current evidence suggests in attempting to sketch the image of the world that
science presents to us now. We look forward to future science proving us wrong
but hope that philosophers armed with current science will have trouble doing
so. Note that to the extent that metaphysics is closely motivated by science, we
should expect to make progress in metaphysics iff we can expect to make progress
in science. In Chapter 2 we indicate at length why we hold fallibilism about
science to be compatible with optimism about epistemic progress in science. This
argument carries directly over to scientiﬁcally motivated metaphysics.
There are two reasons why a speciﬁc hypothesis might not be deemed suitable
for investigation that should not impugn that hypothesis’s possible relevance
to metaphysics. The ﬁrst is that the hypothesis in question might already be
regarded as conﬁrmed. This in itself presents no issue for our principle as stated,
since that principle allows that conﬁrmed hypotheses are potential motivators
of sound metaphysics. But in light of what we admitted above about temporal
relativity, there seems to be a problem. Suppose that a hypothesis was conﬁrmed
at a time when scientiﬁc judgement as to what was sufﬁciently speciﬁc to
warrant investigation was different—presumably less strict—than at present.
The only way to avoid the absurd conclusion that sound metaphysics becomes
unsound simply because science becomes more specialized is to stipulate that
every hypothesis that was actually a target of direct investigation by recognizably
institutionalized science (so, including the Royal Society but not including
Plato’s Academy) is a potential motivator of sound metaphysics. We do not
think there was ever a time or place after the scientiﬁc revolution when
institutionally bona ﬁde scientiﬁc resources were devoted to directly investigating
claims of a level of generality that justiﬁed or would justify neo-scholastic
metaphysics.
The second reason why a hypothesis that is a potential motivator of sound
metaphysics might not be considered as a subject of direct scientiﬁc investigation
is that no one can think of a practical experiment or measurement. Some
interesting microphysical hypothesis, for example, might be testable only using
an accelerator that is too expensive to build. We of course want to distinguish
hypotheses that are non-investigable in this sense from hypotheses that are
non-investigable because information that would bear on them is in principle
unobtainable by any observer. Let us therefore say simply that a speciﬁc scientiﬁc
hypothesis is one that would be deemed suitable for direct investigation given
the absence of any constraints resulting only from engineering, physiological, or
economic restrictions or their combination.

--- Page 49 ---

36 In Defence of Scientism
A remaining locus of ambiguity in our version of veriﬁcationism is its appeal
to ‘institutionally bona ﬁde ’ science and scientiﬁc research funding bodies. In
general, we are happy to leave this open to the rational judgements of observers
of institutional processes. What we importantly wish to exclude that will not
be obvious from anything said so far, however, are research projects that are
primarily motivated by anthropocentric (for example, purely engineering driven)
ambitions, as opposed to ambitions anchored around attempts to determine
the objective structures in nature. As philosophers, we naturally owe a detailed
account of what we take this to mean, and providing such an account, and a
justiﬁcation for it, is another of the primary objectives of the book as a whole.
In Chapter 4 we will articulate a theory of what it is for a scientiﬁc theory to
be taken to describe a part of objective reality—a ‘real pattern’, as we will say
(following Dennett 1991a). It will follow from this analysis that for a pattern
to be real—for the object of a scientiﬁc theory or other description to be
deemed an aspect of objective reality—it must be such that a community of
inquirers who wished to maximize their stock of true beliefs would continue
to be motivated to track the pattern notwithstanding any shifts in practical,
commercial, or ideological preferences that are not justiﬁed by new evidence
bearing on the epistemic redundancy or non-redundancy of the pattern. Some
activity appropriately called ‘scientiﬁc’ because it is governed by the institutional
error-ﬁltering processes characteristic of science—for example, some research
done in medical, engineering, law, and public policy schools and institutes—does
not aim at objectivity in this sense. That is just to say that such activity sometimes
deliberately tolerates pursuit of objectively redundant facts for the sake of the
practical utility of certain representations by people aiming at real-time solutions
to problems arising from their non-epistemic preferences. Engineers, for example,
sometimes study reﬁnements of generalizations from classical physics that are
strictly false according to contemporary physics. Metaphysics should not be
motivated by such activity.
In excluding anthropocentrically motivated investigations as relevant motiva-
tors of metaphysical hypotheses, we also rule out ideologically driven research.
Suppose, for example, that some self-styled ‘creation scientists’ sought and
obtained funding from one of their own dedicated foundations to pursue a
physical hypothesis that, if true, would comport with their belief in a very
young Earth. We would of course wish to exclude this as a motivator of relevant
metaphysics. The fact that these ‘scientists’ would have to seek their funding
from non-standard sources is, by our lights, precisely the most reliable indicator
that their activity should not be taken seriously by the metaphysician—more
reliable, in particular, than any speciﬁc analysis of the speciﬁc arguments and
assumptions cited in the motivations for the project. ³⁶ We thus take this hypo-
thetical example as casting further illumination on the value of indexing serious
³⁶ This does not imply, of course, that such criticisms are not often valuable in their own right.

--- Page 50 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 37
science to epistemological factors by way of mediating institutional factors as
proxies rather than by directly epistemological criteria. To reiterate: we assume
that the institutions of modern science are more reliable epistemic ﬁlters than are
any criteria that could be identiﬁed by philosophical analysis and written down.
Note that we do not derive this belief from any wider belief about the relia-
bility of evolved human institutions in general. Most of those—governments,
political parties, churches, ﬁrms, NGOs, ethnic associations, families, etc.—are
hardly epistemically reliable at all. Our grounding assumption is that the speciﬁc
institutional processes of science have inductively established peculiar epistemic
reliability.
One more general idea underlying our naturalistic constraint on metaphysics
remains to be expressed. In the next section of this chapter, we will argue for
a principle we call the Primacy of Physics Constraint (PPC). This articulates
the sense in which evidence acceptable to naturalists confers epistemic priority
on physics over other sciences. In Chapter 5 we will elaborate on the details
about how physics constrains other sciences. It will turn out that what is most
importantly different about physics—or, at least, about the part of physics we
will call ‘fundamental’—is that it has wider scope, in a sense we will make
precise, than other sciences. Metaphysics, as the project of unifying the scientiﬁc
world-view, shares the maximum scope of fundamental physics, in the same
precise sense.
It follows from this view—which is part of the content of our metaphysical
theory rather than part of its motivation—that a hypothesis that uniﬁed speciﬁc
hypotheses from sciences other than fundamental physics, but uniﬁed them with
no speciﬁc hypotheses from fundamental physics, would not be a metaphysical
hypothesis. It would instead be a hypothesis of a special science of wider
scope than those it partially uniﬁed. Again, it is premature to go into the
details of this in advance of the analysis to be given in Chapters 4 and 5.
For now we simply assert that although speciﬁc hypotheses from any non-
anthropocentric scientiﬁc inquiry may be motivating premises for naturalistic
metaphysical hypotheses, at least one speciﬁc hypothesis that the metaphysical
hypothesis in question uniﬁes with others must be derived from fundamental
physics.
Based on these reﬂections, here is a reﬁned formulation of a naturalist
constraint on metaphysical hypotheses that we will henceforth refer to as the
Principle of Naturalistic Closure (PNC):
Any new metaphysical claim that is to be taken seriously at time t should be
motivated by, and only by, the service it would perform, if true, in showing how
two or more speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypotheses, at least one of which is drawn from
fundamental physics, jointly explain more than the sum of what is explained by
the two hypotheses taken separately, where this is interpreted by reference to
the following terminological stipulations:

--- Page 51 ---

38 In Defence of Scientism
Stipulation: A ‘scientiﬁc hypothesis’ is understood as an hypothesis that is taken
seriously by institutionally bona ﬁde science at t.
Stipulation: A ‘speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypothesis’ is one that has been directly
investigated and conﬁrmed by institutionally bona ﬁde scientiﬁc activity prior to
t or is one that might be investigated at or after t, in the absence of constraints
resulting from engineering, physiological, or economic restrictions or their
combination, as the primary object of a ttempted veriﬁcation, falsiﬁcation, or
quantitative reﬁnement, where this activity is part of an objective research
project fundable by a bona ﬁde scientiﬁc research funding body.
Stipulation: An ‘objective research project’ has the primary purpose of estab-
lishing objective facts about nature that would, if accepted on the basis of the
project, be expected to continue to be accepted by inquirers aiming to maximize
their stock of true beliefs, notwithstanding shifts in the inquirers’ practical,
commercial, or ideological preferences.
The PNC as thus formulated has so far been motivated only in a provisional way.
At many points in the argument to come, we will ﬂag further considerations that
we take to enhance its justiﬁcation.
1.4 THE PRIMACY OF PHYSICS
There is a methodological rule observed in the history of recent science to the
effect that practitioners of special sciences at any time are discouraged from
suggesting generalizations or causal relationships that violate the broad consensus
in physics at that time, while physicists need not worry reciprocally about
coherence with the state of the special sciences. We call this (so far roughly
formulated) rule the ‘Primacy of Physics Constraint’ or PPC. Here we consider
two questions: (1) How does the PPC relate to the more standard commitments
of avowed ‘physicalists’? (2) Why is the PPC observed in science? We conclude
this section with a more precise formulation of the PCC.
Physicalism is usually deﬁned as the view that everything is ‘in some sense’
physical, or sometimes that everything supervenes on the physical. Papineau
(2001, 3) says that ‘everything is physically constituted’. Hellman and Thomp-
son’s Ontological Physicalism is the view that everything is ‘exhausted’ by
mathematical-physical entities (1975, 553–4). Another possibility, also can-
vassed in Hellman and Thompson (557), is to interpret the core notion of
physicalism as that of ‘one realm of facts determining another’ (our italics), where
causal priority, sufﬁciency, or necessity would be among the possible kinds of
determination. We deny all these claims. We also deny the local supervenience of
the mental on the physical, the token identity of mental states and physical states,
the existence of a hierarchy of ‘levels of reality’, and the claim that all causation

--- Page 52 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 39
is physical causation. ³⁷ Nonetheless, as Kim says, there is no consensus about
how physicalism is to be formulated (2005, 33), and the PPC is compatible with
some weak deﬁnitions of physicalism such as this one also due to Hellman and
Thompson:
Mathematical physics, as the most basic and comprehensive of the sciences, occu-
pies a special position with respect to the over-all scientiﬁc framework. In its loosest
sense physicalism is a recognition of thi s special position. (Hellman and Thompson
1975, 551)
Certainly, the PPC provides no comfort to dualists or emergentists. Physicalism,
in common with the PPC, is committed to a generic asymmetry:s p e c i a ls c i e n c e s
do not relate to physics the way that it relates to them.
The view articulated and defended here clearly accords physics a special
status. The Principle of Naturalistic Closure stated above requires that for a
metaphysical claim to be taken seriously it must relate to at least one speciﬁc
scientiﬁc hypothesis of fundamental physics. The notion of a real pattern, central
to our approach to the special sciences, laid out in Chapter 4 requires projectibility
by a physically possible device. The fact that we take seriously the notion that
there are special sciences at all, that is sciences which are of restricted scope
compared to physics, also shows that physics is more than one science among
many for us.
We argue below that science—its current state and its history—supports
the primacy of physics and physicalism in the loosest sense. Physicalism is
generally regarded, at least by most physicalists, as a naturalist position that is
motivated by science.³⁸Yet, with a few recent exceptions (for example, Papineau
2001, Melnyk 2003), physicalists rarely offer direct arguments for physicalism
using premises drawn from science itself. The debates in which physicalists
do engage, including defending physicalism by dealing with various objections
to it, are striking for the near total absence of reference to current scientiﬁc
theories or results. Much of the contemporary debate over physicalism concerns
variations on the knowledge argument (paradigmatically concerning what Mary,
the colour-perception-deprived yet cognitively omnipotent colour scientist, could
³⁷ There is much debate about how to deﬁne the notion of ‘physical’ in this context follow-
ing Hempel’s dilemma (1965). Ontological physicalism is (almost certainly) false if it refers to
existing physics for its ontology, for it ca n safely be assumed that present-day physics will be
superseded by a more advanced physics of the future that will posit an ontology different in at
least some respects from that of the former. But it is also (certainly) trivial (today) if it deﬁnes the
physical as that which will be posited by a future, completed fundament al physics. Wilson (2006),
following Kim (1996), Spurrett and Papineau (1999), Papineau (2001, 12), Crook and Gillett
(2001), and Loewer (2001, 40), argues that physical entities ought to be characterized as those that
are treated by fundamental physics and that are not fundamentally mental. This approach severs
the link between physics and physicalism. Other recent discussions of how to formulate physicalism
include Dowell (2006), Markosian (2000), Montero (2006), and Ney (forthcoming a). We do not
concern ourselves with this problem because we do not defend ontological physicalism.
³⁸ One exception is Jackson (1998) who seems to regard physicalism as true a priori.

--- Page 53 ---

40 In Defence of Scientism
or could not know about colour ( Jackson 1986)) and reﬂections on the putative
possibility of zombies, inverted spectra, and other exotica utterly unrepresented
in the literature of cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Earlier, one
would more likely ﬁnd debate over physicalism expressed through discussion
of worries over epiphenomenal ectoplasm (Horgan 1982), or worlds physically
differing from our own only in the position of one ammonium molecule, but
at which there are no mental properties at all (Kim 1993). A striking feature of
these debates in at least some versions of each of them is that no facts accessible
to (third-person) science bear on whether the scenarios in question are actual or
not: there are no epiphenomenal ectoplasm detectors, zombies are identical to
us as far as any third-person investigation can tell, and worlds at which there
are no mental properties at all pose the same problem on a larger scale. This
dislocation from what could be discovered empirically is odd in debate over a
position ostensibly motivated by naturalism.
Since at least the 1970s a strong tendency in much debate over physicalism
has been to argue that epistemological commitments, especially to some form of
theory reduction, are unsupportable and inessential to physicalism. Physicalism
is generally taken to express an ontological rather than an epistemological or
methodological claim, but not universally: Oppenheim and Putnam’s (1958)
well-known account of a reductive form of physicalism involved explanation
of all facts by reference to theories concerning the behaviour of elementary
particles. (Note that they didn’t call their position ‘physicalism’.) Much more
recently Kim has said that physicalism is a thesis that any ‘phenomenon in
the world can be physically explained if it can be explained at all’ (2005,
149–50).
There is a tension between the goal of providing a naturalist defence of
physicalism, and that of making physicalism an ontological thesis but not an
epistemological one. A naturalist defence must use evidence, and such evidence
will consist in a catalogue of explanatory—that is, epistemological—successes.
In asserting the thesis that everything is physical the ontological physicalist
singles out a particular science, physics, as having a special role in ontology.
For example, Philip Pettit says the world ‘contains just what a true complete
physics would say it contains’ (1993, 213). Thus understood physicalism is in
tension with the naturalism that supposedly motivates all forms of physicalism.
That is, a responsible naturalist who defers to science as it stands in matters
of belief formation will ﬁnd herself ontologically committed to all sorts of
entities and properties that aren’t straightforwardly physical, in the sense of
being studied as such by physicists. ³⁹ (Dupré 1993 uses this as the basis for a
³⁹ In referring to ontological commitment we are assuming the naturalist to be a scientiﬁc realist.
Although it doesn’t matter for the speciﬁc arguments a dvanced in this discussion, we later, especially
in Chapter 2, defend a speciﬁc version of ontic stru ctural realism rather than standard scientiﬁc
realism.

--- Page 54 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 41
naturalist rejection of ontological physicalism.) Consider, for example, markets,
ﬁxed action patterns, mating displays, episodic memories, evolutionarily stable
strategies, and phonemes. Powerful explanations and successful predictions have
been produced by sciences that aren’t physics and which refer to such entities.
They are good ammunition for an epistemic success argument in favour of
naturalism and against ontological physicalism.
Hüttemann and Papineau (2005) suggest that there are two main forms of
ontological physicalism. One, part–whole physicalism, holds that everything
real is in some sense made out of or is exhausted by basic constituents that are
themselves physical. The other, supervenience or levels physicalism, holds that
the putatively non-physical is nonetheless dependent on the physical.
There have been prominent part–whole physicalists, including Oppenheim
and Putnam (1958), and Pettit (1993). ⁴⁰Since major parts of the remainder
of this book, especially Chapter 3, are a sustained argument against central
presuppositions of part–whole physicalism, we’ll say little about it here. As
Hütteman and Papineau point out, using a simple example concerning a classical
mechanical system comprising three sub-systems, the view that the properties and
behaviour of macroscopic entities is asymmetrically determined by their micro-
constituents and the laws governing micro-activity has little to recommend it
compared to a view in which ‘parts and wholes mutually determine each other’.
As we see later, attention to contemporary physics makes matters much, worse
for the part–whole physicalist.
For a signiﬁcant part of its history, especially in the wake of Davidson’s
inﬂuential paper on ‘Mental Events’ (1970) ontological physicalism has been
widely understood as the thesis that the (putatively) non-physical, including
the mental, the biological, and so forth, supervenes on the physical. There has
been much discussion of different formulations of the supervenience relation. ⁴¹
The general idea is that one set of (for example, mental) properties supervenes
on another (for example, physical or biological) set if, roughly, something
cannot change with respect to its supervening properties without undergoing
some change with respect to its subvening (or base) properties. Hütteman
and Papineau’s distinction is not always drawn, and some accounts of the
supervenience relationship simultaneously suggest part–whole physicalism. An
example is Lewis’s discussion of the dot-matrix picture, the global properties of
which depend upon the speciﬁc arrangement of a grid of dots (Lewis 1986, 14).
There is another form of ontological physicalism, namely Andrew Melnyk’s
(2003) realization physicalism. Realization, according to Melnyk, is a relation
⁴⁰ We return to the former in the next sectio n. Pettit’s microphysicalism is the claim that
‘[T]here are microphysical entities that constitute everything and microphysical regularities govern
everything’ (1993, 214–16). As Ney (forthcoming a, 13) points out, and as we discuss in Chapter 3,
this is refuted by quantum mechanics since entangled states are not constituted by the entities that
enter into them. We also return to microphysicalism in 1.6.
⁴¹ See McLaughlin and Bennett (2005).

--- Page 55 ---

42 In Defence of Scientism
between tokens, in which the tokening of one type meeting certain conditions
(the realizer) guarantees the tokening of another, functional type. A functional
token is physically realized if the ‘associated condition’ for its tokening is met in
virtue of the distribution of physical tokens and the holding of physical laws. So
physical realizationism is the view that:
(R) Every property instance is either an instance of a physical property or a
physically realized instance of some functional property; every object is either
an object of some physical object kind or a physically realized object of some
functional object kind; every event is either an event of some physical event kind
or a physically realized event of some functional event kind.
Melnyk’s realizationism isn’t an identity theory since the realization relation
requires neither token nor type identities, and although it entails some forms
of global supervenience, it isn’t really a supervenience theory either. In the next
section we discuss different versions of reductionism and indicate why we don’t
endorse Melnyk’s physicalism, even though its sparse commitments and bracing
naturalism make it broadly PNC-compatible.
We now explain why we accord physics a special status. Most of the evidence
for the primacy of physics was discovered in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. The developments in question involved attempts to test for the presence
or absence of candidate non-physical forces or other inﬂuences that might affect
the chances of some physical facts, as well as more general extensions of physical
theory. That non-physical forces were on the agenda is partly explicable by
reference to empirical advances in the life sciences and chemistry that added to the
list of explananda phenomena that mechanists were initially unable to explain.
Newton’s introduction of forces was emulated with enthusiasm, and speciﬁc
forces were proposed in several areas, including forces of attraction and repulsion
for electrostatics, magnetism, and the cohesion of bodies; forces of irritability and
sensibility to account for perception; forces to explain fermentation, the origin
of micro-organisms, and chemical bonding. Some physical forces were found.
None of the non-physical ones were.
At the same time, scientists made progress in unifying physical forces, and the
physical treatment of force, work, and energy. Key steps here included Faraday’s
research on electromagnetic induction which also showed the unity of apparently
different sorts of electricity, whether electrostatic, induced, or from batteries;
Joule’s research on the quantitative equivalence between heat and mechanical
work; and Helmholtz’ work on deriving the principle of conservation of the sum
of kinetic and potential energy from rational mechanics, and relating this principle
to the work of Joule. For a time, chemistry was a striking counterexample to this
trend. Although various chemical regularities had been discovered, there was no
contender for an explanation of chemical bonding in terms of more fundamental
physical processes, and the possibility that there were as yet unknown chemical
forces was recognized by leading scientists. Broad referred to chemistry as the

--- Page 56 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 43
‘most plausible’ candidate for an ‘example of emergent behaviour’ (Broad 1925:
65), and Mill had chemistry in mind in his earlier treatment of composition
of forces, which was a key source for British emergentism. However, following
a series of advances by Thomson, Rutherford, and others, Bohr successfully
constructed, ﬁrst, a dynamical model of the hydrogen atom, then of heavier
atoms, and ﬁnally aspects of the structure of the periodic table (Pais 1991,
146–52). A key measure of his success was deriving the hitherto descriptive
Balmer formula for the emission spectra of hydrogen and some other simple
elements from his model. A physical theory of chemical bonding had been
developed, and while it did not apply readily to all molecules, or indeed all
atoms, and certainly did not herald the theoretical reduction of chemistry to
physics, it did dispose of the view that chemical phenomena involved distinct
non-physical forces or forms of inﬂuence. ⁴²
This history has been widely taken to support two complementary arguments
for the primacy of physics. The ﬁrst argument is inductive: in the history of science
a succession of speciﬁc hypotheses to the effect that irreducibly non-physical
entities and processes ﬁx the chances of physical outcomes have failed.
The second argument is also inductive. Over the history of science a succession
of processes in living systems, and in the parts of some living systems dedicated
to cognition, have come to be largely or entirely understood in physical terms,
by which we mean in terms of the same quantities and laws as are invoked in
physical theorizing about non-living systems. For example, the electrochemical
functioning of neurons is understood partly in the language of insulators,
resistors, and charge and density gradients, as is the operation of the ion pumps
and ATP transport molecules that build the charge gradients, and supply the
(physical) energy for the operation of the pumps. So it is not merely that
anti-primacy-of-physics hypotheses have been rejected in the history of science,
but that speciﬁcally physical hypotheses and explanations have been successful in
their place.
Over this history physical theory itself has been uniﬁed and extended, for
example in developing conservation principles, partly through the same experi-
mental work concerning the conversion of different sorts of energy that supports
the previous inductive arguments. Subsequently, for example, physical forces
previously viewed as independent (electromagnetism and weak nuclear forces)
have been given uniﬁed treatment in the Standard Model of particle physics,
according to which the same electroweak interaction manifests in two different
ways at low energies as a result of the photon having no rest mass. Consolidations
and uniﬁcations of this sort are part of the reason for supposing that there is
a coherent body of fundamental physical theory of sufﬁcient scope and power
that it is the only candidate for the ‘most basic and comprehensive of the
⁴² For arguments against reductionism about chemist ry see Scerri and McIntyre (1997).

--- Page 57 ---

44 In Defence of Scientism
sciences’. In consequence, fundamental physics is regarded as having primacy
over the rest of physics.
Most philosophers who consider themselves naturalists (Dupré and Cartwright
being exceptions) regard what has just been said as uncontroversial. However,
there is a frequent tendency to go on to use the primacy of fundamental
physics as if classical physics is still the approximate content of fundamental
physics. This, we contend, is the basic source of the widespread confusion
of naturalism with the kind of ontological physicalism we reject. Classical
physics was (at least in philosophers’ simpliﬁcations) a physics of objects, col-
lisions, and forces. When ‘fundamental’ physics is interpreted in these terms,
as an account of the smallest constituents of matter and their interactions,
it seems reasonable to many to think that everything decomposes into these
constituents and that all causal relations among macroscopic entities are closed
under descriptions of their interactions. In other words, they think that the
history sketched above supports ontological physicalism. However, this is the
philosophy of A-level chemistry at work. In Chapters 2 and 3 we will argue
that contemporary physics motivates a metaphysics of ontic structural real-
ism (Ladyman 1998, French and Ladyman 2003a and 2003b). This will yield
an interpretation of fundamental physics that has nothing to do with putative
tiny objects or their collisions. Our endorsing the primacy of fundamental
physics should be read in light of this. To anticipate, fundamental physics for
us denotes a set of mathematically speciﬁed structures without self-individuating
objects, where any measurement taken anywhere in the universe is in part
measurement of these structures. The elements of fundamental physics are
not basic proper parts of all, or indeed of any, objects. (Nor is there any
motivation for supposing that the fundamental structures describe gunk.) The
primacy of fundamental physics as we intend it does not suggest ontological
physicalism.⁴³
We now give the more precise formulation of the PPC:
Special science hypotheses that conﬂict with fundamental physics, or such
consensus as there is in fundamental physics, should be rejected for that reason
alone. Fundamental physical hypotheses are not symmetrically hostage to the
conclusions of the special sciences.
This, we claim, is a regulative principle in current science, and it should be
respected by naturalistic metaphysicians. The ﬁrst, descriptive, claim is reason
for the second, normative, one.
⁴³ Note that the standard history is also taken to suppo rt the causal closure of the physical world
or the completeness of physics (Papineau 1993, Spurrett and Papineau 1999). This principle is
not entailed by the PPC since one might deny that there are causes in physics (perhaps persuaded
by Russell’s 1913 arguments, see 5.1–5.4), and so deny the causal closure of the physical while still
defending the PPC.

--- Page 58 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 45
Precisely because the PPC holds in science, one ﬁnds few direct invocations
of it in scientiﬁc literature, because it would likely have been applied as a ﬁlter
on the road to publication, rather than fought over in public. Nonetheless, there
are places where one would expect to ﬁnd it stated, including in textbooks where
methodological precepts are passed on, and by those advocating radical or new
ideas who are concerned that they not be mistaken for proponents of crazy ideas.
We close this section with a few such instances.
Theories of agency and volition are especially likely to raise suspicion of dualism
or other breaches of physical primacy. Near the opening of his (2001) account of
the psychology of preference equivocation, addiction, and compulsion, Ainslie
takes care to warn his readers that he requires that ‘all explanations of behaviour
should at least be consistent with what is known in the physical and biological
sciences’ (2001, 11). Kauffman’s popular account of complexity theory argues
that key phenomena associated with life are ‘emergent’. He is careful, though,
to emphasize that he does not mean anything ‘mystical’ by this, and explains
that no ‘vital force or extra substance is present in the emergent’ system (1995,
24). Similarly, Stephanie Forrest (1991, 1) refers to emergent computing as
having as its object ‘computational models in which the behaviour of the entire
system is in some sense more than the sum of its parts’ and that in these systems
‘interesting global behaviour emerges from many local interactions’. But then, in
case this smacks of downward causation, she adds that ‘the concept of emergent
computation cannot contribute magical computational properties’ (1991, 3). We
suggest that the use of words like ‘mystical’ and ‘magical’ here is considered, and
that it reﬂects the fact that rejection of the PPC amounts not merely to doing
bad science, but to not doing science at all.
1.5 UNITY OF SCIENCE AND REDUCTIONISM
We have said that the raison d’ˆetre of a useful metaphysics is to show how the
separately developed and justiﬁed pieces of science (at a given time) can be ﬁtted
together to compose a uniﬁed world-view. By ‘pieces of science’ we refer to
any and all propositions ⁴⁴that motivate metaphysical reﬂections according to
the PNC, including theoretical propositions of any degree of generality, ⁴⁵and
representations of observations and experimental manipulations.
In philosophy of science, one ﬁnds two general strategies for uniﬁcation.
One is representational. It seeks formal or semantic entailment relations holding
⁴⁴ The reference to ‘propositions’ does not imply we think science is essentially linguistic. Other
‘pieces of science’ are embodied bits of procedural know-how among scientists that we assume can
be modelled as representations of one sort or another if and as the need arises.
⁴⁵ Some scientiﬁc propositions will be sufﬁciently general as themselves to be metaphysical. Our
notion of metaphysics is thus recursive, and requires no attempt to identify a boundary between
metaphysical and sci entiﬁc propositions.

--- Page 59 ---

46 In Defence of Scientism
amongst unifying propositions and the propositions they unify. Kitcher (for
example, 1981, 1993) and Thagard (1992) are leading post-positivist proponents
of this strategy. The other strategy, more frequent among philosophers who seek
metaphysical rather than just epistemological unity, rests on some version or
other of (usually ontological physicalist) reductionism. If there were one thing
or some uniﬁed class of things that all of science could, via reductions between
the parts of science, be supposed to be ultimately about, then science would be
uniﬁed. Oppenheim and Putnam’s (1958) famous argument that science was
in the process of being uniﬁed was reductionistic and the particular form of
reductionism they envisaged bottomed out at elementary physical particles.
We begin our discussion of the Unity of Science with this paper, even though
no contemporary philosopher endorses much of what it says, because Oppenheim
and Putnam’s main premises are drawn from empirical science and it is therefore
an exemplar of PNC-compatible philosophy.
For Oppenheim and Putnam the Unity of Science is a ‘working hypothesis’
which they argue commands more respect than the alternatives. Their discussion
focuses on the Unity of Science, ﬁrst, as ‘an ideal state of science’ and, second, to
‘a pervasive trend within science, seeking the attainment of that ideal’ (1958, 4).
The speciﬁc notion of reduction that Oppenheim and Putnam use is developed
from an account given by Kemeny and Oppenheim (1956). This so-called
‘micro-reduction’ is intended to provide a formulation of reductionism without
commitment to the earlier (pre-1961, for example, Nagel 1949) programme of
Nagel and others based on bridge principles or ‘co-ordinating deﬁnitions’. The
further developed version used by Oppenheim and Putnam says that, given two
theories T
1 and T2,T 2 can be said to be reduced to T 1 iff:
(1) The vocabulary of T 2 contains terms not in the vocabulary of T 1.
(2) Any observational data explainable by T 2 are explainable by T 1.
(3) T 1 is at least as well systematized as T 2. (1958, 5)
This rather weak construal of a reduction relation between theories ( T ) is applied
by extension to branches of science (B) and the key requirement for being a micro-
reduction here is that ‘the branch B1 deals with the parts of the objects dealt with
by B2’ (1958, 6), which presupposes both a universe of discourse for each branch,
and the part/whole notion (Pt). ⁴⁶Micro-reduction requires decomposition of
entities (or objects in the universe of discourse) of B 2 into proper parts all
within the universe of discourse of B1. The micro-reduction relation is transitive,
so micro-reductions could be cumulative. Oppenheim and Putnam note this
and point out that two additional properties of micro-reductions (irreﬂexivity
and asymmetry) can be derived from transitivity given only ‘the (certainly true)
empirical assumption that there does not exist an inﬁnite descending chain of
proper parts, i.e., a series of things x
1,x 2,x 3 …s u c h t h a t x2 is a proper part of
⁴⁶ See also Hempel and Oppenheim (1953).

--- Page 60 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 47
x1,x 3 is a proper part of x 2, etc.’ (1958, 7). (Note the assumption that atomism
is certainly true.)
Oppenheim and Putnam construct a theory of the relationships between
fundamental physics and the special sciences, and among the special sciences,
by reference to this mereology. They reason that ‘there must be several levels’
of micro-reduction, and that ‘scientiﬁc laws which apply to all things of a
given level and to all combinations of those things also apply to all things of
higher level. Thus the physicist, when he speaks about ‘all physical objects,’ is
also speaking about living things—but not qua living things’ (1958, 8). They
also argue that induction on the recent history of science as of their writing
shows a trend towards uniﬁcation by micro-reduction across a cascade of six
levels, which they identify as: (6) social groups; (5) multi-cellular living things;
(4) cells; (3) molecules; (2) atoms; (1) elementary particles. The empirical case is
not made by any careful demonstrations of inter-theoretic reductions satisfying
the three criteria above. Rather, they claim that science ‘directly’ supports their
proposed hierarchy of levels through a track record of successful decompositions
of higher-level types into adjacent lower-level ones and syntheses of lower-level
types into higher-level ones. They also claim ‘indirect’ empirical support from
the fact that, according to them, science has consistently shown types at lower
levels to be prior, ontogenetically and genealogically, to the types they compose.
A hodgepodge of considerations is responsible for the almost universal rejection
of the package of theses that Oppenheim and Putnam promote. The view that
science progresses mainly by reduction, or even the idea that this is an important
question, has been ﬁercely contested since the work of Feyerabend and Kuhn.
The atomism of Oppenheim and Putnam is now rejected by many philosophers.
Oppenheim and Putnam clearly suppose that relations amongst constituents of
compound systems are generally additive. Thanks to the aggressive championing
of complexity theory in almost all disciplines (but especially in the social,
behavioural, and biological sciences) by the Santa Fe Institute and its friends, this
hunch has been displaced by a widespread emphasis on ‘emergence’ and inter-level
feedback loops. Hence in many respects the inappropriateness of Oppenheim
and Putnam’s most crude background assumptions is not even controversial
nowadays. Our most important reasons for rejecting the Oppenheim and
Putnam programme are that we deny their atomism (see especially Chapter 3
below), and also maintain that Oppenheim and Putnam’s supposition that two
sciences (or ‘branches’ of science) could explain the same ‘observational data’
takes for granted a denial of what we call the scale relativity of ontology (see
Chapter 4 below).
There are other sorts of reductionism worth distinguishing. Let ‘micro-
reductionism’ denote any form of reductionism that includes a decomposition
condition like one found in Oppenheim and Putnam. ‘Nagelian reductions’,
on the other hand, are either reductions as envisaged in Nagel’s own ﬂagship
account (Chapter 11 of Nagel 1961), or in later views developed as reﬁnements or

--- Page 61 ---

48 In Defence of Scientism
elaborations of Nagel’s model. For Nagel, reduction is the (deductive) explanation
of a theory by another theory. Nagel pointed out that typically, in real cases,
in order for reduction to be effected ‘additional assumptions’ are needed. For
example in his famous discussion of a reduction of a single law of thermodynamics
(the Boyle–Charles law for ideal gasses, stating pV = kT where p is pressure, V
volume, k a constant, and T the temperature of a volume of gas) to statistical
mechanics, Nagel argues that these additional assumptions include: supposing
a sample of gas to consist in a large number of molecules; arbitrarily dividing
the volume into many sub-volumes, and assigning independent probabilities
of position and momentum in the sub-volumes to the molecules; treating the
molecules as elastic spheres colliding with each other and the container; and
treating collisions with the container as perfectly elastic. Nagel also proposed
stipulations connecting the vocabularies of the two theories. For example he
deﬁnes pressure as ‘the average of the instantaneous momenta transferred from
the molecules to the walls’). He then argued that it is ‘possible to deduce that
the pressure p is related in a very deﬁnite way to the mean kinetic energy E of
the molecules, and that in fact p = 2E/3V ,o r pV = 2E/3’ (Nagel 1961, 344).
The latter equation shares ‘ pV ’ with the Boyle–Charles law, suggesting that ‘the
law could be deduced from the assumptions mentioned if the temperature was
in some way related to the mean kinetic energy of the molecular motions’. Given
all this, Nagel suggests that we could ‘introduce the postulate’ that 2 E/3 = kT
(Nagel 1961, 344–5).
As Marras (2005, 342) points out, the postulate that temperature is ‘in some
way related’ to mean kinetic energy of molecules is a ﬁnal step in the process of
reduction, justiﬁed by preceding work showing that an analogue,o rw h a ts o m e
call an ‘image’ (Beckermann 1992; Bickle 1992, 1998), of one theory can be
constructed in a supplemented version of another. Nagel rejects the suggestion
that the additional assumptions are analytic—‘no standard exposition of the
kinetic theory of gasses pretends to establish the postulate by analyzing the
meaning of the terms occurring in it’ (1961, 355)—and says that there is
no simple fact of the matter, independent of specifying the pragmatic context
in which the question is raised, about whether instead the assumptions are
conventions or empirical. Nagel argues against the ‘unwitting doubletalk’ of
treating the terms related by additional assumptions as having been made
‘identical by deﬁnition’, because doing so would involve changing the meanings
of the terms in one or both theories, so not reducing one original theory to
the other (Nagel 1961, 357). So, for example, temperature is not a statistical
property while mean kinetic energy is, and there are theoretically distinct ways
of determining the mean within statistical mechanics (Feyerabend 1962; Nickles
1973, 193; Brittan 1970, 452; Yi 2003). Nagel allowed that the additional
postulates often were empirical hypotheses ‘asserting that the occurrence of the
state of affairs signaled by a certain theoretical expression … in the primary
science is a sufﬁcient (or necessary and sufﬁcient) condition’ for the occurrence

--- Page 62 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 49
of the corresponding state of affairs designated in some way by the ‘secondary’
science (Nagel 1961, 354).
Clearly, Nagelian reductions need not be micro-reductions. The conditions
for each type of reduction are distinct (though compatible), and, part of the
point of micro-reduction is to dispense with the ‘bridge laws’ requirement found
in earlier proposals by Nagel. Conversely, there is no requirement in Nagel
that the reducing science concern itself with the proper parts of the things
studied by the reduced science. This is especially clear in the case of more
‘homogenous’ reductions (where the theories share ‘descriptive terms’) such as
the derivation of some of Galileo’s laws, or Kepler’s, from Newton’s, or those
of Newton from the Special Theory of Relativity, given suitable additional
assumptions and restrictions in each case. ⁴⁷ Nobody supposes that these are
micro-reductions.
Some purported reﬁnements of Nagel’s programme claim to ‘remove’ features
that, as Marras (2005) points out, aren’t present in the ﬁrst place, such as
reﬁnements that downplay the importance of bridge laws (for example, Bickle
1998). It is important to note that if the multiple realization argument is correctly
understood as aimed at the bridge laws requirement for theoretic reduction, and
it is also the case that Nagelian reduction (reﬁned or raw) doesn’t require
bridge laws, then the multiple realization argument may fail to undermine
it. This is certainly the view of ‘new wave’ reductionists (for example, Bickle
1996).
Oppenheim and Putnam placed a bet on the direction of science. We bet
differently. By contrast, Nagelian reduction makes no predictions about the direc-
tion of science. We reject micro-reductionism but not Nagelian reductionism,
because we think that there are real examples of Nagelian reductions (though not
of caricatures of Nagelian reductions involving bridge laws) that are signiﬁcant
contributions to science, and steps toward uniﬁcation. There are, however, other
arguments to the effect that Nagelian reductions are rare or non-existent and in
some cases impossible.⁴⁸This brings us to type reductionism.
Type reductionism (sometimes confused with Nagelian reductionism) is our
name for the view that is the critica l target of several classic anti-reductionist
papers including Davidson (1970) and Fodor (1974). Fodor’s paper invites
confusion with its title—‘Special sciences, or the disunity of science as a working
hypothesis’—which suggests it is aimed against Oppenheim and Putnam’s (1958)
⁴⁷ None of these reductions are perfect. Some need assumptions to derive one law that are
incompatible with those used to derive another, or require assumptions which are known to be false
(for example, that changing distance makes no difference to rate of fall, in order to ‘derive’ Galileo’s
law of fall from Newton’s laws). See Sklar (1967), Brittan (1970), Nickles (1973), Batterman
(2002, 18).
⁴⁸ Bickle (1992, 218) notes that Davidson’s argument for the anomalism of the mental was also
supposed to show the ‘conceptual impossibility of r educing intentional psychology to a lower-level
science’.

--- Page 63 ---

50 In Defence of Scientism
‘Unity of Science as a working hypothesis’. Fodor’s argument attacks bridge laws,
which as noted above, are not involved in Oppenheim and Putnam’s micro-
reductions, and his argument ignores issues around mereological composition
and atomism, which are so involved. In the discussions of Fodor (and many
others in the voluminous literature that followed him) nearly all of the scientiﬁc
detail found in Nagel is absent, and replaced by toy examples.
Fodor discusses reductionism and the multiple realization argument against it
in terms of (natural) kinds and laws. So, if there is a true physical law P1 → P2,
and a true special science law S1 → S2, the bridge laws will be biconditionals
linking P1 and S1, and P2 and S2. It is exactly these biconditional laws that
the multiple realization argument is supposed to show are either unlikely or
impossible, but this is not Fodor’s main reason for rejecting them. Fodor claims,
as is supposedly ‘obvious to the point of self-certiﬁcation’, that:
(a) interesting generalizations (e.g. counterfactual supporting generalizations) can often
be made about events whose physical descriptions have nothing in common; (b) it is
often the case that whether the physical descriptions of the events subsumed by such
generalizations have anything in common is, in an obvious sense, entirely irrelevant to the
truth of the generalizations, or to their i nterestingness, or to their degree of conﬁrmation,
or, indeed, to any of their epistemologically important properties; and (c) the special
sciences are very much in the business of for mulating generalizations of this kind. (Fodor
1974, 84)
This is over-stated. Physical descriptions of the tokens of at least many special
science types often have a great deal (and certainly far more than ‘nothing’)
in common. Questions of physical similarity aren’t irrelevant to, for example,
whether two animals are both vertebrates, or whether two different samples of
sediment are clays or oozes. Indeed, many special science generalizations are
directly about physical properties—consider the reported correlations between
testicle size and mating strategy (for example, Møller 1994), or encephalization
and group size in social primates (for example, Dunbar 1992), or the varying
attractiveness to human females of the scents of more symmetrical men during
ovulation ( Thornhill and Gangestad 1999). Furthermore, even if Fodor’s argu-
ment is devastating for the view that reduction can be achieved by biconditional
bridge laws, it does no harm to prospects for Nagelian reductions.
What then does multiple realization show? Any real system or process features
in a variety of different scientiﬁc generalizations, and multiple realization possi-
bilities in one of them need not line up with those in others. A manufactured
microphone in which vibrations move a metal coil positioned near a magnet,
thereby inducing a current in a circuit, is one way of transducing sound into
electricity. The hair cells in our ears, which bend in response to vibrations, twist-
ing molecular gates at their bases, and releasing a cascade of processes involving
ions at a synapse, is another. This is a credible instance of multiple realization.
Like any, it has its limits: anyone can think of ways in which the two are not

--- Page 64 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 51
interchangeable because they don’t both appear in all the same regularities. ⁴⁹As
the criteria for instantiating a given regularity are made more demanding, or the
number of regularities we seek to satisfy at once rises, the number of satisﬁers
will tend to drop. So a microphone makes a ﬁne transducer, but it doesn’t get
well looked after by our kind of immune system, or get well built by our kind of
diet. Contra Putnam, we couldn’t be made of Swiss cheese and it does matter. ⁵⁰
This cross-classiﬁcation of regularities at different scales is disastrous for the
‘sundering’ form of reduction defended by Kim (for example, 1998), in which
relations of multiple realization require fragmenting special science kinds into
as many sub-kinds (each a reductive identiﬁcation of the sort we’re resisting) as
there are different realizers. Science does sometimes partition established kinds;
for example, distinguishing different sorts of memory and separating whales
from ﬁsh. But there is no good reason for supposing that this will generally
happen when ﬁnding differences in some sense ‘inside’ the systems studied and
plenty of reason for thinking the opposite. The fact that the relations between
generalizations at different scales won’t involve neat nesting means that no scale
automatically gets to be the one against which others are fragmented. Good
generalizations at any scale deserve the same scientiﬁc respect, consistent with
the PPC.
Note ﬁnally that the functionalism promoted by Fodor (like Davidson’s
anomalism) is committed to the token identity of special science and physical
events (or property instantiations, etc.). We’ve already indicated our endorsement
of some Nagelian reasons for caution about endorsing identity claims between the
referents of different theories. Later, in Chapter 4, we argue that ontology should
be understood as scale-relative, presenting a further barrier to identiﬁcations. We
note here that disputes over whether the identities are, or have to be, or can’t be,
event identities, thing identities, property identities, and so on, are all from our
point of view distractions. On our structural realist metaphysic (see Chapters 2
and 3), neither things, nor properties, nor events turn out to be ontologically
fundamental, meaning that by the lights of Fodor and others we hollow out (so
to speak) the notion of a (natural) kind (see 5.6). Further, there is room in our
view only for a very limited notion of material identity.
The upshot of all this is that while we are not type reductionists, and agree
that the multiple realization argument tells against that doctrine, we are also not
proponents of the sorts of non-reductive physicalism (involving token identity
and/or local supervenience) paradigmatically associated with the rejection of type
reductionism.
⁴⁹ The cross-classiﬁcation of regularities at di fferent scales being described here has sometimes
been called ‘multiple supervenience’ (for example, Gasper 1992, Meyering 2000). The reasons
for our wariness of endorsing even token identities prohibit our endorsing most supervenience
theses, so we eschew that label. Our view (see Chapter 4) is very tolerant of cross-classifying
regularities, though.
⁵⁰ ‘We could be made of Swiss cheese and it wouldn’t matter’ (Putnam 1975b, 291).

--- Page 65 ---

52 In Defence of Scientism
Core-sense reductions are also sometimes called ‘ontological reductions’.⁵¹Since
the expression ‘ontological reduction’ is also used in other settings, we have
adopted ‘core-sense’ reductionism from Melnyk (2003), who deﬁnes core-sense
reductionism as follows:
(CR) All nomic special- and honor ary-scientiﬁc facts, and all positive non-nomic special-
and honorary-scientiﬁc facts, have an explanation that appeals only to (i) physical facts
and (ii) necessary (i.e. non-contingent) truths. (Melnyk 2003, 83)
According to Melnyk, an ‘honorary scientiﬁc fact’ is a fact of an honorary
science like folk psychology and folk physics. (Melnyk is not here defending
philosophy of domesticated science, but trying to leave a door open for truths
onto which the folk may have happened. See Melnyk 2003, 32n.) Nomic
facts support counterfactuals, while non-nomic ones are to be understood as
tokenings. Positive facts exclude absences and other negative facts. For the
purposes of a reduction in the core sense, the physical facts can include non-
nomic facts, including initial conditions. Finally the ‘having’ of the explanation
is ‘in principle’ rather than in practice, although Melnyk thinks there is sufﬁcient
evidence (see Chapters 5 and 6 of Melnyk 2003) for the claim that there are
indeed such explanations.
The basic idea behind CR is that science (Melnyk argues on the basis
of many detailed real scientiﬁc examples) motivates realization physicalism
(as deﬁned in the previous section). Melnyk’s realizationism explicitly lacks
commitment to the identity of special science tokens with physical tokens. In
fact Melnyk is careful to distinguish ‘retentive’ realizationism (where tokens
of special science types are not ultimately ontologically replaced) from non-
retentive forms, and argues that realization physicalism will turn out to be
retentive just in case, and to the extent that, functional types realized by actual
physical tokens turn out to be identical to special science types (Melnyk 2003,
32–48).
The fact that the explanations referred to in the deﬁnition of core-sense
reductionism can include non-nomic facts, including initial conditions, shows
that Melnyk’s thesis is weaker than type reductionism. Because reduction relations
need not track decomposition relations, it is also weaker than micro-reductionism
(Melnyk 2003, 29–30). Furthermore, because it is a strictly empirical matter
what material identities, if any, obta in between functional types (and tokens of
those types) and their realizers, core-sense reductionism is metaphysically more
modest even than some anti-reductionisms which include a general commitment
to token identity (Melnyk 2003, 32–48).
It is still, though, not weak enough for us, and explaining why will further
clarify our relationship to physicalism as promised in the previous section. We
⁵¹ ‘Physicalism as I have characterized it is a reductionist thesis. However, it is reductionist in an
ontological sense, not as a thesis that all statements can be translated into statements about physical
particles and so on’ (Smart 1989, 81, his emphasis).

--- Page 66 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 53
do not deny that core-sense reductionism may be true. It is PNC-compatibly
motivated. But it involves a commitment stronger than the PPC. In cases
where it isn’t clear whether or not a special science is contradicting physics
the metaphysician following the PPC keeps her peace, while the one persuaded
of CR is committed to there being an explanation of the special science fact
by physical facts and laws. In Chapter 3, we entertain a resolution to the
measurement problem in quantum mechanics that involves denying that a
measurement apparatus has a fundamental-physical description, from which
the absence of a CR-style explanation follows. If this is right, it reﬂects a
general fact concerning the relationship between fundamental-physical tokens
and special-science tokens, namely that no special-science tokens will have
fundamental-physical descriptions. If this is the case, and if the explanations
expected by the advocate of CR require physical descriptions of special science
tokens, then our view would turn out to be incompatible with CR. Melnyk doubts
that commitment to this requirement is necessary for realization physicalism being
truly a kind of physicalism; we’re not sure about this. But at this point the question
of whether, if we can be reconciled to CR, we can also be ontological physicalists
of one sort after all, turns purely semantic.
We end our discussion of reductionism with a cautionary note from Nagel:
both successful and unsuccessful attempts at reduction have been occasions for compre-
hensive philosophical reinterpretations of th e import and nature of physical science …
These interpretations are in the main hi ghly dubious because they are commonly under-
taken with little appreciation for the conditions that must be fulﬁlled if a successful
reduction is to be achieved. (Nagel 1961, 338)
1.6 FUNDAMENTAL AND OTHER LEVELS
We seek an ontological model according to which science is uniﬁable, and which
explains the basis for such unity as it can produce. This, we claim, is the point of
naturalistic metaphysics. At one level of description, the goal of unity of science
will be approached through the incremental ﬁlling in of networks of Nagelian
reductions—which, as we have just argued, carry no implications to the effect
that we should expect micro-reductions or type reductions. On the contrary, the
PNC leads us to scepticism about these kinds of putative reductions, for reasons
to come in the next four chapters.
Nevertheless, enumeration of such Nagel-type inter-theoretic relations as have
been justiﬁed at any given time don’t exhaust what can be said about the unity
of science. This is because Nagelian reductions are far from equally antecedently
probable between any two scientiﬁc theories chosen randomly with respect to their
domains. For example, there are interesting relationships between microeconomic
generalizations and neuroscientiﬁc generalizations (Glimcher 2003, Ross 2005,
ch. 8), but it is unlikely that there are interesting Nagelian relations between

--- Page 67 ---

54 In Defence of Scientism
macroeconomic generalizations and chemical generalizations. ( There may of
course be lessons from one for the other about how to use mathematical tools.)
These asymmetries in the relationships among the domains of the sciences look
like features of the structure of the world. But we think that attempts to offer
generalizations about these asymmetries in terms of micro-reduction and type
reduction are forlorn, in the ﬁrst case because, after a few promising starts, the
attempts ceased to be supported by the course of science, and in the second case
because the attempts never were supported by science. This book is an effort to
justify generalizations about the wide-scope metaphysical structure of the world
that does not rely on any of the intuitions underlying micro-reductionism or
type reductionism.
Of special importance among these intuitions we will deny is that world comes
in ‘levels’. Contemporary science, we argue, gives no interesting content to this
metaphor, and so a metaphysics built according to the PNC should not reﬂect
it.⁵²We are not the only philosophers who are lately denying widespread aspects
of micro-reductionism. We here mention two philosophers in particular who
share aspects of our anti-micro-reductionist metaphysics, partly just to orient the
reader in the literature, but mainly to help explain our position by contrasting it
with others that look at least superﬁcially similar.
The ﬁrst of these philosophers is Jonathan Schaffer. Schaffer (2003) argues
speciﬁcally against the view he calls ‘fundamentalism’, that is, the thesis that
science suggests the structure of the world to have a deﬁnite bottom level. Such
a bottom level has been generally supposed to be physical, atomic, and provide
a base for universal mereology and/or supervenience. This does duty in the
formulation and development of arguments for a variety of related metaphysical
theses:
[T]he physicalist claims that microphysical theory (or some future extension thereof )
describes the fundamental level of reality on which all else supervenes; the Humean claims
that all supervenes on the distribution of local, fundamental qualities in spacetime; the
epiphenomenalist claims that all causal powers inhere at the fundamental level; and the
atomist claims that there are no macroentities at all but only fundamental entities in
various arrangements. (498)
Schaffer notes that ‘the central connotation of the ‘‘levels’’ metaphor is that of
(a) a mereological structure, ordered by the part–whole relation’. Then
The peripheral connotations of ‘levels’ include those of (b) a supervenience structure ,
ordered by asymmetric dependencies; (c) a realization structure , ordered by functional
relations; and (d) a nomological structure, ordered by one-way bridge principles between
⁵² Levels are sometimes supposed to be reﬂected in the division of science into disciplines, but
note that, rather than a neat hierarchy, there is a good deal of overlap between the domains of, for
example, chemistry and biology, or economics and psyc hology. John Heil (2003) also rejects the
idea of levels of reality though not on naturalistic grounds.

--- Page 68 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 55
families of lawfully interrelated properties. Those who speak of levels typically suppose
that most if not all of these connotations comport. (ibid. 500)
Schaffer attacks the central connotation by arguing that current physics does
not offer good evidence that mereological atomism is true. In Chapter 3 below,
we will strengthen this PNC-compatible argument, providing evidence that
according to current fundamental physics mereological atomism is false. At
various points we will also give independent arguments, based on science, against
(b) and (d).⁵³
Schaffer then argues that even if mereological atomism is denied, physi-
calism (in his sense), Humeanism, epiphenomalism, and atomism all depend
on the idea that there is a bottom level to nature, even if it isn’t a bunch
of atoms. (Perhaps, following Poland (1994), it’s a set of physical attributes
rather than objects.) Schaffer doubts there are sound scientiﬁc reasons for
believing in such a level. In Chapter 3, we provide much more evidence
for this doubt. Finally, Schaffer asks whether there might only be a lowest
supervenience base, below which there are inﬁnitely descending mereologi-
cal divisions that introduce no new classiﬁcations. He adduces no scientiﬁc
evidence against this picture. It, he maintains, would continue to exclude epiphe-
nomenalism and atomism, but would readmit physicalism and Humeanism as
possibilities.
We agree with Schaffer about what there isn’t, and that it’s science that
establishes the various negative cases. On the other hand, he differs from us
in accepting the levels metaphor itself. Because we deny that metaphor, when
we wonder about ‘fundamental’ physics, we don’t take ourselves to be asking
about a putative physical ‘bottom’ to reality. Instead, as we explained in 1.4,
by ‘fundamental’ physics we will refer to that part of physics about which
measurements taken anywhere in the universe carry information.
The second partial ally we will mention here is Andreus Hüttemann,
who argues against a view he calls ‘microphysicalism’ (2004). This is the
view that properties of the components of processes and systems determine,
govern,a n d causally exclude the macroproperties at the whole-process or
whole-system level. Determination is a modal relation between some set of
explanans and an explanandum. Microdete rmination of process or system
properties obtains if, given some particular set of microproperties, speci-
ﬁed macroproperties obtain necessarily. General microdetermination follows
if strong local supervenience holds in general. This does not imply that
microdetermination is generally false if strong local supervenience is denied
as holding in general; but denial of general strong local supervenience knocks
out the main motivation for expecting general microdetermination to hold.
Microgovernance holds if the laws generalizing micro-level relationships are
⁵³ We offer no direct arguments, as far as we can tell, against (c). Furthermore, Melnyk’s (2003)
version of ontological physicalism, discussed above, disassoc iates (c) from (a) and (b), but not (d).

--- Page 69 ---

56 In Defence of Scientism
sufﬁcient conditions for all laws generalizing macro-relations but not vice
versa. Microgovernance typically features as a premise in arguments for micro-
causal exclusion, the thesis referred to by Schaffer above as ‘epiphenomenal-
ism’.
Hüttemann rejects each of microdetermination, microgovernance and micro-
causal exclusion for speciﬁc reasons (and thus rejects the microphysicalist thesis
they collectively constitute). We of course agree with his conclusion. However,
an important premise in each of his three general arguments is that in cases
of compound processes and systems, macroproperty relations make disposi-
tions manifest, whereas dispositions of microcomponents are merely inferred or
posited for purposes of explanation. This premise reﬂects a view Hüttemann
shares with Nancy Cartwright (1989 and elsewhere) to the effect that what
science aims to discover are neither Humean regularities nor modal structures
of reality, but causal capacities (or ‘Aristotelian natures’, as Cartwright (1992)
calls them) of types of things. This view is sharply at odds with the general
one we will defend, and undergirds a thesis to the effect that both science and
the world itself are strongly disuniﬁed (and, in the case of science, not uniﬁable
if one values wide scope of application). We will criticize different aspects of
this thesis in later chapters. For now, we simply note Hüttemann’s work as
leading to an important part of our core conclusion, but by means of arguments
that differ substantially from those we will give. Hüttemann, like Schaffer but
unlike us, does not question the general adequacy of the levels metaphor. As
a result, he now thinks (Papineau and Hüttemann 2005) that his arguments
against part/whole microdetermination do not apply against microdetermination
of higher levels by lower ones. His view is in this respect much more conservative
than ours.
In denying ‘levels physicalism’ we will appear to convict ourselves, according to
Papineau and Hüttemann, of endorsing what the latter (2004, 44–7) identiﬁes
as C. D. Broad’s (1925) notion of emergence. One is an emergentist in Broad’s
sense, according to Hüttemann, just in case one holds that there is behaviour
of some complex systems that is not determined by the behaviour of parts of
the systems in question. Hüttemann denies that examples of chaotic systems
and systems that undergo phase transitions, with which enthusiastic popular
and Santa Fe Institute-inspired literature lately abounds, are instances of such
emergence, since the inability of ﬁnite observers such as people to be able to predict
macro-behaviour on the basis of micro-behaviour does not imply metaphysical
failure of determination. We agree with him about this; our basis for denial of
‘levels physicalism’ in Chapter 3 will not be based on these sorts of cases. For
this reason, we reject the suggestion that denial of ‘levels physicalism’ implies
a doctrine that deserves to be called ‘emergentism’. This doctrine warrants its
name because it holds that ‘higher’ levels of organization ‘emerge’ indeterminably
out of ‘lower’ level ones and then causally feed back ‘downward’. Our position,
denying that science suggests the world to be structured into levels at all, calls a

--- Page 70 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 57
pox on both houses in this dispute. ⁵⁴We and Hüttemann agree that quantum
entanglement, a phenomenon that is important to our argument, implies failure
of determination of the states of compounds from states of parts. (An analogous
point can be made about General Relativity.) But here, because of his continuing
allegiance to the levels metaphor, Hüttemann (2004, 52) is pleased to talk of
‘emergence’ whereas we never are.
What we aim to do in this book is displace the micro/macro distinction,
whether conceived in terms of wholes and parts or in terms of higher and lower
levels, by a new way of drawing the distinction between fundamental physics
and special sciences. We carefully say ‘displace’ rather than ‘replace’. We don’t
claim that our new distinction can do every philosophical job the old one did.
Rather, we claim that many of the jobs to which the old distinction has been
put are not worth doing, or are even destructive. We take on one traditional
job—furnishing a basis for the synchronic and diachronic unity of science—as
the central one, and argue that our distinction is better for it. Since we insist
that, for naturalists, that is the only self-ratifying job there is for metaphysics, all
other chips on the philosopher’s table must then be allowed to fall as they will
over the course of the inquiry.
1.7 STANCES, NORMS, AND DOCTRINES
Schaffer and Hüttemann may not go as far as we do in denying ‘the hierarchical
picture of the world as stratiﬁed into levels’ (Schaffer 2003, 498). However,
we take some heart from the fact that as we set out to try to convince readers
that the familiar picture needs drastic revision in order to keep abreast of
science, at least a few other philosophers have taken steps down the same
path. We turn to another fellow inquirer, and disturber of philosophers’ peace
of mind, whose critical attitude we seek to emulate in a broader sense. We
have said harsh things about much—indeed, by implication, most—current
metaphysics in this chapter. We see no point in mincing words: it seems to
us to be just ridiculous when philosophers look up from their desks and tell
us that while sitting there and concentrating they’ve discovered (usually all by
themselves) facts about the nature of the world that compete with the fruits of
ingenious experimentation conducted under competitive pressure and organized
by complex institutional processes. The individual philosophers are generally
not crazy; but quirks in the history and structure of the modern academy have
encouraged crazy activity and hidden its absurdity. A prominent philosopher of
⁵⁴ That said, let us note that the respective rhetorical standings of the two ways of expressing
muddled philosophy differ, just as a result of cultural history. When a scientist refers to levels of
reality she is merely declining to get involved in certain philosophical disputes. When someone
pronounces for downward causation they are in opposition to science.

--- Page 71 ---

58 In Defence of Scientism
science who has recently said the same thing, though more graciously, is Bas van
Fraassen (2002).⁵⁵He reminds us of the vastness of the gulf between metaphysics
and science that is concealed by common assertoric and citation-studded formal
presentation.
For the scientist, every mistake she makes risks being exposed as clearly a
mistake, either by someone’s experiment or by mathematical demonstration.
She knows this as she works. Knowing also that she is sure to make mistakes,
she simultaneously reduces her responsibility and establishes an early-warning
system against error by joining a team. (Bear in mind that she mainly joins a
team for other reasons: science requires specialization of labour in experimental
design, control, and analysis, and lone individuals will seldom be entrusted with
the resources necessary for isolating and interrogating important parts of the
world.) Very important here, as van Fraassen stresses, is that the scientist is not
a monomaniac with respect to goals. She seeks truth, to some extent; but all that
should be meant by this is that she must be careful never to report, as sincerely
held beliefs about her domain, claims that she thinks are merely hunches; and
that she must exercise responsibility in deciding when some approximation or
idealization is too instrumental to be announced with a po face. (Again, her sub-
ordination of her judgement to that of her team, not individual moral heroism,
does almost all the work here in normal circumstances.) In any event, it in no way
diminishes the idea that science is our society’s primary source of truth to remind
ourselves that scientists don’t treat truth as their proximate target. What they
mainly aim for is that their contributions be important, to policy or commerce
or practical know-how. Importance may be a highly inexact and multifariously
realizable goal. But scientists generally know when they’ve achieved it one way
or another and when they haven’t; citation indices actually measure it quite
reliably.
By contrast, van Fraassen points out, in metaphysics there is no goal but true
belief itself. It is problematic, to say the least, that the metaphysician has no
test for the truth of her beliefs except that other metaphysicians can’t think of
obviously superior alternative beliefs. ( They can always think of possibly superior
ones, in profusion.) In fact, every metaphysician not in the grip of bad faith
should know that her favourite professional opinions are almost certainly not
true; this is awkward when truth is all she has to work for.
The key consequence of this difference that van Fraassen emphasizes is as
follows. When we discover that scientiﬁc theories are not exactly true, this
should occasion no deep angst or regret; scientiﬁc theories have multiple possible
sources of value which they had to demonstrate to have ever attracted signiﬁcant
investment in the ﬁrst place. It is much less obvious that a false metaphysical
theory is good for anything. But since all metaphysical theories are false …
⁵⁵ All references to van Fraassen in the rest of this section are to his (2002).

--- Page 72 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 59
Note that the metaphysician is the last person who can hide behind an
instrumentalism of good works (‘well, it’s false, but it comforted us all for
awhile’) here. Van Fraassen makes the point vivid:
Consider the real history of Newton’s physics, compared to what might have been the
history of Cartesian dualism. Newton’s physics reigned dominant for two hundred years.
It gave us false beliefs but many beneﬁts. I don’t think anyone will say ‘It would have
been better if Newton had never lived!’ Imagine that Cartesian dualism had not been
so conclusively rejected by the late seventeenth century but had also reigned for two
hundred years. Would we say that the false beliefs that metaphysics gave us had been but
a small price to pay for the ease and intuitive appeal felt in its explanation of the human
condition? (16–17)
On top of all this, van Fraassen demonstrates the special discomfort that must
be faced by the metaphysician who aims at naturalism. ⁵⁶ A non-naturalistic
metaphysician might be able to sincerely think that her intuitive insights certify
their own truth (typically because, in part, there is a kind of ‘truth’ that she thinks
transcends the grubby everyday sort we hope to get from science). But among
the views that typically incline a philosopher to naturalism is the conviction
that there are no secure foundations for knowledge. Van Fraassen associates
this problem especially with empiricism, but even those philosophers who call
themselves realists agree, these days, that even if they can know a priori that
‘tiger’ denotes all and only tigers in all possible worlds, the part of knowledge,
even philosophical knowledge, that really matters is based on fallible processes.
In fact, no naturalistic philosopher in good faith can now deny that for any of
the well-established philosophical ‘isms’ compatible with naturalism, the simple
truth of that ism cannot plausibly be asserted. Van Fraassen puts it thus. ‘For each
philosophical position X there exists a statement X + such that to have (or take)
position X is to believe (or decide to believe) that X +.’ Call X + ‘the dogma or
doctrine of position X’. Then the naturalistic philosopher who generally conducts
her speciﬁc philosophical exercises by reasoning in accord with the principles
of position X cannot take X + to be literally true, for each X, unless she is in
bad faith (40–6). ⁵⁷Therefore, if it is possible to do philosophy in good faith, ‘a
philosophical position need not consist in holding a dogma or doctrine’ (46).
If philosophical positions should not be doctrines, what can they be instead?
Van Fraassen suggests that we conceive of them as ‘stances’:
A philosophical position can consist in something other than a belief in what the world
is like. We can, for example, take the empiricist’s attitude toward science rather than
his or her beliefs about it as the mor e crucial characteristic … A philosophical position
can consist in a stance (attitude, commitment, approach, a cluster of such—possibly
⁵⁶ Van Fraassen uses ‘naturalism’ and ‘materialism’ interchangeably. See below for critical
discussion of his reasons.
⁵⁷ We have put the point in somewhat stronger terms than van Fraassen does. We’re conﬁdent
that he’d endorse this way of putting it, however.

--- Page 73 ---

60 In Defence of Scientism
including some propositional attitudes such as beliefs as well). Such a stance can of course
be expressed … but cannot be simply equat ed with having beliefs or making assertions
a b o u tw h a tt h e r ei s .( 4 7 – 8 )
One fully grasps the idea of a stance only after being given an example or two,
but ﬁrst note that to take the view that a sound philosophical position is a stance
rather than a doctrine is to adopt an anti-metaphysical attitude in one sense. Let
us say that someone endorses ‘strong metaphysics’ if she assents to the claim that
it is (practically) possible for a person to set out to cultivate non-trivial doctrinal
beliefs about the structure of the world that go beyond what the sciences tell us
or imply, and then come to have a preponderance of true such beliefs relative
to false such beliefs because of the activity of cultivating them. (We formulate
things this way so as not to be troubled by ‘broken clock’ phenomena; perhaps
it’s probable that there are some people out there whose metaphysical beliefs are
mainly true by sheer good luck, merely because there are so many people.) Then
the considerations raised by van Fraassen that we have been reviewing should lead
us to be sceptical about the value of strong metaphysics. ( The reader will surmise
that we are working up to the announcement of some less blighted programme
for ‘weak metaphysics’.) To agree with van Fraassen that philosophical positions
ought to be stances rather than doctrines is to suppose that there is value in some
philosophy, somehow conceived, but not in strong metaphysics.
We endorse van Fraassen’s opinion that sound (general) philosophical positions
should be stances. This at once raises the question for us, what is our stance? And
then we add that our project here is to be an exercise in naturalistic metaphysics.
How do we reconcile this ambition with the scepticism about strong metaphysics
we have just said we share with van Fraassen?
The answer to the second question will follow swiftly from our answer to the
ﬁrst one. We will approach it by ﬁrst reviewing the two explicit descriptions of
rival stances, the ‘empiricist stance’ and the ‘materialist stance’ that van Fraassen
provides. We will identify our own stance by reference to these. In this procedure
we follow van Fraassen’s meta-advice:
Besides the theses on which the day’s materialists take their stand, and which vary with
time, there is also such a thing as ‘the spir it of materialism’ which never dies. False
consciousness can be avoided in two ways:
(1) the philosopher may lack that spirit and be gen uinely concerned solely with certain
deﬁnite factual questions about what there is.
or
(2) the philosopher may have the spirit and not confuse its expression with any particular
view of what the world is like.
The latter, however, may never yet have been instantiated among philosophers.
Nevertheless, the second option is the r eally interesting one and similar to the one
I would favour for any attempt to continue the empiricist tradition. The problem for
materialists will then be to identify the true m aterialist stance and for the empiricist to

--- Page 74 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 61
identify the true empiricist stance (or the sp ectrum of true empiricist stances). Being or
becoming an empiricist will then be similar or analogous to conversion to a cause, a
religion, an ideology, to capitalism or to socialism, to a worldview … (60–1)
It will be obvious from the above that van Fraassen does not claim to have
himself fully worked out what these stances are. But it seems that the idea of a
fully worked out stance is a will-o-the-wisp anyway; one begins by approximately
targeting the stances and from there follows the never-to-be-completed activity
of elaborating—by discovering —their details. So let us begin with van Fraassen’s
approximate targets.
Philosophers who adopt the empiricist stance, according to van Fraassen,
emphasize the following attitudes. First, they hold that philosophy should
emulate the norms of anti-dogmatism characteristic of science. No hypothesis
should be ruled out of consideration come what may. ( This, as van Fraassen
argues, is why empiricists can’t assert as their doctrine that no knowledge can arise
from pure intuition or that all knowledge arises from observation; the doctrine
refutes itself as doctrinal, and the empirical stance rules out the coherence of
an empiricist dogma.) As in science, so in philosophy every proposal should be
considered as seriously as the evidence and arguments for it warrant. This is the
positive part of the empiricist stance. The negative part is a more speciﬁc sort of
resistance to metaphysics than the generic anti-metaphysical attitude described
above that favours stances over doctrines to begin with. This resistance manifests
itself in tendencies for:
(a) … rejection … of demands for explanation at certain crucial points
And
(b) … strong dissatisfaction with explanations (even if called for) that proceed by
postulation (37).
Van Fraassen reviews the main historical philosophers who have been regarded
as exemplary empiricists, or who have been regarded as moving philosophy in
empiricist directions relative to the state in which they found it (for example,
Aristotle after Plato), and argues that we ﬁnd nothing general in common among
them at the level of doctrine; all, however, can be found ‘rebelling’ against ‘overly’
metaphysical tendencies by reference to the elements of the empiricist stance.
The strong dissatisfaction with neo-scholasticism we expressed in 1.1 and 1.2
are evidently manifestations of empiricist rebellion. We admire science to the
point of frank scientism. As with van Fraassen’s leading empiricist examples, what
most impresses us about science is not its results—marvellous though these have
been—but the way in which its institutional organization selects for rationality
and collective epistemic progress in the activities of a species that seems, in its
more natural institutional settings, strongly disposed to superstition and fearful
conservatism. Our veriﬁcationism, like all versions of that, is promoted as a bar
against seeking explanation where we have good reasons to doubt that it promises
anything but temporary psychological satisfaction at the expense of truth. In

--- Page 75 ---

62 In Defence of Scientism
particular, we deny that there is value to be had in philosophers postulating
explananda, without empirical constraint, on grounds that these would make
various putative explanans feel less mysterious if they prevailed.
It seems, then, that by van Fraassen’s lights we must be empiricists, despite
the fact that in defending objective modality we apparently violate a standard
empiricist doctrine. ⁵⁸After all, we evince every aspect of the empiricist stance,
and that, according to him, is necessary and sufﬁcient for being an empiricist.
But before we simply announce our membership in the empiricist brigades,
thanking van Fraassen for the doctrinal freedom his ‘stance stance’ allows us
to plunder as we like from the realist warehouse, consider the rival stance he
identiﬁes.
He calls this the ‘materialist stance’. Here is his account of it:
[M]aterialism … is not identiﬁable with a theory about what there is but only with an
attitude or cluster of attitudes. These attitudes include strong deference to the current
content of science in matters of opinion about what there is. They include also an
inclination (and perhaps a commitment , at least an intention) to accept (approximative)
completeness claims for science as actually constituted at any given time. (59)
Reading van Fraassen is like consulting a sophisticated caster of horoscopes, for
this describes us to a T also. Yet according to him the great tension in the history
of (secular) western philosophy is between the empiricist and the materialist
stances. Let us reiterate words we quoted above: ‘The problem for materialists
will then be to identify the true materialist stance and for the empiricist to
identify the true empiricist stance’; this is van Fraassen articulating his hopes for
the best possible future for philosophy. Are we then schizophrenic, advocating
both stances at once? Or do we embody the resolution of philosophy’s long
struggle? Perhaps we are instances of a Hegelian stance.
It is noteworthy that van Fraassen calls the second stance ‘materialism’
and equates it with ‘naturalism’. Why? The philosophers he has in mind as
exemplifying the materialist tradition—Holbach, Laplace, Quine, Lewis—all
maintained that everything is physical. This they took as meaning the same
thing as ‘natural’ (so that the supernatural is what some confused people imagine
to exist extramaterially—so much for Hegel after all). However, van Fraassen
argues, across the whole tradition of materialism ‘physical’ means nothing more
than ‘whatever physicists endorse’. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
this correlated with ‘composed out of matter’; but as physics moved beyond this
restriction, materialist philosophers could and would follow it loyally. That is no
doubt what van Fraassen will suggest we are doing when we insist that naturalists
should drop their commitments to atomism and, indeed (as we will argue in
⁵⁸ In Chapter 2 we discuss at length the relations hip between constructive empiricism and the
philosophy of modality. It turns out that, surprisingly, van Fraassen does not regard belief in
objective modality as antithetical to his empiricism.

--- Page 76 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 63
Chapters 2 and 3), to substantivalism al together in the name of allegiance to
physics.
So we really are, in detail, both perfect empiricists and perfect materialists
according to van Fraassen’s criteria. Note that this cannot be diagnosed as
implying doctrinal self-contradiction, for that is a charge that is inappropriate to
stances.
Well, then, let us own up to being materialist Hegelians. ⁵⁹To start to see the
basis for synthesis between the empiricist and materialist stances, let us attend
to the critical feature they have in common. Both demand that philosophy
fashion its style of inquiry after the example of science. Empiricists emphasize
the fallibilism and tolerance of novel hypotheses they ﬁnd in science. Materialists
emphasize scientiﬁc reluctance to take ‘spooky’ processes seriously. Both of these
really are perennial aspects of the history of science, so scientistic philosophers
of both stances come by them naturally. Thus, might the source of (secular)
philosophical tension lie within science itself? The two aspects indeed look to
be awkwardly related: the tendency celebrated by the empiricists wants to let
a hundred ﬂowers bloom and the tendency celebrated by materialists wants to
stomp on some it regards as weeds.
This tension in science has surely been productive. Scientiﬁc institutions
are hyper-conservative about taking novelty seriously, as a result of which
science (unlike philosophy) stays on an equilibrium path. ⁶⁰ And then this
very conservatism, by ensuring that the few novelties that get through the
institutional ﬁlters are extremely rigorously selected and robust, produces an
engine for continuous epistemic and cultural renovation in societies that take
science seriously. Perhaps, then, philosophy in aiming to emulate science should
welcome incorporation of this tension in itself, if only it can do so without being
foolishly incoherent.
Veriﬁcationism, we suggest, is exactly the principle that pulls this off. That it
does so, we believe, has been obscured for almost a century by the fact that the
logical positivists and logical empiricists associated it with a very special theory
of perceptual belief and of putative differences between this and other kinds of
belief.⁶¹ This is precisely the aspect of the last century’s philosophy that, we
respectfully submit, van Fraassen has not shaken off; so perhaps it is unsurprising
he may have a blind spot exactly here. We think it salutary to remind readers,
as we did in 1.2, that veriﬁcationism did not originate with and is not special to
the logical positivists and empiricists. We ﬁnd it in Peirce, as we have discussed,
⁵⁹ We have heard that before to come to mention it. But this book will contain no dodgy
economics.
⁶⁰ We mean by this what economists do. The idea is that although scientiﬁc progress is far
from smooth and linear, it never simply oscillates or goes backwards. Every scientiﬁc development
inﬂuences future science, and it never repeats itself.
⁶¹ As noted in 1.2, the positivists also mist akenly took veriﬁcationism to be a theory of meaning.
This is an error van Fraassen does not share with them.

--- Page 77 ---

64 In Defence of Scientism
and (though not of course by name) in Hume. It is revealing to ask oneself, in
light of van Fraassen’s labels for the stances: who is generally regarded in histories
of philosophy as the prototypical strong naturalist among great philosophers?
The answer is of course Hume. His Christian contemporaries denounced him
as a materialist, not without grounds. Yet he is simultaneously regarded as the
prototypical empiricist.
Our diagnosis of the fact that Hume can be the poster philosopher for
both of van Fraassen’s stances is that he was the ﬁrst philosopher who made
veriﬁcationism his core commitment. When Hume argues that it is never rational
to take reports of miracles seriously, this isn’t because God is held to transmit
his agency by means other than knocking bits of matter into other bits; it
is because God as a putative part of the world simultaneously transcends (by
hypothesis) the domain we have procedures for systematically testing. (Remember
that, in Hume’s Inquiry, the conclusion against miracles serves as an essential
premise in his subsequent argument for atheism—it doesn’t go the other way
around.)
It is evident from the later parts of van Fraassen (2002) that he thinks empiri-
cism is open to accommodation with the non-secular in a way that materialism
is not. This may be among the factors that he thinks recommends empiricism.
By contrast, we do not think that science ought to try to accommodate the
religious impulse⁶²—on this point too we echo Hume. The empiricist and the
materialist (or naturalist) stances synthesize when they each add a pro-attitude
toward veriﬁcationist limits. The empiricist then continues to endorse tolerance,
but within the limits of what is veriﬁable; for the materialist, veriﬁcationism
is the way to keep order without resorting to the dogmatism of the ideological
conservative.
Let us call the synthesized empiricist and materialist—and resolutely secular-
ist—stances the scientistic stance. (We choose this word in full awareness that it
is usually offered as a term of abuse.) Its compatibility with van Fraassen’s more
general ‘stance stance’ is not merely rhetorical. Our fundamental principles are
not propositional doctrines: both the PNC and the PPC are explicitly norms.
They are not, of course, arbitrary norms; we motivate them as descriptively
manifest in scientiﬁc practice. But a person who ﬁnds science unimpressive,
or demeaning (think of Coleridge or Wordsworth), or Faustian, will have no
reason at all to be persuaded by this book. This does not mean we have nothing
to discuss with such people; their resistance to science, which must be quite
thoroughgoing if it is not to be unprincipled, will confront them with serious
policy problems in the management of social affairs, and we will want to press
them as hard as possible on these. But we would not try to convert them with
metaphysics, for van Fraassen is right that that would require strong metaphysics,
and strong metaphysics can’t get off the ground.
⁶² See Dennett (2006) for careful argument to this effect.

--- Page 78 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 65
Within the context of our scientistic stance, we will defend various propositions
that will have the grammatical form of saying what there is. These should be
understood not as doctrines but as proposed provisional commitments for living
out the stance. Such living requires, most importantly of all, paying close
attention to the actual progress of science. It might be thought surprising that
there could be people who embrace the scientistic stance in all outward respects
but then don’t seem to bother to follow science closely; yet neo-scholastic pseudo-
naturalistic philosophers such as those we criticized ﬁt exactly this description.
Most of our argument to come will not be with them, except by example. We
will instead concern ourselves mainly with genuine students of science—not
least van Fraassen himself—as they try to work out how to live the scientistic
stance in detail.
Our discussion will therefore be rooted much more closely in the philosophy
of science than in the metaphysics literature properly so called. Some contributors
to the latter might say that our book is not really about metaphysics at all, and
that in this section we have supplied them with grounds for this claim: there is a
kind of metaphysics, strong metaphysics, which we join van Fraassen in refusing
to regard as well motivated. By ‘metaphysics’ we mean something more limited
and carefully constrained. We refer to the articulation of a uniﬁed world-view
derived from the details of scientiﬁc research. We call this (weak) metaphysics
because it is not an activity that has a specialized science of its own. In case
someone wants to declare our usage here eccentric or presumptuous, we remind
them that we share it with Aristotle.
Does our weak metaphysic not necessarily share one feature with strong
metaphysics, and one equally vulnerable to van Fraassen’s criticism? Is not the
only virtue we can claim for it that we purport it to be true? But then if, as we
claim, it is derived from the details of current science, must we not admit it to
be false, since we can expect current science to be overthrown by future science?
Here we encounter a disagreement between us and van Fraassen (and many
others) at the level of the philosophy of science, rather than meta-philosophy or
metaphysics. We are not persuaded that the history of science is most persuasively
presented as a history of revolutions in which theories are repeatedly routed by
successors and found to be false. There is, we think, a defensible basis for joining
the logical positivists in viewing the history of science as a history of progressive
accumulation of knowledge. As we will see, presentation of this picture cannot
be separated from the second-order, stance-relative metaphysics in which we are
engaged: our philosophy of science and our scientistic metaphysics reciprocally
support each other.

--- Page 79 ---

2
Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism,
and Structuralism
James Ladyman and Don Ross
So far we have described a strong form of naturalism in metaphysical methodolo-
gy, and promised to demonstrate the advantages of our metaphysics by reference
to problems in the philosophy of science. In this chapter, we will begin the
construction of our metaphysics by arguing that a form of structural realism
is motivated by reﬂection on issues that arise in two different domains that
have been the subject of intense scrutiny during recent decades. These are: ﬁrst,
problems from the history of science about the abandonment of ontological
commitments as old theories are replaced by more empirically adequate ones;
and secondly, questions arising from the debate between scientiﬁc realists and
constructive empiricists about what really is at stake between them, and about the
inadequacies of constructive empiricism. We also argue that the so-called ‘seman-
tic’ or ‘model-theoretic’ understanding of the nature of scientiﬁc representation
ﬁts very well with the kind of structural realism we advocate.
The structure of our argument is dialectical. It should be evident from
Chapter 1 why we favour this approach over strictly analytic argumentation
as a way of discovering the contents of our scientistic stance. Our (weak)
metaphysical view is an aspect of our understanding of science. We do not gain
superior understanding of science by discerning ﬁrst principles or conceptual
truths and then constructing syllogisms. Rather, one metaphysical proposal
constructed in accordance with the PNC is to be preferred to another to the
extent that the ﬁrst uniﬁes more of current science in a more enlightening way.
Thus defending a metaphysical proposal is necessarily an exercise in comparison.
Degree of consilience, the property a PNC-compatible metaphysics should aim to
optimize, is a comparative property of a whole theory and cannot be determined
just by analysing the detailed implications of its parts. This of course does not
mean that analytic arguments are not important to elements of the comparative
evaluations. Theories have the good or bad properties they do in large part

--- Page 80 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 67
because of what is implied by various speciﬁc claims they motivate. The reader
will thus ﬁnd plenty of arguments ahead. Our point here is to explain why
these will occur in the context of a kind of narrative, wherein we converge
on our favoured position by presenting, comparing, criticizing, and adjusting
metaphysical proposals made by others, until we ﬁnd we can improve no further
in light of the current state of scientiﬁc knowledge.
The dialectical narrative will pivot around van Fraassen’s engagement with
standard scientiﬁc realism. We take it that our remarks in the last section of the
previous chapter show why this is a natural approach for us. Our metaphysic is a
synthesis of constructive empiricism and scientiﬁc realism based on our broadly
Peircean veriﬁcationism. We aim to show that a view defended over several years
by one of us (Ladyman), ontic structural realism, just is such a synthesis. We
will do this by incrementally adjusting constructive empiricism and standard
scientiﬁc realism in the face of each other’s objections—at least, those objections
we can endorse on the basis of the PNC—until their residues form a consistent
mixture that is a form of ontic structural realism.
Structural realism was suggested by John Worrall (1989) to solve the problem
of theory change for scientiﬁc realism. Roughly speaking, structural realism
is the view that our best scientiﬁc theories describe the structure of reality,
where this is more than saving the phenomena, but less than providing a true
description of the natures of the unobservable entities that cause the phenomena.
Following subsequent developments and accounts of the history of structuralism
about science in the twentieth century, there are now a number of variants
of structural realism discussed in the literature. Ladyman (1998) argues that
they can be divided into epistemological and metaphysical varieties according to
how they depart from standard scientiﬁc realism, and introduces a distinction
between ‘ontic’ and ‘epistemic’ structural realism. ¹ French’s and Ladyman’s
(2003a, 2003b) advocacy of ontic structural realism emphasizes the commitment
to objective modal structure to which Ladyman (1998) drew attention with
reference to a classiﬁcation of forms of realism and empiricism due to Ron Giere
(1985, 83).
If structural realism (whether epistemic or ontic) is just a response to theory
change it is vulnerable to the charge that it is ad hoc. The view advocated here
escapes this concern by having multiple motivations, and by appeal to the virtue
of consilience in relation to a variety of problems in philosophy of science.
In the next chapter, we argue that our form of structural realism is motivated
by the metaphysical implications of our best current (including cutting-edge)
physics to the extent that it demonstrates consensus, and is compatible with all
currently serious theoretical options where there is not consensus. We add further
¹ For example, Esfeld (2004) is clearly addressing metaphysical issues, whereas Votsis (forth-
coming) is more concerned with epistemological ones. Psillos (2001) uses ‘eliminative structural
realism’, van Fraassen (2006) uses ‘radical struc turalism’ for ontic structural realism.

--- Page 81 ---

68 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
consilience in Chapters 4 and 5 when we introduce the theory of real patterns, in
combination with which the position defended here makes possible a plausible
account of laws, causation, and explanation, and of the relationship between the
special sciences and fundamental physics. According to our naturalism, this is
the only legitimate way of arguing for a speculative scientiﬁc metaphysic.
This chapter is organized as follows. First, in 2.1, we review the deﬁnition
of scientiﬁc realism, and the arguments for and against it, concluding that the
history of successful novel prediction science is the most compelling evidence
for some form of realism, but also (in 2.2) that the history of ontological
discontinuity across theory change makes standard scientiﬁc realism indefensible.
In 2.3, we introduce scientiﬁc structuralism, and then assess in detail van
Fraassen’s empiricism. We ﬁnd much to agree with him about, including the
appropriateness of the semantic approach to scientiﬁc theories (which we outline
in 2.3.3), but we also argue that a commitment to objective modality is needed
to make his structuralist form of empiricism defensible. In 2.3.4 we introduce
some novel terminology we will make use of in the rest of the book, before
turning to the exposition of structural realism in 2.4. We argue against a purely
epistemic form of structural realism and conclude the chapter by introducing
ontic structural realism and preparing the ground for the further defence and
d e v e l o p m e n to fi ti nC h a p t e r3 .
2.1 SCIENTIFIC REALISM
There is of course a good deal of controversy about how to deﬁne scientiﬁc
realism. We note later that van Fraassen deﬁnes it as a view about the aims of
science. He has dialectical reasons for characterizing it that way, but here we offer
a more standard epistemological deﬁnition according to which scientiﬁc realism
is the view that we ought to believe that our best current scientiﬁc theories
are approximately true, and that their central theoretical terms successfully refer
to the unobservable entities they posit. Hence, if the theories employ terms
that purport to refer to unobservable entities such as electrons, or gravitational
waves, then, realists say, we ought to believe that there really are such entities
having the properties and exhibiting the behaviour attributed to them. ² For
many philosophers scientiﬁc realism is obvious and uncontroversial. Certainly,
for example, in debates about physicalism, reductionism, and supervenience in
the philosophy of mind, it is normally assumed by all parties that there are atoms,
² There are complications of course. Scientiﬁc realism can be considered in terms of semantic,
metaphysical and epistemic components (see, for example, Psillos 1999, Ladyman 2002b, ch. 5).
Some philosophers adopt a pragmatic (or otherwise epistemic ally constrained) conception of truth
and defend belief in unobservables on that basis (see for example Ellis 1985). Van Fraassen’s
arguments are not directed against such views (1980, 4), but they may be vulnerable to other
antirealist arguments.

--- Page 82 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 69
molecules, ions, and so on; the question is whether that is all there is, or whether
there are emergent or causally autonomous entities and properties over and above
the physical stuff. Scientiﬁc explanat ions throughout the physical and the life
sciences make essential reference to unobservable entities such as electromagnetic
waves, nitrogen molecules, and gravitational ﬁelds. Hence, one might be forgiven
for thinking that there is no question that scientiﬁc realism is correct.
However, there are many arguments against scientiﬁc realism. Some are
perhaps merely philosophical, but some appeal to contingent facts about the
history of science and our best scientiﬁc theories. We are in some ways more
sceptical than van Fraassen, who argues only for the permissibility of agnosticism
about theoretical entities, and in this chap ter we will argue that the arguments
from theory change compel us to relinquish standard scientiﬁc realism. Before
discussing them it is important for the consilience case that we are building that
we review the main argument in favour of scientiﬁc realism, since we will argue
that the form of non-standard realism about science that we recommend is also
supported by it.
2.1.1 The no-miracles argument
Ladyman (2002b, ch. 7) distinguishes between local and global appeals to
inference to the best explanation (IBE) to defend scientiﬁc realism. (Psillos 1999
marks a similar distinction using the terms ‘ﬁrst-order’ and ‘second order’.) A local
defence of scientiﬁc realism appeals to a particular set of experimental facts and
their explanation in terms of some particular unobservable entities. Opponents
of scientiﬁc realism, such as van Fraassen, deny that the local defences of realism
about speciﬁc unobservables are compelling, arguing that they can in each case
be reinterpreted in pragmatic terms as inferences to the empirical adequacy of
the explanation in question, plus a commitment to continue theorizing with the
resources of the theory (see van Fraassen 1980). Hence, the debate shifts to
the global level where scientiﬁc realists argue that their philosophy of science is
needed to account for science, and its history of empirical success, as a whole.
This ‘ultimate’ argument for scientiﬁc realism was famously presented by Putnam
as follows: ‘The positive argument for realism is that it is the only philosophy
that doesn’t make the success of science a miracle’ (1975a, 73). A similar form of
argument is to be found in Smart: ‘If the phenomenalist about theoretical entities
is correct we must believe in a cosmic coincidence’ (1963, 39).³ This is an inference
to the only explanation. Many scientiﬁc real ists argue naturalistically that we are
led to realism if we follow in philosophy of science the same patterns of inference
that we follow in science. Scientiﬁc realism is thus seen as a scientiﬁc explanatory
hypothesis about science itself: ‘[P]hilosophy is itself a sort of empirical science’
(Boyd 1984, 65).
³ Ian Hacking (1985) argues from the denial of outrageous coincidence.

--- Page 83 ---

70 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
The no-miracles argument is made more sophisticated by citing speciﬁc
features of scientiﬁc methodology and practice, and then arguing that their
successful application is in need of explanat ion, and furthermore that realism
offers the best or only explanation because the instrumental reliability of scientiﬁc
methods is explained by their theoretical reliability. ⁴ Richard Boyd (1985, for
example) argues that in explaining the success of science, we need to explain the
overall instrumental success of scientiﬁc methods across the history of science.
The following are all offered as general facts that the hypothesis of scientiﬁc
realism explains:
(i) patterns in data are projectable using scientiﬁc knowledge;
(ii) the degree of conﬁrmation of a scientiﬁc theory is heavily theory-dependent;
(iii) scientiﬁc methods are instrumentally reliable.
The second point refers to the fact that scientists use accepted theories to
calibrate instruments, choose relevant methods for testing new theories, describe
the evidence obtained, and so on.
Another feature of scientiﬁc practice that realists have long argued cannot be
explained by antirealists is the persistent and often successful search for uniﬁed
theories of diverse phenomena. The well-known conjunction objection (Putnam
1975b) against antirealism is as follows: That T and T’ are both empirically
adequate does not imply that their conjunction T & T’ is empirically adequate;
however, if T and T’ are both true this does imply that T & T’ is true. ⁵ Hence,
the argument goes, only realists are motivated to believe the new empirical
consequences obtained by conjoining accepted theories. However, in the course
of the history of science the practice of theory conjunction is widespread and
a reliable part of scientiﬁc methodology. Therefore, since only realism can
explain this feature of scientiﬁc practice, realism is true. Van Fraassen (1980,
83–7) responds by denying that scientists ever do conjoin theories in this manner.
Rather, he argues, the process of unifying theories is more a matter of ‘correction’,
wherein pairs or sets of theories are all adjusted so as not to contradict or be
isolated from each other, than ‘conjunction’. Furthermore, he argues, scientists
have pragmatic grounds for investigating the conjunction of accepted theories in
the search for empirical adequacy. The latter response suggests how to formulate
a general argument to show that the antirealist can account for the retention
of any aspect of the practice of science that realism can. Suppose some feature
of scientiﬁc practice is claimed by the realist to have produced instrumental
success, and realism provides an explanation or just iﬁcation of that feature. The
⁴ This ironically makes the theory-ladenness of scientiﬁc methodology and conﬁrmation evidence
for realism, where Hanson, Kuhn, and Goodman took it to tell against realism.
⁵ Note, however, that if we suppose that T and T’ are both approximately true; this does not
imply that their conjunction T & T’ is also approximately true. For example, suppose T is Kepler’s
laws of planetary motion, and T’ is Newtonian mechanics; then T & T’ is actually inconsistent and
therefore cannot be approximately true.

--- Page 84 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 71
antirealist can simply point out that the history of science provides inductive
grounds for believing in the pragmatic value of that feature of scientiﬁc practice.
Similarly, van Fraassen (1980) offers an account of the pragmatics of science
which attempts to account for (i), (ii), and (iii) above by reference to the fact that
the background theories are empirically adequate.
It certainly is true that the simplistic view of theory conjunction does not
do justice to the complexity of the practice of conjoining real theories. In some
cases the conjunction of two theories will not even be well-formed, as with the
example of general relativity and qua ntum mechanics (about which more in the
next chapter). However, notwithstanding recent scepticism about the unity of
science (notably defended by Nancy Cartwright and John Dupré, about which
more is said in Chapter 4), the uniﬁca tion of a range of phenomena within a single
explanatory scheme is often a goal of scientiﬁc theorizing. Michael Friedman
argues that theoretical explanation consists in ‘the derivation of the properties
of a relatively concrete and observable phenomenon by means of an embedding
of that phenomenon into some larger, relatively abstract and unobservable
theoretical structure’ (1981, 1). His examples include the reduction of gas theory
to molecular theory and of chemical theory to atomic theory. Friedman then
argues that theoretical explanations of this kind conﬁrm the theories of the
unobservable world that provide the reductive bases. ⁶ However, he cautions
against a simplistic view that regards an explanatory reduction as conﬁrmed just
because it is the best available explanation because this would lead to an inﬁnite
hierarchy of explanations. According to Friedman, explanatory reductions or
embeddings must have unifying power in order to be conﬁrmed.
Friedman’s argument is as follows:
(1) Uniﬁcation at the theoretical level confers a higher degree of conﬁrmation
to theories at the empirical level.
(2) Only realists have epistemic grounds for uniﬁcation at the theoretical level.
(3) Therefore, we should be realists.
He further argues that there are grounds for thinking that scientists ought to
conjoin theories whether they in fact do so or not. The full theoretical description
T is capable of acquiring a greater degree of conﬁrmation when conjoined with
other theories than that which attaches to the claim that T is empirically adequate.
The argument for this goes as follows:
A theoretical structure that plays an explanatory role in many diverse areas picks up
conﬁrmation from all these areas. The hypotheses that collectively describe the molecular
⁶ Friedman (1974) had previously argued that uniﬁcation is valuable because it increases our
understanding by reducing the number of brute facts in the world. This argument was criticized
by Kitcher (1976) and Salmon (1989), who argued that Friedman had not given a satisfactory
account of how to individuate brute facts. Friedman’s later version of the argument refers only to
conﬁrmation.

--- Page 85 ---

72 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
model of a gas of course receive conﬁrmation via their explanation of the behaviour of
gases, but they also receive conﬁrmation from all the other areas in which they are applied:
from chemical, thermal and electrical phenomena, and so on. (Friedman 1983, 243)
On the other hand the claim that the hypotheses are empirically adequate cannot
partake of this extra conﬁrmation from other domains. Since the phenomenolog-
ical import of the hypotheses is among their consequences, if the full theoretical
description becomes better conﬁrmed, so too does the phenomenological descrip-
tion. Hence, claims Friedman, the realist has better-conﬁrmed knowledge even
of the observable world than the antirealist, and this is the very type of knowledge
at which, according to the antirealist, science aims.
However, as pointed out by Kukla (1995), the antirealist may simply argue
that realists are not epistemically entitled to extra conﬁdence in the empirical
adequacy of uniﬁed theories. Kukla also argues that even if this extra conﬁdence in
the pursuit of uniﬁcation is methodologically advantageous this is not sufﬁcient
grounds for realism since the extra conﬁdence is also warranted for his so-called
‘conjunctive empiricist’ (234, and see also his 1996b). This is someone who
believes that not only are our best theories empirically adequate, but also that
when conjoined with background theories they will produce new theories that are
also empirically adequate. The conjunctive empiricist then has epistemic reasons
to pursue uniﬁcation because it will give her more instrumental knowledge. Now
if the no-miracles argument works at all it will certainly work against Kukla’s
proposal, since if scientiﬁc theories are false, it can only be more miraculous
to the realist that they should be extendible in this way than it was that
they were instrumentally successful. Furthermore, the conjunctive empiricist’s
position seems entirely ad hoc. However, note that this argument for scientiﬁc
realism relies on the modal power of theories that quantify over unobservables
in order to explain and predict phenomena. It is because diverse phenomena
are subject to the operation of the same laws and causes that uniﬁcation in
terms of unobservables is instrumentally reliable. If scientiﬁc laws described mere
regularities in the actual phenomena in some domain, their successful extension
to new domains, or the successful extension of their explanations to new domains,
would be no less mysterious than for the antirealist.
2.1.2 Against the no-miracles argument
Van Fraassen has three arguments against the claim that realism is the best or
only explanation of the success of science. The ﬁrst is that the demand that there
be an explanation for every regularity amounts to the demand that Reichenbach’s
principle of the common cause (PCC) be satisﬁed, so the realist seems to be
committed to this principle as a requirement for the adequacy of scientiﬁc
theories. The PCC holds that the correlations among events is either evidence
of a direct causal link between them, or is the result of the action of a common
cause. Van Fraassen then argues that PCC is too strong a condition on the basis

--- Page 86 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 73
of quantum mechanics (see his 1980, ch. 2, and 1991, ch. 10). Bell’s theorem
tells us that the correlations between measurement results on members of a pair
of entangled particles cannot be screened off by conditionalizing on any common
cause, and the idea of a direct causal link seems to violate relativity theory, so the
realist does indeed face a problem with quantum mechanics. However, regardless
of whether or how this can be solved, it is not obvious that the scientiﬁc realist
is committed to PCC simply in virtue of appealing to inference to the best
explanation. Perhaps there are scientiﬁc explanations that violate the principle of
the common cause, or perhaps explanation in terms of common causes simply
gives out eventually, but is nonetheless necessary, or at least appropriate, for the
vast majority of scientiﬁc purposes.
The second argument that van Fraassen offers is to object that the realist’s
demand for explanation presupposes that to be a lucky accident or coincidence is
to have no explanation at all, whereas (according to him) coincidences can have
explanations in a certain sense (1980, 25).
It was by coincidence that I met my friend in the market—but I can explain why
I was there, and he can explain why he came, so together, we can explain how this
meeting happened. We call it a coincidence, not because the occurrence was inexplicable,
but because we did not severally go to the market in order to meet. There cannot
be a requirement upon science to provide a t heoretical elimination of coincidences, or
accidental correlations in general, for that does not even make sense. (1980, 25)
This seems to miss the point of the no-miracles argument. The realist’s claim
is just that explanation of the consistent predictive success of scientiﬁc theories
in terms of coincidence or miraculous luck is an unacceptable and arbitrary
explanation, especially given the availability of the realist’s alternative. If one kept
meeting one’s friend in the market unexpectedly, and some other explanation
than mere coincidence was available, then one would be inclined to adopt it.
Perhaps with this response in mind, van Fraassen also offers a Darwinian
explanation for the instrumental success of science:
[T]he success of current scientiﬁc theorie s is no miracle. It is not even surprising to
the scientiﬁc (Darwinist) mind. For any scien tiﬁc theory is born into a life of ﬁerce
competition, a jungle red in tooth and claw. Only the successful theories survive—the
ones which in fact latched on to actual regularities in nature. (1980, 40)
Realists may reply that realism is not the only but the best explanation of
the success of science (see for example Boyd 1985), and then point out that
van Fraassen’s explanation is a phenotypic one: it gives a selection mechanism
for how a particular phenotype (an empirically successful theory) has become
dominant in the population of theories. However, this does not preclude a
genotypic explanation of the underlying properties that make some theories
successful. Realists claim that the fact that theories are approximately true is
a genotypic explanation of their instrumental reliability. They argue that ‘a
selection mechanism may explain why all the selected objects have a certain

--- Page 87 ---

74 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
feature without explaining why each of them does’ (Lipton 1991, 170). Hence,
Lipton (ibid. 170 ff.) says that the realist’s explanation explains two things that
van Fraassen’s does not: (a) why a particular theory that was selected is one
having true consequences; and (b) why theories selected on empirical grounds
went on to have more predictive successes. ⁷
Ultimately, van Fraassen rejects the need for explanation of the kind the
scientiﬁc realist claims to offer. He identiﬁes himself with the Kantian critique
of metaphysics construed as theorizing about the nature of the world as it is in
itself (while not identifying himself with Kant’s transcendental turn). According
to him, metaphysicians have in common with scientiﬁc realists their desire to
interpret and explain what is already understood in so far as it can be. He
thinks that any attempt to defend scientiﬁc realism will involve metaphysics
of some kind, notably modal metaphysics. It is only on the assumption that
the unobservable entities posited by realists cause the phenomena that they
explain them. If unobservable entities merely happened to be around when
certain phenomena were occurring then their presence would not be explanatory.
Hence, he argues, scientiﬁc realism relies upon some kind of metaphysical theory
of laws of nature, singular causation, or essential natures. For van Fraassen, this
means it ultimately rests on explanation by posit. Here we reach an impasse with
the scientiﬁc realist insisting on the need for explanations where the antirealist is
content without them.
Colin Howson (2000), P. D. Magnus and Craig Callender (2004) have
recently argued that the no-miracles argument is ﬂawed because in order to
evaluate the claim that it is probable that theories enjoying empirical success are
approximately true we have to know what the relevant base-rate is, and there is no
way we can know this. Magnus and Callender argue that ‘wholesale’ arguments
that are intended to support realism (or antirealism) about science as a whole
(rather than ‘retail’ arguments that are applied to a speciﬁc theory) are only taken
seriously because of our propensity to engage in the base-rate fallacy. They think
we ought to abandon the attempt to address the realism issue in general.
In this book we are attempting to develop a metaphysical position that allows
us to make sense of science as a whole. We are thus engaging in wholesale
reasoning about science. Rather than offering a principled defence of so doing,
we leave it to the reader to decide whether the product of our labour vindicates
our methods. In particular, we do suppose that the no-miracles argument is an
important consideration in the thinking of many scientists who say they ﬁnd
antirealism unsatisfactory as an account of their aims. Magnus and Callender
claim that the continued success of the argument in this respect, despite its
fallacious nature, is to be explained in terms of human frailty (2004, 329),
and has no probative force. We disagree just this far: if general and universal
structures can be identiﬁed—if, to that extent, a uniﬁed account of the world
⁷ See Stanford (2000).

--- Page 88 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 75
can be found, based on science—then successful applications of particular
instantiations of these structures in new domains, so as to generate novel but
reliable predictions, will be explicable and non-mysterious. It is true that we must
not insist, a priori, that the instrumental success of science can be explained.
But we should surely accept an explanation, rather than preferring to believe in
recurrent miracles, if one can in fact be provided without violation of the PNC.
We turn to novel predictive success below. But ﬁrst we take note of another
fundamental criticism of the appeal to IBE in the debate about scientiﬁc realism.
This one is due to Larry Laudan (1984, 134) and Arthur Fine (1984a), both
of whom point out that, since it is the use of IBE in speciﬁc instances where
this involves unobservables that is in question, it is viciously circular to use IBE
at the global level to infer the truth of scientiﬁc realism because the latter is a
hypothesis involving unobservables. According to them, any defence of realism
by appeal to the no-miracles argument is question-begging. There is a similarity
here with the inductive vindication of induction. Richard Braithwaite (1953,
274-8), and Carnap (1952), argue that the inductive defence of induction is
circular but not viciously so, because it is rule circular but not premise circular.
In the case of IBE such a view has recently been defended by David Papineau
(1993, ch. 5) and Stathis Psillos (1999). The idea is that premise circularity of an
argument is vicious because the conclusion is taken as one of the premises; on the
other hand, rule circularity arises when the conclusion of an argument states that
a particular rule is reliable and that conclusion only follows from the premises
when the very rule in question is used. Hence they argue that IBE is in just the
same position as inductive reasoning: it cannot be defended by a non-circular
argument. (But then we may remember Lewis Carroll’s story of Achilles and the
Tortoise (1895) and note that even deduction is circular.)
The no-miracles defence of realism is rule- but not premise-circular. The
conclusion that the use of IBE in science is reliable is not a premise of the
explanationist defence of realism, but the use of IBE is required to reach this
conclusion from the premises that IBE is part of scientiﬁc methodology and
that scientiﬁc methodology is instrumentally reliable. However, lack of vicious
circularity notwithstanding, this style of argument will not persuade someone
who totally rejects IBE. Rather, what the argument is meant to show is that
someone who does make abductive inferences can show the reliability of their
own methods. Hence, the realist may claim that although they cannot force the
non-realist to accept IBE, they can show that its use is consistent and argue that
it forms part of an overall comprehensive and adequate philosophy of science.
Unfortunately for the scientiﬁc realist, the history of science gives us grounds for
doubting whether scientiﬁc realism is really the best explanation of the success of
science, or so we shall argue in 2.1.4. In the next section we will argue that the
real miracle about the success of science is not empirical success in general, but
how it is that scientiﬁc theories can tell us about phenomena we never would
have expected without them.

--- Page 89 ---

76 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
2.1.3 Novel prediction
It has been remarked by various philosophers that the scientiﬁc realism debate
has reached an impasse. (See for example Blackburn 2002.) We hope to break
that impasse here in favour of a form of realism about science, but one which
concedes a good deal to the constructive empiricist. It is a familiar point in
philosophy that the determined sceptic cannot be rationally converted. Hence
there is no valid argument for scientiﬁc realism, the premises of which will be
accepted by the antirealist who is prepared to forsake all explanations of science.
However, van Fraassen does offer a positive account of science that is intended
to vindicate its rationality and its cumulative empirical success. In this section,
we will distil from the no-miracles argument the essence of the motivation for
realism about science. When we talk about the success of a scientiﬁc theory
there are many things that we might have in mind, for example technological
applications, provision of explanations, methodological success, contribution to
uniﬁcation, application to other sciences, generation of predictions, and so on.
Not all of these are equally good explananda for no-miracles arguments. For
example, Nancy Cartwright (1983) argues that phenomenological applications
of fundamental theories are not evidence of the truth of these theories because
of the idealizing and falsifying that is involved in both formulating and applying
them. Similarly, technological applications of science owe a great deal to trial
and error, and to auxiliary know-how. Whether or not careful work can show
that these forms of success support scientiﬁc realism after all, there is one kind of
success which seems to be the most compelling reason for some form of realism
about scientiﬁc theories, namely novel predictive success.
Alan Musgrave (1988) says ﬂatly that the only version of the no-miracles
argument that might work is one appealing to the novel predictive success of
theories. Some realists, such as Psillos (1999), have gone so far as to argue that
only theories which have enjoyed novel predictive success ought to be considered
as falling within the scope of arguments for scientiﬁc realism. This restricts the
number of abandoned past theories that can be used as the basis for arguments
against scientiﬁc realism discussed in the next section. Desiderata for an account
of novelty in this context are of two kinds. First, there are more or less a priori
features that are demanded of theories of conﬁrmation such as objectivity and
impersonality. Second, there is conformity to paradigmatic scientiﬁc judgements
about the conﬁrmation of speciﬁc theories in the history of science. Examples
of the latter that are commonly given include the empirical success of General
Relativity in predicting the deﬂection of light as it passes near large masses, and
the empirical success of Fresnel’s wave optics in accounting for the celebrated
phenomenon of the white spot in the shadow of an opaque disc (see Worrall
1994). However, it is no simple matter to give a general characterization of novel
predictive success.

--- Page 90 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 77
The most straightforward idea is that of temporal novelty . A prediction is
temporally novel when it forecasts an event that has not yet been observed.
The problem with adopting this kind of novel predictive success as a criterion
for realism about particular theories is that it seems to introduce an element of
arbitrariness concerning which theories are to be believed. When exactly in time
someone ﬁrst observes some phenomenon entailed by a theory may have nothing
to do with how and why the theory was developed. It is surely not relevant to
whether a prediction of a theory is novel if it has in fact been conﬁrmed by
someone independently but whose observation report was not known to the
theorist. ( The white spot phenomenon had been observed independently prior
to its prediction by Fresnel’s theory.) A temporal account of novelty would
make the question of whether a result was novel for a theory a matter of mere
historical accident and this would undermine the epistemic import novel success
is supposed to have.
It is more plausible to argue that what matters in determining whether a
result is novel is whether a particular scientist knew about the result before
constructing the theory that predicts it. Call this epistemic novelty.T h ep r o b l e m
with this account of novelty is that, in some cases, that a scientist knew about
a result does not seem to undermine the novel status of the result relative to
her theory, because she may not have appealed to the former in constructing
the latter. For example, many physicists regard the success of general relativity
in accounting for the orbit of Mercury, which was anomalous for Newtonian
mechanics, as highly conﬁrming, because the reasoning that led to the theory
appealed to general principles and constraints that had nothing to do with the
empirical data about the orbits of planets. Even though Einstein speciﬁcally
aimed to solve the Mercury problem, the derivation of the correct orbit was
not achieved by putting in the right answer by hand. Worrall suggests that
realism is only appropriate in the case of ‘theories, designed with one set of data
in mind, that have turned out to predict, entirely unexpectedly, some further
general phenomenon’ (1994, 4). However, in a recent analysis, Jarett Leplin
(1997) rejects this as relativizing novelty to the theorist and thereby introducing
a psychological and so non-epistemic dimension to novelty. ⁸ Take the case of
Fresnel. If we say that the fact that the white spot phenomenon was known
about is irrelevant, because Fresnel was not constructing his theory to account
for it although his theory still predicted it, then we seem to be saying that the
intentions of a theorist in constructing a theory determine in part whether the
success of the theory is to be counted as evidence for its truth. Leplin argues, and
we agree, that this undermines the objective character of theory conﬁrmation
needed for realism.
This motivates the idea of use novelty. A result is use-novel if the scientist did
not explicitly build the result into the theory or use it to set the value of some
⁸ Our discussion of Leplin (1997) follows Ladyman (1999).

--- Page 91 ---

78 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
parameter crucial to its derivation. Hence, Leplin proposes two conditions for
an observational result O to be novel for a theory T:
Independence Condition: There is a minimally adequate reconstruction of the reasoning
leading to T that does not cite any qualitative generalization of O.
Uniqueness Condition: There is some qualitative generalization of O that T explains
and predicts, and of which, at the time that T ﬁrst does so, no alternative theory provides
a viable reason to expect instances. (1997, 77)
Leplin explains that a reconstruction of the reasoning that led to a theory is an
idealization of the thought of the theorist responsible for that theory, and is said
to be ‘adequate’ if it motivates proposing it, and ‘minimally’ so if it is the smallest
such chain of reasoning (1997, 68–71).
According to the two conditions above, novelty is a complex relation between
a theory, a prediction or explanation, the reconstruction of the reasoning that led
to it, and all the other theories around at the time, since the latter are required
not to offer competing explanations of the result. Two points follow. First, if
we found a dead scientist’s revolutionary new theory of physics, but he left no
record of what experiments he knew about or what reasoning he employed, such
a theory could have no novel success. Hence, according to Leplin, no amount
of successful prediction of previously unsuspected phenomena would motivate
a realist construal of the theory. Second, suppose that we already knew all the
phenomena in some domain. In such a case we could never have evidence for
the truth rather than the empirical adequacy of any theories that we constructed
in this domain, no matter how explanatory, simple, or uniﬁed they were. These
consequences are surely contrary to realist thinking.
Furthermore, Leplin admits that his analysis makes novelty temporally indexed
(1997, 97), but this seems to fall foul of his own claim that ‘it is surely
unintuitive to make one’s epistemology depend on what could, after all, be
simple happenstance’ (1997, 43). The main problem seems to be with the
uniqueness condition since it leaves too much to chance. For example, suppose
a result is novel with respect to some theory, but that another theory comes
along soon afterwards which also explains it. According to Leplin’s view, a realist
commitment to the former theory is warranted but not to the latter; yet it seems
that the order of things might have been reversed, so that which theory we should
believe to be true is a function of contingencies of our collective biography.
Moreover, truth is taken to explain the mystery of the novel success of one
theory, but the success of the other theory, which would be novel were its rival
not around, is left unexplained.
Certainly scientiﬁc methodology includes far broader criteria for empirical
success, such as providing explanations of previously mysterious phenomena.
Indeed, Darwin’s theory of evolution and Lyell’s theory of uniformitarianism
were accepted by the scientiﬁc community because of their systematizing and
explanatory power, and in spite of their lack of novel predictive success. As we

--- Page 92 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 79
have seen, realists also often argue that the unifying power of theories, which
may bring about novel predictive success but need not do so, should be taken as
a reason for being realistic about them.
We suggest a modal account of novel prediction. That a theory could predict
some unknown phenomenon is what matters, not whether it actually did so
predict. The empirical success of a theory which was just a list of the phenomena
that actually occurred would not stand in need of explanation. That theories
sometimes produce predictions of qualitatively new types of phenomena, which
are then subsequently observed, is what is important, not whether a particular
prediction of a speciﬁc theory is novel (we return to this below). ⁹ Since some
theories have achieved novel predictive success our overall metaphysics must
explain how novel predictive success can occur, and the explanation we favour
is that the world has a modal structure which our best scientiﬁc theories
describe.
Of course, van Fraassen will argue that even novel predictive success does not
need to be explained other than in Darwinian terms. Since science will not tell
us anything one way or the other about what is epistemically ‘required’ (and of
course van Fraassen is not here referring to a mere psychological requirement),
we cannot attempt to refute him. We can only reiterate what we said above in
response to the scepticism about explanation offered by Howson, Magnus, and
Calander. However, when van Fraassen talks about scientiﬁc theories describing
the relations among the phenomena, he comes very close to our view. The
only difference between us is that we understand the relations in question to
be nomological or more broadly modal, whereas he understands them to be
extensional occurrent regularities. Of course, some scientiﬁc realists of a Humean
inclination would argue that van Fraassen is right about this latter point. We will
argue that the marriage of scientiﬁc realism and Humeanism about modality is an
unhappy one. Van Fraassen is at least consistent in his disavowal of metaphysics.
However, we will argue in 2.2.3.2 that even constructive empiricism incurs
some metaphysical commitments. First, in the next two sections, we consider
celebrated arguments against scientiﬁc realism.
2.1.4 Underdetermination
The underdetermination argument is widely discussed in the debate about
scientiﬁc realism. Before considering its implications for our project we need
to clarify it. We distinguish between two generic forms of underdetermination,
‘weak’ and ‘strong’.
Weak underdetermination:
⁹ The emphasis on new types of phenomena is crucial here since a theory that predicts another
token of a well-known type of phenomenon may simply be based on generalizing from the
known data.

--- Page 93 ---

80 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
(1) Some theory, T, is supposed to be known, and all the evidence is consistent
with T.
(2) There is another theory T# which is also consistent with all the available
evidence for T. T and T# are weakly empirically equivalent in the sense that
they are both compatible with the evidence we have gathered so far.
(3) If all the available evidence for T is consistent with some other hypothesis
T#, then there is no reason to believe T to be true and not T#.
Therefore, there is no reason to believe T to be true and not T#.
This kind of underdetermination problem is faced by scientists every day, where
T and T# are rival theories but agree with respect to the classes of phenomena that
have so far been observed. To address it scientists try to ﬁnd some phenomenon
about which the theories give different predictions, so that some new experimental
test can be performed to choose between them. For example, T and T# might
be rival versions of the standard model of particle physics which agree about
the phenomena that are within the scope of current particle accelerators but
disagree in their predictions of what will happen at even greater energies. ¹⁰
The weak underdetermination argument is a form of the problem of induction.
Let T be any empirical law, such as that all metals expand when heated, and
T# be any claim implying that everything observed so far is consistent with T
but that the next observation will be different (Goodman 1955). If antirealism
about science is to make use of underdetermination to motivate some kind of
epistemic differentiation, speciﬁcally between statements about observables and
statements about unobservables, then it ought to amount to more than just
common-and-garden fallibilism about induction.
Let us ﬁrst discuss strong underdetermination. To generate a strong underde-
termination problem for scientiﬁc theories, we start with a theory H, and generate
another theory G, such that H and G have the same empirical consequences, not
just for what we have observed so far, but also for any possible observations we
could make. If there are always such strongly empirically equivalent alternatives to
any given theory, then this might be a serious problem for scientiﬁc realism. The
relative credibility of two such theories cannot be decided by any observations
even in the future and therefore, it is argued, theory choice between them
would be underdetermined by all possible evidence. If all the evidence we could
possibly gather would not be enough to discriminate between a multiplicity of
different theories, then we could not have any rational grounds for believing in
the theoretical entities and approximate truth of any particular theory. Hence,
scientiﬁc realism would be undermined.
¹⁰ One of us is now running an experiment to isolate divergent predictions about reward
conditioning in the human brain made by different mathematical models of the process that are
each equally adequate to existing data measured at the less ﬁne-grained scales used in the advance
of the planned test—but where each theory offers a different explanation of, and therefore different
further predictions about successful treatment of, addiction.

--- Page 94 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 81
The strong form of the undetermination argument for scientiﬁc theories is as
follows:
(i) For every theory there exist an inﬁnite number of strongly empirically
equivalent but incompatible rival theories.
(ii) If two theories are strongly empirically equivalent then they are evidentially
equivalent.
(iii) No evidence can ever support a unique theory more than its strong-
ly empirically equivalent rivals, and theory-choice is therefore radically
underdetermined.
There are various ways of arguing that strong empirical equivalence is incoherent,
or at least ill-deﬁned:
(a) The idea of empirical equivalence requires it to be possible to circumscribe
clearly the observable consequences of a theory. However, there is no
non-arbitrary distinction between the observable and unobservable.
(b) The observable/unobservable distinction changes over time and so what the
empirical consequences of a theory are is relative to a particular point in time.
(c) Theories only have empirical consequences relative to auxiliary assumptions
and background conditions. So the idea of the empirical consequences of the
theory itself is incoherent.
Furthermore, it may be argued that there is no reason to believe that there will
always, or often, exist strongly empirically equivalent rivals to any given theory,
either because cases of strong empirical equivalence are too rare, or because the
only strongly empirically equivalent rivals available are not genuine theories. ¹¹
Regardless of their views on (i), many realists argue that (ii) is false. They argue
that two theories may predict all the same phenomena, but have different degrees
of evidential support. In other words, they think that there are non-empirical
features ( superempirical virtues) of theories such as simplicity, non-ad hocness,
(temporal or other) novel predictive power, elegance, and explanatory power,
which give us a reason to choose one among the empirically equivalent rivals.
Antirealists may agree that superempirical virtues break underdetermination at
the level of theory choice, but argue, following van Fraassen, that their value is
merely pragmatic, in so far as they encourage us to choose a particular theory with
which to work, without giving us any reason to regard it as true. This is part of
the motivation for van Fraassen’s claim that our best scientiﬁc theories may just as
well be empirically adequate rather than true. C ontrary to how his view is usually
presented by his critics, he doesn’t directly appeal to strong underdetermination
to argue against scientiﬁc realism and for constructive empiricism. Rather, he
uses cases of strong empirical equivalence to show that theories have extra
¹¹ For discussion of these issues see Laudan and Leplin (1991), (1993), Kukla (1993), (1994),
(1996a), and (1998), and Ladyman (2002b, ch. 6).

--- Page 95 ---

82 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
structure over and above that which describes observable events, in defence of
the claim that belief in empirical adequacy is logically weaker than belief in truth
simpliciter.¹²
Nonetheless, it is signiﬁcant that van Fraassen concedes that he has nothing
to say in the face of inductive scepticism, and we shall return to this below.
Furthermore, the fact that he does not use the underdetermination argument
against scientiﬁc realism does not mean that the realist cannot deploy it against
constructive empiricism. The problem that antirealists face is how to overcome
the weak underdetermination argument without thereby overcoming the strong
one. Realists argue that the same superempirical considerations that entitle
them to regard a well-tested theory as describing future observations as well
as past ones also entitle them to choose a particular theory among strongly
empirically equivalent ones. The particular strong underdetermination problem
for scientiﬁc realists is that all the facts about observable states of affairs will
underdetermine theory-choice between T
0, a full realistically construed theory,
and T1, the claim that T 0 is empirically adequate. However, all the evidence we
have available now will underdetermine the choice between T 1 and T2,t h ec l a i m
that T0 is empirically adequate before the year 2010 (the problem of induction).
Furthermore all the facts about all actually observed states of affairs at all times
will underdetermine the choice between T
1 and T3, the claim that T 0 describes
all actually observed events. So, the realist can argue, even the judgement that T 0
is empirically adequate is underdetermined by the available evidence, and hence,
the constructive empiricist ought to be an inductive sceptic in the absence of a
positive solution to the underdetermination problem.
The underdetermination arguments discussed above do not seem unequivo-
cally to support either realism or antirealism. However, there is something to
the thought that genuine cases of strong empirical equivalence from science
pose a particular problem for the scientiﬁc realist. Roger Jones (1991) raised
the problem ‘Realism about what?’ by drawing attention to the existence of
alternative formulations of physical theories that coexist in science. In a recent
paper, Jonathan Bain (2004) analyses one of Jones’s examples, namely that of
Newtonian gravity, and shows that there are at least six theories that are prima
facie entitled to that name. The details are technical, but the basic idea is that
the theories differ with respect to their spacetime symmetries, their boundary
conditions, and their dynamical symmetries. The most obvious difference is that
some of them are ﬁeld theories on ﬂat spacetimes, and some are theories in
which the effect of gravity is incorporated into the spacetime structure in the
form of curvature as in General Relativity. In a discussion of the implications
for the realism debate, Bain goes on to argue that three of these theories seem
to constitute a genuine case of strong empirical equivalence, since they have
differing spacetime symmetries and absolute objects. However (374), he points
¹² See M. van Dyck, (forthcoming).

--- Page 96 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 83
out, they have the same dynamical symmetries and so a structural realist who
regards dynamical structure as what is physically real should regard them as
different ways of describing the same structure.
Quantum physics gives further examples of empirical equivalence. Our view
is that the choice among competing ways of embedding empirically equivalent
substructures in fundamental theory is a pragmatic one, but ultimately different
formulations may lead naturally to the discovery of new modal relations and
hence to new empirical discoveries. For example, Newton’s force law suggested
the mathematical form for Coulomb’s law, although we know that both theories
can be geometrized so that explicit forces disappear from the formalism. However,
as Bain says, the standard scientiﬁc realist has the option of trying to break any
cases of underdetermination by reference to the kinds of superempirical virtues
mentioned above. The problem is that these sometimes seem to pull in different
directions, and there is no obvious way to rank them (see Ladyman 2002b, ch. 8,
section 2).
The underdetermination argument cannot be ignored by the scientiﬁc realist,
but, since it also threatens any positive form of antirealism such as constructive
empiricism, it does not give us compelling grounds to abandon standard
scientiﬁc realism. (However, note that, as Bain says, there are grounds for
thinking that underdetermination supports structural realism.) In any case, we
will not discuss it further since in the next section we present what we regard as a
more compelling—indeed, as the most compelling—form of argument against
standard scientiﬁc realism.
2.2 THEORY CHANGE
Many realists are inclined to dismiss worries based on underdetermination as
‘mere philosophic doubt’. They argue that since scientists ﬁnd ways of choosing
between even strongly empirically equivalent rivals, philosophers ought not to
make too much of merely in-principle possibilities that are irrelevant to scientiﬁc
practice. Leaving aside the question of whether all cases of strong empirical
equivalence are scientiﬁcally unproblematic, and supposing (counterfactually, in
our view) that the epistemological defence of scientiﬁc realism in terms of IBE is
compelling, the problem of theory change at its strongest suggests that scientiﬁc
realism is not supported by the facts about scientiﬁc theories because realism is
not even empirically adequate. The power of the arguments against scientiﬁc
realism from theory change is that, rather than being a priori and theoretical, they
are empirically based and their premises are based on data obtained by examining
the practice and history of science. Ontological discontinuity in theory change
seems to give us grounds not for mere agnosticism but for the positive belief that
many central theoretical terms of our best contemporary science will be regarded
as non-referring by future science.

--- Page 97 ---

84 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
The notorious pessimistic meta-induction was anticipated by the ancient
Greek sceptics,¹³ but in its modern form, advocated notably by Laudan (1981),
it has the following structure:
(i) There have been many empirically successful theories in the history of science
which have subsequently been rejected and whose theoretical terms do not
refer according to our best current theories. (Laudan gives a list.)
(ii) Our best current theories are no different in kind from those discarded
theories and so we have no reason to think they will not ultimately be
replaced as well.
So, by induction we have positive reason to expect that our best current
theories will be replaced by new theories according to which some of the
central theoretical terms of our best current theories do not refer, and hence,
we should not believe in the approximate truth or the successful reference of
the theoretical terms of our best current theories.
The most common realist response to this argument is to restrict realism to
theories with some further properties (usually, maturity and novel predictive
success) so as to cut down the inductive base employed in (i). However, assuming
that such an account can be given there are still a couple of cases of mature
theories which enjoyed novel predictive success by anyone’s standards, namely
the ether theory of light and the caloric theory of heat. If their central theoretical
terms do not refer, the realist’s claim that approximate truth explains empirical
success will no longer be enough to establish realism, because we will need
some other explanation for the success of the caloric and ether theories. If this
will do for these theories then it ought to do for others where we happened
to have retained the central theoretical terms, and then we do not need the
realist’s preferred explanation that such theories are true and successfully refer to
unobservable entities. To be clear:
(a) Successful reference of its central theoretical terms is a necessary condition
for the approximate truth of a theory.
(b) There are examples of theories that were mature and had novel predictive
success but whose central theoretical terms do not refer.
(c) So there are examples of theories that were mature and had novel predictive
success but which are not approximately true.
(d) Approximate truth and successful reference of central theoretical terms is not
a necessary condition for the novel-predictive success of scientiﬁc theories.
So, the no-miracles argument is undermined since, if approximate truth and
successful reference are not available to be part of the explanation of some
theories’ novel predictive success, there is no reason to think that the novel
predictive success of other theories has to be explained by realism.
¹³ See Annas and Barnes (1985).

--- Page 98 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 85
Hence, we do not need to form an inductive argument based on Laudan’s list
to undermine the no-miracles argument for realism. Laudan’s paper was also
intended to show that the successful reference of its theoretical terms is not a
necessary condition for the novel predictive success of a theory (1981, 45), and
there are counter-examples to the no-miracles argument. ¹⁴
2.2.1 The ﬂight to reference
There are two basic (not necessarily exclusive) responses to this:
(I) Develop an account of reference according to which the abandoned theo-
retical terms are regarded as referring after all.
(II) Restrict realism to those parts of theories which play an essential role in
the derivation of subsequently observed (novel) predictions, and then argue
that the terms of past theories which are now regarded as non-referring were
non-essential so there is no reason to deny that the essential terms in current
theories will be retained. ¹⁵
Realists have used causal theories of reference to account for continuity of
reference for terms like ‘atom’ or ‘electron’, when the theories about atoms and
electrons undergo signiﬁcant changes. The difference with the terms ‘ether’ and
‘caloric’ is that they are no longer used in modern science. In the nineteenth
century the ether was usually envisaged as some sort of material, solid or liquid,
which permeated all of space. It was thought that light waves had to be waves
in some sort of medium and the ether was posited to fulﬁl this role. Yet if
there really is such a medium then we ought to be able to detect the effect of
the Earth’s motion through it, because light waves emitted perpendicular to the
motion of a light source through the ether ought to travel a longer path than
light waves emitted in the same direction as the motion of the source through the
ether. Of course, various experiments, the most famous being that of Michelson
and Morley, failed to ﬁnd such an effect. By then Maxwell had developed his
theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, which came to be regarded as not a material
substance at all. As a result the term ‘ether’ was eventually abandoned completely.
However, as Hardin and Rosenberg (1982) argue, the causal theory of reference
may be used to defend the claim that the term ‘ether’ referred after all, but to
the electromagnetic ﬁeld rather than to a material medium. If the reference of
theoretical terms is to whatever causes the phenomena responsible for the terms’
introduction, then since optical phenomena are now believed to be caused by
¹⁴ P. Lewis (2001), Lange (2002), and Magnus and Callender (2004) regard the pessimistic
meta-induction as another instance of the base rate fallacy (see 2.1.2 above). Here we sidestep their
concerns by reformulating the argument from theory change so that it is not a probabilistic or
inductive argument.
¹⁵ Stanford (2003) refers to this as ‘selective conﬁrmation’.

--- Page 99 ---

86 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
the oscillations in the electromagnetic ﬁeld, the latter is what is referred to by
the term ‘ether’. Similarly, since heat is now believed to be caused by molecular
motions, then the term ‘caloric’ can be thought to have referred all along to these
rather than to a material substance. The danger with this, as Laudan (1984)
pointed out, is that it threatens to make the reference of theoretical terms a trivial
matter, since as long as some phenomena prompt the introduction of a term it
will automatically successfully refer to whatever is the relevant cause (or causes).
Furthermore, this theory radically disconnects what a theorist is talking about
from what she thinks she is talking about. For example, Aristotle or Newton
could be said to be referring to geodesic motion in a curved spacetime when,
respectively, they talked about the natural motion of material objects, and the
fall of a body under the effect of the gravitational force.
The essence of the second strategy is to argue that the parts of theories
that have been abandoned were not really involved in the production of novel
predictive success. Philip Kitcher says that: ‘No sensible realist should ever want
to assert that the idle parts of an individual practice, past or present, are justiﬁed
by the success of the whole’ (1993, 142). Similarly, Psillos argues that history
does not undermine a cautious scientiﬁc realism that differentiates between the
evidential support that accrues to different parts of theories, and only advocates
belief in those parts that are essentially involved in the production of novel
predictive success. This cautious, rather than all-or-nothing, realism would not
have recommended belief in the parts of the theories to which Laudan draws
attention, because if we separate the components of a theory that generated
its success from those that did not we ﬁnd that the theoretical commitments
that were subsequently abandoned are the idle ones. On the other hand, argues
Psillos: ‘the theoretical laws and mechanisms that generated the successes of past
theories have been retained in our current scientiﬁc image’ (1999, 108). Such
an argument needs to be accompanied by speciﬁc analyses of particular theories
which both identify the essential contributors to the success of the theory
in question, and show that these were retained in subsequent developments,
as well as criteria for identifying the essential components of contemporary
theories.
Leplin, Kitcher, and Psillos have all suggested something like this strategy,
but we will only discuss Psillos’s execution of it. What Leplin (1997) sets out
to show is something very weak, namely that there are conditions that would
justify a realist attitude to a theory, rather than that these conditions have
actually been satisﬁed. He does allude (1997, 146) to the idea of (II) above, but
doesn’t develop it in any detail. Kitcher (1993) suggests a model of reference
according to which some tokens of theoretical terms refer and others do not,
but his theory allows that the theoretical descriptions of the theoretical kinds
in question may have been almost entirely mistaken, and seems to defend
successful reference only for those uses of terms that avoid ontological detail
at the expense of reference to something playing a causal role in producing

--- Page 100 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 87
some observable phenomena. ¹⁶ The most detailed and inﬂuential account is
due to Psillos (1999), who takes up Kitcher’s suggestion of (II) and develops
it in some detail, and also combines it with (I). Laudan claims that if current
successful theories are approximately true, then the caloric and ether theories
cannot be because their central theoretical terms don’t refer (by premise (ii)
above). Strategy (I) accepts premise (ii) but Psillos allows that sometimes an
overall approximately true theory may fail to refer. He then undercuts Laudan’s
argument by arguing that abandoned theoretical terms that do not refer, like
‘caloric’, were involved in parts of theories not supported by the evidence at the
time, because the empirical success of caloric theories was independent of any
hypotheses about the nature of caloric. Abandoned terms that were used in parts
of theories supported by the evidence at the time do refer after all; ‘ether’ refers
to the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Below, we identify some problems with this type of defence of realism and
the claims made about ‘ether’ and ‘caloric’. Most importantly, we argue that the
notion of ‘essential’, deployed in (a) above, is too vague to support a principled
distinction between our epistemic attitudes to different parts of theories. In our
view, the problem with strategy (II) is that its applications tend to be ad hoc and
dependent on hindsight. Furthermore, by disconnecting empirical success from
the detailed ontological commitments in terms of which theories were described,
it seems to undermine rather than support realism. As Kyle Stanford (2003)
argues, this strategy seems to have ‘sacriﬁced the substantive tenets of realism on
the altar of its name’ (555). ¹⁷
According to Psillos: ‘Theoretical constituents which make essential contribu-
tions to successes are those that have an indispensable role in their generation.
They are those which ‘‘really fuel the derivation’’ ’ (1999, 110). This means that
the hypothesis in question cannot be replaced by an independently motivated,
non-ad hoc, potentially explanatory alterna tive. (Remember that the sort of
success referred to here is novel predictive success.) Psillos gives as an example
of an idle component of a theory Newton’s hypothesis that the centre of mass of
the universe is at absolute rest. However, within Newton’s system this hypothesis
cannot be replaced by an alternative that satisﬁes the above requirements. That the
centre of mass of the universe should move with any particular velocity is surely
more ad hoc than it being at rest. There is also a sense in which the universe being
at rest is simpler than it having a particular velocity, since the latter would raise
the further question of whether it had always been in motion or whether some
force set it in motion. Certainly, any alternative hypotheses that might have been
¹⁶ For a critique of Kitcher’s account of the reference of theoretical terms see McLeish (2005).
She argues persuasively that there are no satisfactory grounds for making the distinction between
referring and non-referring tokens. McLeish (2006) argues that abandoned theoretical terms partially
refer and partially fail to refer. This strategy trivializes the claim that abandoned theoretical terms
referred after all unless it is combined with strategy (II).
¹⁷ Psillos is also criticized in Lyons (2006).

--- Page 101 ---

88 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
entertained would not be explanatory of anything or independently motivated. It
seems that this hypothesis does count as an essential contribution to the success
of Newton’s theory, by Psillos’s criteria, and hence that he would have had us
be realistic about it. However, the notions of absolute space and absolute rest
have no meaning in modern physics so Psillos’s criterion above has accidentally
bolstered historically inspired scepticism.
This case is arguably not so serious for the realist for it does not involve a central
theoretical term that was essentially deployed, yet which cannot be regarded as
referring from the standpoint of later theory. Nonetheless, Psillos seeks to deal
with the threat of such examples using this distinction between essential and
inessential theoretical constituents, and his example reveals that his deﬁnition
of the distinction does not in general capture only the theoretical hypotheses
with which the realist would be happy. Another problem is the ambiguity that
arises concerning the type of dependence in question when we ask if a theory’s
success is dependent on a particular hypothesis. We can understand this as at
least either logical/mathematical dependence or causal dependence. So, when
we are asked to look at the particular novel empirical success of a theory and
decide which are the parts of the theory that this success depended on, then
we will give different answers according to how we understand dependence.
Furthermore, the realist should be careful here for it is dangerous for realism
overall to disconnect the metaphysical hypotheses and background assumptions
about supposed entities like caloric or the ether from what are construed as the
real successes of the theories in issuing certain predictions. As we have seen, one
of the central claims of contemporary realism is that we should take seriously the
involvement of theoretical and metaphysical beliefs in scientiﬁc methodology,
and that we cannot disconnect the success of science from the theoretically
informed methods of scientists. This is meant to support realism, for, according
to Boyd and others, only realism explains why these extra-empirical beliefs are
so important. However, Psillos suggests that after all we need not take seriously
scientists’ beliefs about the constitution of the ether or caloric, because the success
of the theories ﬂoats free of such assumptions. Let us now examine the examples
he discusses.
2.2.2 ‘Ether’, ‘Caloric’, ether and caloric
Ether theories were successful by any plausible criteria that the realist may
concoct and were mature, yet it was widely believed that the ether was a material
substance, and there certainly is no such thing permeating space according to
Maxwell’s successor theory. The hypotheses about the material nature of the
ether were no presuppositional or idle posits because they motivated the use of
mechanical principles, like Hooke’s law, in investigations of how light waves
would propagate in such a medium. This led to the fundamental departure
from previous wave theories brought about by Fresnel’s assumption that light

--- Page 102 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 89
propagates as a transverse wave motion. Fresnel thus got important ‘heuristic
mileage’ out of these mechanical principles. Therefore, as Worrall (1994) has
argued, although the replacement of ether theory by electromagnetic theory
provides a constructive proof of the eliminability of the former, mechanics
is really only eliminable from the success of Fresnel’s theory in a minimal
logical sense.
When we inquire into what hypotheses ‘really fuel the derivation’ we have
no other way to address this question than by explaining how we would derive
the prediction in question using our understanding of the theory. This does
not show that hypotheses which we do not use in reconstructing the derivation
played no role in making it possible for the scientists of the time to derive
the prediction that they did. A modern scientist may not need to invoke
anything about the material constitution of the ether to reconstruct Fresnel’s
predictions, but Fresnel did so to derive the predictions in the ﬁrst place.
Psillos says that ‘essential constituents’ of success are ones such that ‘no other
available hypothesis’ (1999, 309) can replace them in the derivation of the
novel predictions made by the theory in question. The question is: available to
whom? There was no other hypothesis available to Fresnel about the nature of
the ether that would have allowed him to derive the novel predictions of his
theory. In general it seems true that quite often there will be no other hypothesis
available at the time, but that in reconstructing derivations we may have several
alternatives.
Psillos argues that there is continuity between the causal roles of attributes
of the ether and those of the ﬁeld. For example, the fundamental causal role
of the ether is arguably to act as the repository of the energy associated with
light between emission by a source and its absorption or reﬂection by matter.
Light was known to travel at a ﬁnite velocity, so it had to be in some medium
while passing through otherwise empty space. The electromagnetic ﬁeld is now
thought to be that medium. However, the determination of which causal role is
important is done with the beneﬁt of hindsight. Our assessment of what matters
in the description of optical phenomena is very much relative to our current state
of knowledge, as is any statement about the relevant causal role of some posited
unobservable entity. However, we do not know what parts of current theories
will be retained, in other words what the real causal roles are.
It is true that the important principles about light (that it undergoes transverse
propagation, for example) are carried over into Maxwell’s theory, and indeed
there is a lot of continuity between the ether theories and electromagnetic ﬁeld
theory. However, the latter has now been replaced by quantum ﬁeld theories,
which may soon be replaced by a theory of superstrings or a grand uniﬁed
theory of quantum gravity. It is implausible to suggest that ‘ether’ referred all
along to a quantum ﬁeld, because the latter have a completely different nature to
Maxwell’s electromagnetic ﬁeld. For example, the latter is supposed to permeate
all space and have a deﬁnite magnitude at different points, whereas the former is

--- Page 103 ---

90 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
multi-dimensional and incorporates only probabilities for different magnitudes
(at least according to the usual understanding of it). ¹⁸
In the case of caloric, Psillos argues that ‘the approximate truth of a theory
is distinct from the full reference of all its terms’ (1994, 161). ‘Caloric’, he
maintains, was not a central theoretical term, and we should only worry about
the central theoretical terms, ‘central in the sense that the advocates of the theory
took the successes of the theory to warrant the claim that there are natural kinds
denoted by these terms’ (Psillos 1999, 312). One response to Psillos on this issue
is to argue that in the realism debate we ought only to be concerned with what
scientists should believe and not with what they do in fact believe. For example,
if a group of antirealists came up with a novel predictively successful theory,
realists should not thereby be driven to admit that, because none of the scientists
involved believes in the natural kinds denoted by the theory, the theory has
no central terms. When we are concerned with philosophical disputation about
science the fact that a particular scientist had this or that attitude to a theory
is irrelevant. Indeed, while the PNC demands that metaphysics be subservient
to science, it does not accord the opinions of scientists about metaphysics any
special authority. It is the content of science per se that constrains metaphysics
but scientists may be and often are wrong about the metaphysical implications
of theories. In particular, the authors of a discovery have no privileged weight
in discussions of its metaphysical interpretation. For example, we think that
a PNC-compatible attitude would have required metaphysicians to take local
hidden-variables interpretations of qua ntum mechanics seriously prior to the
experiments that violated Bell’s inequality in the 1970s, ¹⁹ even though most
physicists ignored them, because the scientiﬁc knowledge of the time was
compatible with them. What Einstein, Heisenberg, or Bohr believed about local
hidden variables is epistemically irrelevant.
Thus, in response to Psillos: when a philosopher is reconstructing the history
of science for interpretation of the central commitments of theories, she should
take account of all the science we know now. The metaphysical opinions of
historical scientists have no more authority tha n do the metaphysical attitudes of
historical philosophers. Of course, these opinions are important for explaining
¹⁸ Saatsi adopts strategy (II) with respect to the ether theory of light and argues that ‘ether’ was
not a central theoretical term, but agrees with Psillos that there is continuity between the ether
theory and Maxwell’s electromagnetic ﬁeld theory at the level of the causal properties of light.
However, like Chakravartty (1998), he fails to consider the consequences of the fact that physics has
moved on considerably since Maxwell. Our understanding of those causal properties has changed
dramatically and there simply is nothing in conte mporary physics that corresponds to the entities
that were supposed to bear those properties. There is no consensus among those defending standard
realism in the face of theory change and their manoeuvres have become increasingly ad hoc. Hence,
we have token not type reference (Kitcher), partial disjunctive reference (McLeish), reference after
all or terms not central after all (Psillos), an d approximate truth of the causal roles but not reference
(Saatsi)—better to abandon standard scientiﬁc realism given the availability of structural realism as
an alternative.
¹⁹ There were many such experiments; see Redhead (1987, 108).

--- Page 104 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 91
why the history of science went as it did. In any case, to return to Psillos’s
example, he argues that in the case of caloric theory all the important predictive
successes of the theory were independent of the assumption that heat is a material
substance. He argues that all the well-conﬁrmed content of the theory, the laws of
experimental calorimetry, was retained in thermodynamics anyway. Here Psillos
can be construed as exploiting, as scientists often do, the positive side of the
underdetermination problem. When we theorize about or model the phenomena
in some domain we will inevitably make a few mistakes. If there was only one
(the true) theory that could describe the phenomena, then we would almost
certainly never hit upon it initially; we arrive at adequate theories by modifying
earlier ones in the face of new evidence. More importantly, after radical theory
change we want to be able to recover the empirical success of old theories
without buying into their outdated ontologies. The ever present possibility of
alternative, empirically equivalent theories is therefore essential. Psillos makes a
similar point with respect to ether as for caloric. ‘Ether’ refers, according to him,
because scientists weren’t committed to it being of any particular nature but were
committed to its having some properties which as a matter of fact are carried
over to Maxwell’s theory.
We agree with Psillos that what is philosophically important about caloric
theory and ether theory is that they were stations along the way to our current
conceptions of heat and of the propagation of light, respectively. Directing
attention to the question of whether the terms ‘hooked onto objects’ is a red
herring (and the same red herring that ushered in application by Putnam of
the Kripke/Putnam theory of reference to cases in the philosophy of science).
However, Psillos’s indexing the basis for his conclusions about caloric and ether
to judgements of historical scientists is also a red herring. Suppose that scientists
had been so committed to belief in the material constitution of the ether that
denying its material nature would have seemed absurd to them. Imagine that this
would have caused them to fail to achieve some derivations that were otherwise
available. (What we are here imagining was no doubt true of some or many
scientists.) Would we then be called upon to reverse Psillos’s whiggish verdict
about ether theory? In that case what is presented as the subject of a metaphysical
question—Does the theory (partially) accurately describe the world?—seems to
resolve into questions about the intentional characterization of some particular
long-dead scientists. This is surely confused. What matters to the metaphysical
question, we suggest, is the structure of the theory. Science is authoritative on
the question of which current theories are appropriate objects of comparison
with the structure of the old theory for purposes of metaphysically evaluating the
latter. Rejecting Psillos’s version of historicism does not replace appeal to history
with appeal to philosophers’ intuitions.
But there is another problem. Even if Psillos’s defence of referential continuity
for the ether theories of light were taken as correct for his reasons, this would
show only that the term ‘ether’ refers to the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld. This

--- Page 105 ---

92 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
is not much of an advance on the position that says ‘ether’ doesn’t refer or
refers to the empty set, and for the small gain we must pay the high price of
making reference too easy. Scientiﬁc realism becomes uninteresting if it is the
thesis that our theoretical terms refer but to things that may be quite unlike
theoretical descriptions we have of them. Rather than saying that the world is
much like our best theories say it is, and that theoretical terms of such theories
genuinely refer, realists would retreat to saying that some theoretical terms refer,
some don’t, and others approximately refer. Any hypothesis or entity will only
b eal e g i t i m a t eo b j e c to fb e l i e fi fi ti se s s e n t i a lf o rp r o d u c i n gn o tj u s tt h es u c c e s s ,
but the novel predictive success, of a theory. So the realist has to concede that
a theory can be highly empirically successful despite the lack of anything in the
world like the entities it postulates. ²⁰ Hence, the danger with strategy (II) is that
it may rely on hindsight in such a way as to make the pronouncements as to
which terms are central and which are not depend on which have subsequently
been abandoned. This would make (II) an ad hoc solution to the problem of
abandoned theoretical terms.
We join Bishop (2003) in emphasizing that the debate about whether the
world is really how it is described to be by scientiﬁc theories is not an issue
in the philosophy of language. No matter how the realist contrives a theory of
reference so as to be able to say that terms like ‘ether’ refer, there is no doubt
that there is no elastic solid permeating all of space. The argument from theory
change threatens scientiﬁc realism because if what science now says is right,
then the ontologies of past scientiﬁc theories are far from accurate accounts of
the furniture of the world. If that is right, even though they were predictively
successful then the success of our best current theories does not mean they have
got the nature of the world right either. Thus the argument from theory change
can be thought of as a reductio on scientiﬁc realism. Our solution to this problem
is to give up the attempt to learn about the nature of unobservable entities from
science. The metaphysical import of successful scientiﬁc theories consists in their
giving correct descriptions of the structure of the world. Hence, we now turn to
structural realism.
From the perspective of the structural realist the problem of referential
continuity across theory change is a pseudo-problem. Indeed, it has some
claim to be regarded as the ‘patient zero’ of the neo-scholastic disease in
metaphysics. Putnam’s (1975b) account of the referential semantic of natural
kind terms, which brought Kripke-style metaphysics into the philosophy of
²⁰ The realist does have to make this concession. Consider, for example, so-called ‘rational
expectations theory’ in economics. T his is predictively successful, and enjoyed novel predictive
success, in at least some very sophisticated niche markets (for example, markets for derivatives)
between phase shifts in higher-scale dynamics. Yet th e main objects of predication in the theory,
atomless measure spaces and inﬁnitely lived agents, quite obviously have no empirical counterparts.
(See Kydland and Prescott 1982, the most important in a series of papers that earned its authors the
Nobel Prize.)

--- Page 106 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 93
science, was a response to Feyerabend’s (1962) argument that if the extensions
of theoretical terms are functions of the intensional meanings entertained by
scientists, then theory change implies ontological discontinuity over time, rather
than progress with respect to truth. We suggest that the appropriate response to
Feyerabend’s problem is to give up the idea that science ﬁnds its metaphysical
signiﬁcance in telling us what sorts of things there are, rather than to follow
Putnam in promoting a non-empiricist account of the relationship between
things, terms, and theories.
2.3 STRUCTURALISM
As we have seen, in the debate about scientiﬁc realism, the no-miracles argument
is in tension with the arguments from theory-change. In an attempt to break
this impasse, and have ‘the best of both worlds’, John Worrall (1989) introduced
structural realism (although he attributes its original formulation to Poincaré).
Using the case of the transition in nineteenth-century optics from Fresnel’s
elastic solid ether theory to Maxwell’s theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
Worrall argues that:
There was an important element of continuity in the shift from Fresnel to Maxwell—and
this was much more than a simple question of carrying over the successful empirical
content into the new theory. At the same time it was rather less than a carrying over
of the full theoretical content or full theoretical mechanisms (even in ‘approximate’
form) … There was continuity or accumulation in the shift, but the continuity is one of
form or structure, not of content. (1989, 117)
According to Worrall, we should not accept full-blown scientiﬁc realism, which
asserts that the nature of things is correctly described by the metaphysical and
physical content of our best theories. Rather we should adopt the structural
realist emphasis on the mathematical or structural content of our theories. Since
there is (says Worrall) retention of structure across theory change, structural
realism both (a) avoids the force of the pessimistic meta-induction (by not
committing us to belief in the theory’s description of the furniture of the world)
and (b) does not make the success of science (especially the novel predictions
of mature physical theories) seem miraculous (by committing us to the claim
that the theory’s structure, over and above its empirical content, describes the
world).
Hence, a form of realism that is only committed to the structure of theories
would not be undermined by theory change. The point is that theories can
be very different and yet share all kinds of structure. The task of providing
an adequate theory of approximate truth at the level of ontology which ﬁts
the history of science has so far defeated realists, but a much more tractable
problem is to display the structural commonalities between different theories.

--- Page 107 ---

94 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
Examples supplementing Worrall’s are given by Saunders (1993a) who shows
how much structure Ptolemaic and Copernican astronomy have in common, by
Brown (1993), who explains the correspondence between Special Relativity and
classical mechanics, and by Bain and Norton (2001), who discuss the structural
continuity in descriptions of the electron.²¹ Holgar Lyre (2004) extends Worrall’s
example by considering the relationship between Maxwellian electrodynamics
and Quantum Electrodynamics (QED). Saunders (2003a and 2003b) criticizes
Cao (1997) for underestimating the difﬁculties with a non-structuralist form of
realism in the light of the history of quantum ﬁeld theory.
There are in fact numerous examples of continuity in the mathematical
structure of successive scientiﬁc theories, but we offer simple examples from
two of the most radical cases of theory change in science, namely the transition
from classical mechanics to Special Relativity, and the transition from classical
mechanics to quantum mechanics.
In classical mechanics if system B is moving at constant velocity v
AB with
respect to system A, and system C is moving at constant velocity v BC with respect
to system B, then system C is moving at constant velocity v AC = vAB + vBC with
respect to system A. This simple addition law for relative velocities does not
hold in Special Relativity, because the coordinate systems deﬁned by the inertial
frames of reference in which each of the bodies is stationary are not related by
the Galilean transformations:
x
′ = (x − vt)
y′ = y
z′ = z
t′ = t²²
but rather by the (simple) Lorentz transformations:
x′ = γ(v)(x − vt)
y′ = y
z′ = z
t′ = γ(v)(t − vx/c2)
where γ(v) = 1
√
1− v2
c2
, and c is the velocity of light in a vacuum.
²¹ Note that although Bain and Norton do no t defend ontic structural realism and seem to
return to ‘a property predicated on individual systems’, Bain thinks that ‘the more appropriate
reading would abstract the structure from the individuals a la French and Ladyman’ (2003, 20).
²² For simplicity, we consider the case where one body is moving along the x-axis of the other’s
coordinate system so that B’s y and z coordinates do not change.

--- Page 108 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 95
However, when v becomes very small compared to c, or when c tends to inﬁnity,
so that v/c tends to 0, the mathematica l structure of the latter clearly increasingly
approximates that of the Galilean transformations. Although the theories are
quite different in their ontological import—for example, Special Relativity does
not allow the deﬁnition of absolute simultaneity—there is partial continuity of
mathematical structure. There are a host of such relations that obtain between
classical mechanics and Special Relativity, but now consider the relationship
between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics. ²³
Neils Bohr self-consciously applied the methodological principle that quantum
mechanical models ought to reduce mathematically to classical models in the
limit of large numbers of particles, or the limit of Planck’s constant becoming
arbitrarily small. This is known as the ‘correspondence principle’. There are
numerous cases in quantum mechanics where the Hamiltonian functions that
represent the total energy of mechanical systems imitate those of classical
mechanics, but with variables like those that stand for position and momentum
replaced by Hermitian operators. Similarly, the equation (known as Ehrenfest’s
theorem), gradV(<r>) = m(d
2 <r>/ dt2), where V is the potential and r is the
position operator, exhibits continuity between classical and quantum mechanics.
It has a similar form to the equation F = ma since in classical mechanics gradV
is equated with F. But the quantum equation involves the expectation values
of a Hermitian operator, where the classical equation features continuous real
variables for position.²⁴
The most minimal form of structuralism focuses on empirical structure, and
as such is best thought of as a defence of the cumulative nature of science in the
face of Kuhnian worries about revolutions (following Post 1971). This is how
van Fraassen sees his structural empiricism, to which we now turn.
2.3.1 From constructive empiricism to structural empiricism
Van Fraassen deﬁnes scientiﬁc realism as follows: ‘Science aims to give us, in
its theories, a literally true story of what the world is like; and acceptance of
a scientiﬁc theory involves the belief that it is true’ (1980, 8). Constructive
empiricism is then contrastively deﬁned thus: ‘Science aims to give us theories
which are empirically adequate; and acceptance of a theory involves as belief
only that it is empirically adequate’ (1980, 12). Claiming empirical adequacy
for a theory is equated by van Fraassen with claiming that: ‘What it says about
²³ See Brown (2005) and Batterman (2002). Batterman discusses numerous examples of
limiting relationships between theories, notably the renormalization group approach to critical
phenomena, and the relationship between wave and ray optics. We return to Batterman’s work
in 4.2.
²⁴ The Poisson bracket provides another example of stru ctural continuity between classical and
quantum mechanics. The correspondence principle and the relationship between classical and
quantum mechanics is beautifully explained in Darrigol (1992).

--- Page 109 ---

96 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
the observable things and events in this world, is true’ (1980, 12). In other
words, ‘the belief involved in accepting a scientiﬁc theory is only that it ‘saves
the phenomena’, that is that it correctly describes what is observable’ (1980,
4). Note that this means that it saves all the actual phenomena, past, present,
and future, not just those that have been actually observed so far, so even to
accept a theory as empirically adequate is to believe something more than is
logically implied by the data (1980, 12, 72). Moreover, for van Fraassen, a
phenomenon is simply an observable event and not necessarily an observed one.
So a tree falling over in a forest is a phenomenon whether or not someone actually
witnesses it.
Note that
(a) Scientiﬁc realism has two components: (i) theories which putatively refer
to unobservable entities are to be taken literally as assertoric and truth-apt
claims about the world (in particular, as including existence claims about
unobservable entities); and (ii) acceptance of these theories (or at least the
best of them) commits one to belief in their truth or approximate truth in
the correspondence sense (in particular, to belief that tokens of the types
postulated by the theories in fact exist). Van Fraassen is happy to accept
(i). It is (ii) that he does not endorse. Instead, he argues that acceptance of
the best theories in modern science does not require belief in the entities
postulated by them, and that the nature and success of modern science
relative to its aims can be understood without invoking the existence of such
entities.²⁵
(b) Both doctrines are deﬁned in terms of the aims of science, so constructive
empiricism is fundamentally a view about the aims of science and the nature
of ‘acceptance’ of scientiﬁc theories, rather than a view about whether elec-
trons and the like exist. Strictly speaking it is possible to be a constructive
empiricist and a scientiﬁc agnostic, or a scientiﬁc realist and scientiﬁc agnos-
tic.²⁶ That said, it is part of van Fraassen’s aim to show that abstaining from
belief in unobservables is perfectly rational and scientiﬁc.
(c) Empirical adequacy for scientiﬁc theories is characterized by van Fraassen in
terms of the so-called ‘semantic’ or ‘model-theoretic’ conception of scientiﬁc
theories, the view that theories are fundamentally extra-linguistic entities
(models or structures), as opposed to the syntactic account of theories, which
treats them as the deductive closure of a set of formulas in ﬁrst-order logic.
The semantic view treats the relationship between theories and the world in
terms of isomorphism. On this view, loosely speaking, a theory is empirically
²⁵ Both the scientiﬁc realist and the const ructive empiricist hold that empirical adequacy is a
necessary condition for the success of science and so it is uncontroversial among them that science
has been successful.
²⁶ See Forrest (1994).

--- Page 110 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 97
adequate if it ‘has at least one model which all the actual phenomena ﬁt
inside’ (1980, 12).²⁷
Initial criticism of van Fraassen’s case for constructive empiricism concentrated
on three issues:
(i) The line between the observable and the unobservable is vague and the two
domains are continuous with one another; moreover the line between the
observable and the unobservable changes with time and is an artefact of
accidents of human physiology and technology. This is supposed to imply
that constructive empiricism grants ontological signiﬁcance to an arbitrary
distinction.
(ii) Van Fraassen eschews the positivist project which attempted to give an a
priori demarcation of predicates that refer to observables from those that
refer to unobservables, and accepts instead that: (a) all language is theory-
laden to some extent; and (b) even the observable world is described using
terms that putatively refer to unobservables. Critics argue that this makes
van Fraassen’s position incoherent.
(iii) The underdetermination of theory by evidence is the only positive argument
that van Fraassen has for adopting constructive empiricism instead of
scientiﬁc realism; but all the data we presently have underdetermine which
theory is empirically adequate just as they underdetermine which theory is
true (this is the problem of induction), and so constructive empiricism is
just as vulnerable to scepticism as scientiﬁc realism. This is taken to imply
that van Fraassen’s advocacy of constructive empiricism is the expression of
an arbitrarily selective scepticism.
(i) is rebutted ﬁrst by pointing out that vague predicates abound in natural
language but clear extreme cases sufﬁce to render their use acceptable, and there
are at least some entities which if they exist are unobservable, for example,
quarks, spin states of subatomic particles, and photons. Second, van Fraassen
argues that epistemology ought to be indexical and anthropocentric, and that
the distinction between the observable and the unobservable is not to be taken
as having direct ontological signiﬁcance, but rather epistemological signiﬁcance.
Says van Fraassen: ‘even if observability has nothing to do with existence (is,
indeed, too anthropocentric for that), it may still have much to do with the
proper epistemic attitude to science’ (1980, 19).
For van Fraassen, ‘observable’ is to be understood as ‘observable-to-us’: ‘X is
observable if there are circumstances which are such that, if X is present to us
under those circumstances, then we observe it’ (1980, 16). What we can and
cannot observe is a consequence of the fact that:
²⁷ Bueno (1997) offers a more precise explication of the notion of empirical adequacy. See also
Bueno, French, and Ladyman (2002). We return to the semantic approach in 2.3.3.

--- Page 111 ---

98 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
the human organism is, from the point of view of physics, a certain kind of measuring
apparatus. As such it has certain inherent limitat ions—which will be described in detail
in the ﬁnal physics and biology. It is these limitations to which the ‘ ′able’ in ‘observable’
refers—our limitations, qua human beings. (1980, 17)
So we know that, for example, the moons of Jupiter are observable because our
current best theories say that were astronauts to get close enough, then they
would observe them; by contrast the best theories of particle physics certainly
do not tell us that we are directly observing the particles in a cloud chamber.
Analogous with the latter case is the observation of the vapour trail of a jet in
the sky, which does not count as observing the jet itself, but rather as detecting
it. Now if subatomic particles exist as our theories say they do, then we detect
them by means of observing their tracks in cloud chambers, but, since we can
never experience them directly (as we can jets ²⁸), there is always the possibility
of an empirically equivalent but incompatible rival theory which denies that
such particles exist. This fact may give the observable/unobservable distinction
epistemic signiﬁcance.
(ii) is rebutted by arguing that matters of language are irrelevant to the issue at
hand. The observable/unobservable distinction is made with respect to entities
not with respect to names or predicates.
(iii) is the most serious problem for van Fraassen. Note ﬁrst that, contrary to
what is often claimed, van Fraassen does not accept that inference to the best
explanation is rationally compelling in the case of the observable world while
denying it this status for the case of the unobservable world. ²⁹ Furthermore,
van Fraassen does not appeal to any global arguments for antirealism such as
the underdetermination argument or the pessimistic meta-induction. He rejects
realism not because he thinks it irrational but because he rejects the ‘inﬂationary
metaphysics’ which he thinks must accompany it, that is, an account of laws,
causes, kinds, and so on, and because he thinks constructive empiricism offers
an alternative view that offers a better account of scientiﬁc practice without such
extravagance (1980, 73). Empiricists should repudiate beliefs that go beyond
what we can (possibly) confront with experience; this restraint allows them to
say ‘good bye to metaphysics’ (1989; 1991, 480).
What then is empiricism and why should we believe it? Van Fraassen suggests
that to be an empiricist is to believe that ‘experience is the sole source of
information about the world’ (1985, 253). The problem with this doctrine is
that it does not itself seem to be justiﬁable by experience. ³⁰ However, as we
discussed in Chapter 1, he has lately argued that empiricism cannot be reduced to
²⁸ Van Fraassen adopts a direct realism about perceptio n for macroscopic objects: ‘we can and
do see the truth about many things: ourselves, others, trees and animals, clouds and rivers—in the
immediacy of experience’ (1989, 178).
²⁹ See Psillos (1996), (1997) and Ladyman et al. (1997).
³⁰ Jennifer Nagel (2000) discusses the problem of how an empiricist can claim to know what
counts as experience.

--- Page 112 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 99
the acceptance of such a slogan, and that empiricism is in fact a stance in Husserl’s
sense of an orientation or attitude towards the world. ³¹ Regarding empiricism as
a stance is indeed, as we saw, intended to immunize it to certain sorts of criticisms
that are appropriate only for doctrines. However, this move is not meant to deny
the appropriateness of justiﬁcation and criticism altogether. Ladyman (2000) has
identiﬁed internal tensions within van Fraassen’s version of empiricism which
we now interpret as identifying ways in which a defender of the empiricist
stance should be dialectically led, by her own lights, towards the synthesis of the
empiricist and materialist stances that we promote (that is, to our ‘scientistic’
stance and ontic structural realism).
Constructive empiricism is supposed to offer a positive alternative to scientiﬁc
realism that dispenses with the need for metaphysics. It is a positive view of science
which is intended to free us from the need to articulate accounts of laws, causes,
and essential properties that take seriously the apparent modal commitments
of such notions. This promised liberation from metaphysics through scepticism
about objective modality is fundamental to van Fraassen’s empiricism: ‘To be
an empiricist is to withhold belief in anything that goes beyond the actual,
observable phenomena, and to recognise no objective modality in nature’
(1980, 202).
Ladyman (2000) argues that to apply the empiricist stance consistently one
must, in spite of what van Fraassen says here, recognize objective modality
in nature. This is largely because constructive empiricism recommends, on
epistemological grounds, belief in the empirical adequacy rather than the truth of
theories, and hence requires that there be an objective modal distinction between
the observable and the unobservable. In their reply to Ladyman, Monton and
van Fraassen concede that it is possible to combine constructive empiricism
with a commitment to objective modality. Ladyman (2004) suggests that this is
tantamount to a form of structural realism (see also Giere 1985, 83), and this
is the view that we will defend here. Such modal structural realism allows us to
take account of the insights of van Fraassen’s advocacy of the semantic approach
to scientiﬁc theories (1979) and structural empiricism (2006), by means of
which he illuminates the representational chara cter of science, and the nature of
the continuity of scientiﬁc theories through time, respectively. Hence, we will
argue that ontic structural realism ought to be understood as modal structural
empiricism, and that this view can claim all the advantages of constructive
empiricism and scientiﬁc realism without being prone to the problems that those
views respectively face.
Constructive empiricism emphasizes the description science gives of relations
among phenomena. Van Fraassen (2006) proposes the following ‘ requirement
³¹ See van Fraassen (1994), (1995), (1997), and (2002), and see the symposium in Philosophical
Studies (2004) for critical comments by Peter Lipton, Paul Teller and Ladyman, and a reply by van
Fraassen.

--- Page 113 ---

100 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
upon succession: The new theory is so related to the old that we can explain the
empirical success of the old theory if we accept the new’ (298). He goes on
to say:
So we can reply to Worrall: YES, there is an accumulation of knowledge through science,
but it is knowledge about the observable phenomena. You did make a good point: there
is an accumulation going on throughout all those deep theoretical changes. Moreover this
requirement upon theory succession should satisfy the ‘No Miracle’ intuition! The success
of science is not a miracle , because in any theoretical change both the past empirical
success retained and new empirical successes were needed as credentials for acceptance.
(298–9)
So he argues that what he calls ‘structural empiricism’ can account for the kind
of continuity of structure among scientiﬁc theories to which Worrall draws
attention. Citing other examples, such as the c →∞ limit of the Special Theory
of Relativity, from which Newton’s mechanics and the Galilean transformations
can be recovered, and the limit of quantum mechanics as Planck’s constant tends
towards zero, from which classical Hamiltonian mechanics can be recovered,
van Fraassen argues that in each case an old theory’s empirical success is
explained by the successor theories, thanks to structural continuities between
their representations. He also argues that structural representation and its limits
are ubiquitous in science.
In his John Locke lectures (2008), van Fraassen emphasizes the history of the
underdetermination problem in the debates of the early twentieth century over
whether it is possible to determine empirically the correct geometry of physical
space. There was then growing currency for the idea that science represents the
empirical world as embeddable in certain abstract models, where the latter are
structures only knowable up to isomorphism. However, Weyl argued in this
context that if science describes its subject matter only up to isomorphism,
then whatever it is that distinguishes colours from points in the projective
plane cannot be revealed by science, and must therefore be known by intuition.
Similarly, Russell famously argued with Poincaré about the geometry of physical
space, contending that we could only know the real congruence relation from
isomorphic ones through intuition, whereas Poincaré maintained that asking
what is the right congruence relation is like asking how to spell the letter ‘a’ (cited
in Coffa 1993, 20–1). There is an analogy here with the debate between Frege
and Hilbert about the meaning of mathematical terms. The former thought that
their meaning must be known through intuition in advance since the axioms
could only be true or false if they already had a reference, whereas the latter
thought that the terms obtained their meaning just through the axioms. Van
Fraassen’s solution to this problem is to appeal to pragmatics as what ﬁxes the
reference of theories over and above their structural representation of the world.
Of course, he only regards them as referring to the structure of the relevant
phenomena.

--- Page 114 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 101
2.3.2 What’s really wrong with constructive empiricism?
In the following sections we explain what we regard as the most serious problems
for constructive empiricism and argue that supplementing van Fraassen’s empiri-
cism with a commitment to objective modality is the best way of responding
to them.
2.3.2.1 Selective scepticism and common-sense realism
It is clear that Worrall intended to go further than structural empiricism since
his advocacy of structural realism explicitly referred to the need for some form of
realism to satisfy the no-miracles argument. Van Fraassen denies that there must
be some explanation in terms of unobservables for the ‘persistent similarities’ in
the phenomena (1985, 298). However, realists argue that the only reason for
accepting the objective existence of such everyday objects as tables is to explain
such persistent similarities. Therefore, it might seem that all the good arguments
for the existence of tables carry over to the existence of electrons and, similarly,
any argument for withholding belief in the latter likewise motivates scepticism
about the former, because of the strong empirical equivalence of hypotheses like
that of Descartes’ evil demon. The belief in everyday objects allows us to explain
many observable phenomena that would otherwise be inexplicable. Why should
such explanation be ruled out for the unobservable world? So, the realist claims,
the constructive empiricist is epistemically erratic, because scientiﬁc realism is
nothing more than the analogue of common-sense metaphysical realism in the
unobservable domain. This view is expressed by Worrall: ‘Nothing in science is
going to compel the adoption of a realist attitude towards theories … But this
leaves open the possibility that some form of scientiﬁc realism, while strictly
speaking unnecessary, is nonetheless the most reasonable position to adopt’ (1984,
67). (Note Worrall’s partial anticipation here of van Fraassen’s ‘stance stance’
to the controversy between empiricism and realism as discussed in Chapter 1.)
In order to make sense of our perceptions we are not compelled to assume the
existence of a real, external world; nonetheless, this seems the most reasonable
position to take. So, the question at this stage in the dialectic between the
scientiﬁc realist and van Fraassen is whether van Fraassen’s scepticism about
unobservables is like Cartesian or inductive scepticism in being radically at odds
with what is reasonable according to common sense. If the realist could show
that it is he would win the argument.
Since Locke’s time, many have been prepared to settle for the claim that the
existence of objects is the best explanation of the regularities in our experience.
However, the need to infer the existence of objects only arises in the ﬁrst place
if direct realism is abandoned. Locke accepted that we do not directly perceive
external objects, and that many of our ideas of the properties they have are
mistaken. Only if we have been similarly persuaded to abandon the manifest

--- Page 115 ---

102 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
image and hence the common-sense view of the world is there any need for us
to infer the existence of everyday objects. Of course there are many techniques
that can be deployed to make us doubt that our experience of the world shows
us reality rather than mere appearances. Once we have been convinced by
such arguments, various replacements for common sense are possible. Perhaps
everything is an idea in the mind of God, or part of a computer simulation. The
only reason why one would be persuaded to abandon direct realism and replace
it with indirect realism, and not idealism or something else, is that the same
scientiﬁc story that makes us think that objects don’t really possess colours also
seems to give us an account of what tables and the like really are.
So the explanation of our experience provided by indirect realism was always
really a promissory note for the explanation that science will one day give in
terms of a basic ontology of atoms. Locke only articulated causal or indirect
realism because he saw his job as giving a philosophy apt for the science of his
day. His commitment to the existence of mind-independent tables, trees, and
stones is really a commitment to the entities of which they are composed. He
concedes that many of the properties we attribute to common-sense objects are
not really possessed by them unperceived. However, aggregates of corpuscles
can do duty for them and they at least possess the properties of extension,
position, and motion that the objects we see around us display. Hence, his
indirect realism just is scientiﬁc realism. So the attempt to show that without
IBE van Fraassen has no right to believe in tables is a mistake. One only needs
IBE to defend indirect realism if one has already assumed that the scientiﬁc
story about how collections of atoms cause ideas of colour, solidity, and so
on in us is more or less true and not merely empirically adequate. It is not
van Fraassen who is at odds with the common sense view of everyday objects,
but the scientiﬁc realist who claims that the table is mostly empty space, and
that matter, space, and time and all other physical phenomena are nothing like
how they seem. Scientiﬁc realism is like a radical sceptical hypothesis, but one
that we are encouraged to take seriously because of the astounding success of
science.
Arguably, common sense requires that epistemologists acknowledge the verac-
ity of many everyday ﬁrst-order knowledge claims about tables, trees, and stones.
As we have seen, realists argue that van Fraassen’s epistemology violates this
condition because they claim that without IBE we have no warrant for believing
in everyday objects. When it comes to unobservable objects, van Fraassen allows
that both belief and agnosticism are rational. However, it is noteworthy that
he is not prepared to be so permissive when it comes to tables. Recall that he
adopts a direct realism about perception for macroscopic objects: ‘We can and
do see the truth about many things: ourselves, others, trees and animals, clouds
and rivers—in the immediacy of experience’ (van Fraassen 1989, 178). The
manifest image of a world of objects is not inferred. This means that many of our
ﬁrst-order knowledge claims about everyday objects are indeed true, and about

--- Page 116 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 103
these he is in no danger of conﬂicting with common sense. Indeed, he can even
say that it is irrational not to believe in everyday objects.
2.3.2.2 Selective scepticism and inductive libertarianism
Van Fraassen’s response to the charge that he ought to be an inductive scep-
tic in the face of the problem of induction, given his lack of resources for
defeating underdetermination, is to argue for a variety of inductive voluntarism,
according to which ampliative inferences are not irrational so long as they do
not violate the constraints of consistency embodied in logic and probability
theory. Hence he argues that constructive empiricism is not rationally required
but permitted, and the view of science which best expresses empiricist values
(see his 1989 and 2002)—that is, implements the empirical stance. There
has been dispute about whether this last claim is sustainable. (See Alspector-
Kelly 2001, and Ladyman forthcoming a). Consider the following range of
views about a theory T which has been tested and ﬁts the phenomena so far
observed:
Ti st r u e .
The world is as if T but T is false.
T is empirically adequate.
T is empirically adequate in region of spacetime X.
T is empirically adequate up to time t.
T is adequate to all actually observed phenomena.
Strict empiricism is an unwillingness to go beyond what experience tells us.
Constructive empiricism is a compromise between strict empiricism and a prior
commitment to the rationality of science. Why is constructive empiricism a
better expression of empiricist values than actualist empiricism which holds fast
to the last of the commitments above, but which nonetheless goes beyond strict
empiricism?
Imagine the following scenario. You have a light box. This is a device which is
lined on the inside with light-absorbent material, and also contains a light source.
There is an eye-piece to allow an observer to look inside, and ﬁnally a copper
bar is set into a recess in the base of the box. If the light is on and the bar is
raised the observer sees it, but if the bar is not raised then what the observer sees
is the same whether or not the light is on. The room is well lit, you are a careful
observer, conservative by nature, and you have devoted your life to studying the
physics of light. You have learned and tested the best theories of optics, and spent
twenty years working on quality control in a light-box factory. The box before
you has been tested, and handmade with the ﬁnest materials, and it is switched
on. ( This is supposed to be a best possible case for induction so if your years
spent in analytic epistemology seminars incline you to add more conditions you
should feel free to do so.)

--- Page 117 ---

104 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
Here are some possible judgements you can consider:
(1) There is a box in front of you.
(2) Photon theory is empirically adequate with respect to the box.
(3) Photon theory is empirically accurate with respect to the box on those
occasions when you actually look.
(4) Photon theory is (approximately) true and there are photons in the box.
(5) When you next raise the bar and look you will see it.
Van Fraassen argues that (1) is known because of direct realism. With such claims
in such favourable conditions it seems he even thinks that knowledge will iterate
so that you can know that you know there is a box in front of you. In so far as
(1) is concerned van Fraassen says nothing that conﬂicts with common sense.
He thinks the empiricist ought to believe (2), but it is not clear why they don’t
stop at (3) since that says as much that is in fact empirically tested as (2). Both
(2) and (3) entail (5) so the empiricist will believe that. He thinks that although
it is not irrational to believe (4) if you have a commitment to explanations,
empiricists shouldn’t endorse it. It is interesting to consider what van Fraassen
can say about whether or not ﬁrst-order knowledge claims involving (2), (4), and
(5) can be true. Suppose we live in a world where there are photons, and scientiﬁc
realists believe in them. Suppose too that they have acquired their beliefs in the
same way as the constructive empiricists acquired their belief in the empirical
adequacy of photon theory, but the realists just made the extra leap to belief in
unobservables. (Suppose they have not read The Scientiﬁc Image and think IBE
is compelling and that acceptance entails belief in truth.) The scientiﬁc realists
are not irrational but can they be said to know (4)?
It may seem that the whole point of van Fraassen’s philosophy of science is to
say that, while photons might exist, andthere is nothing irrational about believing
in them, we can’t know that there are photons because they are unobservable.
However, he allows that in principle there is no difference between belief in
(2) and belief in (4), in the sense that nothing in the nature of rationality
requires anyone to believe either. Now, because of his voluntarism, van Fraassen
has to allow that the person who abstains from inductive inference is perfectly
rational. Hence, the person who observes the behaviour of the box, learns the
theory of photons, derives predictions, conﬁrms them, and so on, can still refuse
to endorse not only (2) and (3), but also (5), and not thereby be irrational.
He must also allow that even the person who refuses to form expectations
according with (5) and instead predicts that the next time they raise the bar
they will not see it is not thereby irrational. Whether or not we think that
scientiﬁc realism is correct, the denial of (5), and the assertion of its contrary,
in the face of all the evidence, without some explanation of why things will be
different next time, is surely irrational. In any case, if van Fraassen denies that
ﬁrst-order knowledge claims about photons are true, even if photons exist, just

--- Page 118 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 105
because belief in them goes beyond the evidence, then he must similarly deny
that ﬁrst-order knowledge claims about (2) and (5) are also false, even if (2) and
(5) are themselves true. ( That he does indeed think this is suggested by this
remark: ‘Empirical adequacy goes far beyond what we can know at any given
time’ (1989, 69).)
This is an unacceptable consequence, for it means that even in ideal circum-
stances for induction nobody ever knows anything about unobserved cases even
though their beliefs about them are true. Furthermore, it makes van Fraassen’s
scepticism about unobservables uninteresting because it amounts to the claim
that nobody knows that electrons exist in just the same way that nobody knows
that any scientiﬁc theory is empirically adequate, or even that the next time
you raise the bar you will see it. There would then be no epistemic asymmetry
between belief in unobservables and belief in empirical adequacy.
On the other hand, suppose van Fraassen allows that ﬁrst-order knowledge
claims like ‘you know that the next time you raise the bar you will see it’ or
‘you know that the photon theory is empirically adequate’ can be true. Since no
rule compels us to arrive at these claims, and since to have inferred nothing or
indeed the contrary would have been equally rational according to him, then all
that could make them known is that they are in fact true beliefs. It follows that
if there are electrons, and scientiﬁc realists believe in them, then they know they
exist. Hence, van Fraassen’s philosophy of science can’t consist in the claim that
we can’t know there are unobservables. It must then be committed to the claim
that we can’t know that we know there are photons. However, van Fraassen
concedes that we can’t know that we know a theory is empirically adequate
either, so again it seems as if the claim that photons exist and the claim that
photon theory is empirically adequate are epistemically on a par. We can’t know
that we know either but if in fact the claims are true then we can know them.
T h em e r ef a c tt h a tb e l i e fi np h o t o n sg o e sf u r t h e rt h a nb e l i e fi nt h ee m p i r i c a l
adequacy of photon theory will not be enough to show that the latter belief can
be knowledge and the former cannot, because the mere fact that belief that the
theory is empirically adequate goes further than the belief that the theory has
been empirically adequate up to now, is not enough to show that the latter belief
can be knowledge and the former cannot.
Van Fraassen’s voluntarism commits him to inductive libertarianism:w h a t e v e r
constraints govern inductive inferences are not rational constraints. Inductive
libertarianism cannot impugn the rationality of deviant induction and so wishful
thinking is as rational as critical realism, and someone who capriciously disregards
all the evidence and counter-inducts cannot be criticized for irrationality so long
as their synchronic degrees of belief remain consistent. On van Fraassen’s view,
then, someone who forms grue-type hypotheses, ﬁnds them continually falsiﬁed,
but persists in forming new ones is just as rational as the follower of standard
inductive practices. The grue-type believer only becomes irrational if they fail to
abandon their speciﬁc belief if it is falsiﬁed. If van Fraassen’s position allows us

--- Page 119 ---

106 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
truthfully to claim to know the results of induction, this is only because he has
weakened the notion of knowledge to its breaking point.
When we test inductive inferences we can often freely choose which of the as
yet unobserved cases to observe. That we are so often able to identify regularities
in phenomena and then use them for prediction needs to be explained. In a
world without nomic connections all our inductive knowledge would be lucky
knowledge, which is to say not knowledge at all. On the other hand, if we
believe that there are real necessary connections between phenomena, then we
are positively justiﬁed in making inductive inferences provided we are careful in
doing so. What being careful means is something we learn by induction based on
sometimes bitter experience. Of course, IBE cannot be used to defend infallibilism
about inductive knowledge. However, inductive inference is rationally required
in a best-case scenario like that of the light box.
There is a connection between these issues concerning induction and the
discussion in the previous section concerning common-sense realism. The most
obvious response to phenomenalism or idealism is to appeal to the fact that
you can close your eyes, open them at random, and everything is pretty much
just as it was. The best reason we have for thinking the table must be there
when we aren’t looking is that we can predict that it will be there when
we do look, and there is intersubjective agreement about this. The table is
an invariant under signiﬁcant transformations of both it and observers. It is
supposed to be the existence of things, whether everyday or scientiﬁc, that
explains all of this, but what really does the explanatory work is not the things
but their stable causal powers. We only know, if we know, about unobservable
objects (unlike tables) in virtue of our theories about them. ³² S i n c ew eo n l y
understand the entities as we do because of the way they are supposed to relate
to our observations, belief in the unobservables entailed by our best scientiﬁc
theories entails belief that those theories are at least approximately empirically
adequate, in other words that there really are the relations among the phenomena
the theories attribute to the world. If those relations were merely randomly
correlated with the objects then the claim that the objects exist could not
count as an explanation of what is observed. It is noteworthy that scientiﬁc
realists often invoke thick non-Humean notions of causation in their attempts
to convince us that unobservables exist. However, we need not go so far as belief
in objects, observable or not. The positing of stable modal relations among the
phenomena will do just as well. The history of science undermines not only
materialism and classical views of space and time, but also the claim that science
describes the true objects that lie beyond the phenomena. We may know little
else about the nature of reality but we are warranted in supposing that it has
a modal structure which is detailed to some extent by folk knowledge and by
science.
³² Entity realism notwithstanding.

--- Page 120 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 107
2.3.2.3 Constructive empiricism and the metaphysics of modality ³³
Recall that van Fraassen rejects realism not because he thinks it irrational but
because he rejects the ‘inﬂationary metaphysics’ which he thinks must accompany
it (an account of laws, causes, kinds, and so on), and because he thinks
constructive empiricism accounts for scientiﬁc practice without metaphysics.
Scientiﬁc realism is associated with the view that science answers fundamental
metaphysical questions concerning space and time, the nature of matter, and so
on.³⁴Furthermore, those realists who employ laws of nature, causes, natural kinds,
and essential properties as substantial parts of their explanation of the success of
both particular scientiﬁc theories and science as a whole, are thereby committed
to a metaphysics of de re modality independently of their endorsement of any
particular scientiﬁc theory. ³⁵ Van Fraassen, on the other hand, in ﬁne empiricist
and positivist style, regards natural modalities of all kinds as metaphysical
conceits. Following Ladyman (2000), here we argue that in order to circumscribe
the observable in a principled way, as constructive empiricism requires, it is
necessary to endorse some modal facts that are theory-independent.
According to constructive empiricism, the judgement that scientiﬁc theories
are empirically adequate—that they ‘save the phenomena’—is not supposed to
concern anything beyond what is actual: ‘Empirical adequacy concerns actual
phenomena: what does happen, and not, what would happen under different
circumstances’ (van Fraassen 1980, 60). The phenomena are what is observable
and van Fraassen argues that something need not actually be observed to
be observable. Rather, we circumscribe the observable by considering what
would happen were certain entities present to us: ‘X is observable if there are
circumstances which are such that, if X is present to us under those circumstances,
then we observe it’ (1980, 16). ³⁶
Take the cases of the moons of Jupiter and dinosaurs, and suppose that, as a
matter of fact, nobody actually observes either. Van Fraassen recommends that
we should believe in them anyway on the grounds that they are observable, which
³³ See Ladyman (2000), Monton and van Fraassen (2003), Hanna (2004), Ladyman (2004)
and Muller (2005).
³⁴ Indeed a recent introductory text on the philosophy of science deﬁnes it as such, namely Cou-
valis (1997, 172).
³⁵ Note that natural kind terms are those that are projectible, hence the modal structure of the
world is to a considerable extent reﬂected in the structure of everyday and scientiﬁc language and
not just in causal or lawlike statements (see 4.5).
³⁶ Note that it seems that the second conditional must be interpreted as a subjunctive conditional
because using the material conditional would have the consequence that any object that was not
actually observed was observable. Strict implication clearly inherits the same problem. The if/then
of conditional probability is not appropriate because whether something is observable or not has
nothing to do with our degrees of belief, and if van Fraassen has another type of conditional in
mind he does not say so. (As we also mention in 2.3.3, Carnap’s project of eliminating theoretical
terms in scientiﬁc theories by explicitly deﬁning t hem in terms of actual and possible observations
faced a similar problem with material implication.)

--- Page 121 ---

108 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
is to say that there are circumstances such that if, say, the moons of Jupiter
were present to us (suppose yourself to be standing on one of them), then we
would observe them. Hence, two questions arise about the claim that entity X
is observable: (a) is it a theory-independent fact that if X was present to us we
would observe it? And (b), if so how can we know such a fact?
Turning to (b) ﬁrst, in one of the passages quoted above (in 2.1) van Fraassen
describes the ‘able’ in ‘observable’ as referring to our limitations as measuring
devices, where these are to be described by physics and biology. So, rather than
the philosophical analysis of language, it is science itself that tells us what is
or is not observable. Van Fraassen says: ‘It is only the content of the theory,
the information it contains (and not its structure), which is meant to have the
proper or relevant adequatio ad rem’ (1989, 188). But part of the content of the
theory is how it circumscribes the observable, hence its content is not limited
to information about the actual but also about the possible, in particular about
possible observations. How can van Fraassen rely upon theoretical science, which
he does not believe to be true, to determine the limits of his scepticism? ³⁷
If what is observable or not were a theory-dependent matter (rather than
merely described by theory), then whether a particular object is observable or not
would depend upon which theory we were using to describe it. If this were so
then the distinction between the observable and the unobservable really would
have no epistemic relevance and constructive empiricism could not be sustained.
This is a point that van Fraassen concedes:
To ﬁnd the limits of what is observable in the world described by theory T we must
inquire into T itself … This might produce a vicious circle if what is observable were itself
not simply a fact disclosed by theory, but rather theory-relative or theory-dependent. … I
regard what is observable as a theory-independe nt question. It is a function of facts about
us qua organisms in the world. (1980, 57–8)
He goes on to argue that his account of observability is not circular because
he believes what is observable to be an empirical, but nonetheless a theory-
independent, matter. So it seems that (a) above must be answered in the
afﬁrmative; if X is observable then it is an objective fact that if it were present to
us then we would observe it.
Given our assumption about the examples above, the circumstances in which
we would observe the moons of Jupiter and dinosaurs never obtain—they are
counterfactual. Hence, in order to demarcate the observable in a principled way
that can bear the burden placed upon it in the epistemology of constructive
empiricism, and to draw this distinction independently of what has as a
matter of fact been observed (to allow for belief in dinosaurs), the constructive
³⁷ Van Fraassen needs to make the observable/unobservable distinction with respect to theories,
so as to demarcate their empirical substructures, and with respect to the world, so as to demarcate
the unobservable objects. Otherwise the notion of empirical adequacy would be inapplicable in
practice.

--- Page 122 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 109
empiricist is committed to believing at least some counterfactuals implied by
scientiﬁc theories. Unless she takes such modal facts as that expressed by the
sentence ‘if a dinosaur were present to me then I would observe it’ to be
objective and theory-independent, her epistemic attitude will depend upon a
distinction that is entirely arbitrary. Yet according to van Fraassen’s analysis
of statements of physical necessity, a counterfactual conditional of the form ‘if
the moons of Jupiter were present to us (in the right kind of circumstances)
then we would observe them’ ought to be construed as follows: there is no
world which is physically possible relative to this world in which the moons
of Jupiter are present to us (in the right kind of circumstances) and we fail to
observe them.
But this in turn just reduces to the logical necessity of the conditional that
has the laws of nature conjoined with the relevant class of initial conditions
as antecedent, and our observing the moons of Jupiter as consequent. Since
the constructive empiricist doesn’t believe that the laws of nature are objectively
different from any other regularities, she ought no more to believe this conditional
than to believe another which has different regularities in the antecedent and
as consequent that the moons of Jupiter are not present to us. Yet the former
conditional entails that the moons of Jupiter are observable and the latter that
they are not. Which one holds follows in part from the bits of the theories
in question from which the constructive empiricist withholds belief, after all:
‘So far as empirical adequacy is concerned, the theory would be just as good
if there existed nothing at all that was either unobservable or not actual’
(1980, 197).
To summarize, although the constructive empiricist need not be committed
to the full truth of theories to demarcate the observable, she is committed to
belief in some of their modal implications. In other words, she is committed to
belief in more than just what theories say about what is observable and actual,
in order to discern what they do say about what is observable and actual. But,
according to what van Fraassen says about modality, either there is simply no
objective fact of the matter about wha t would happen under counterfactual
circumstances, or, even if he were to allow that there are objective modal facts
which determine the truth values of counterfactuals, it is totally incompatible
with constructive empiricism to allow that we could know about such things since
that would amount to allowing that scientiﬁc theories tell us about more than the
actual phenomena. Hence, constructive empiricism is either inconsistent with
van Fraassen’s repudiation of objective modality, because what is observable is an
objective matter after all, or it is viciously circular, because what is observable is
theory-dependent. It seems that van Fraassen must abandon either constructive
empiricism or his modal antirealism.
There are, moreover, other tensions between van Fraassen’s views on modality
and aspects of his philosophy of science. Scientists always look for theories of the
observable, not the observed; in other words, theories always involve modalities.

--- Page 123 ---

110 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
This fact is utterly mysterious on van Fraassen’s empiricist view. ³⁸ To expand
on this point: scientists almost never formulate theories that only refer to what
actually happens in the world; instead theories are always modalized in the
sense that they allow for a variety of different initial conditions or background
assumptions rather than just the actual ones, and so describe counterfactual
states of affairs. But no observable phenomena could allow us to distinguish in
our epistemic attitude between theories that agree about everything that actually
happens but disagree about what would happen under possible but counterfactual
circumstances. Recall that for van Fraassen ‘to be an empiricist is to withhold
belief in anything that goes beyond the actual, observable phenomena’ (1980,
202). Hence, if empiricism were correct we would expect that scientists would
and should be content with theories of the actually observed (past, present, and
future).
Suppose some scientists had it in their power to create conditions in a
laboratory that they knew had never obtained anywhere before, and moreover,
that they knew these conditions would never obtain at all unless they created
them. Suppose also that their (up to now empirically adequate) theory predicted
an outcome for such an experiment. If it were true that these hypothetical
scientists wanted a theory adequate only to all actual observable phenomena,
then they would be motivated not to carry out this experiment in case their
theory was proved wrong. But of course no good scientist would refrain from
doing the experiment; it seems that scientists do want theories that are adequate
to all possible phenomena and not just the actual ones. Perhaps van Fraassen
would explain this fact by saying that scientists want theories that are empirically
strong. But the extra strength of modalized theories can only consist in their
description of possible but non-actual states of affairs which, according to him,
should be of no interest to an empiricist. It may be that it is modalized theories
that are the ones that turn out to be empirically adequate but why this should be
so is a complete mystery from the point of view of van Fraassen’s empiricism.
Empirical adequacy is not achieved by a list of all the actual phenomena. If
the new theory explains the success of the old theory that can only be because it
reproduces the well-conﬁrmed relations among phenomena described by the old
theory. Theories must be modalized because we can choose when to perform a
test of a prediction.
There are several viable interpretations of van Fraassen’s views about modal-
ity,³⁹ but none of them involves belief in any modal statements objectively
construed. According to the modal non-objectivism which van Fraassen advo-
cates in some of his writings about modal matters (1977, 1978, 1981), what is
or is not observable is a consequence of which generalizations are important to
³⁸ This argument draws upon Rosen (1984). See especially pp. 161–2.
³⁹ The texts he cites (1989, n. 35, 365) as presentin g his views on modality are chapter 6 of his
(1980) and his (1977), (1978), and (1981).

--- Page 124 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 111
us. Clearly this provides no objective basis for demarcating the observable from
the unobservable, and the distinction is theory-dependent. On the other hand,
according to the alternative positions on modality that are suggested in some of
his other writings, the constructive empiricist will either abstain from belief in
the truth of any modal statements or believe them all to be false. So whatever the
exact details of his account of modality it cannot bear the epistemic weight put
upon it in constructive empiricism via the deﬁnition of observability. It seems
that even the constructive empiricist must engage in some modal metaphysics
in order to articulate and argue for her epistemic attitude to science. Could she
simply adopt some form of epistemic realism about objective modality to save
constructive empiricism? Monton and van Fraassen (2003) end their reply to
Ladyman by arguing that the best reason to be a constructive empiricist is that it
makes the best sense of science, and that this claim does not depend on modal
nominalism. If modal nominalism is incompatible with constructive empiricism,
then the latter could only make sense of science in conjunction with modal
realism. However, this view, dubbed ‘modal empiricism’ by Ron Giere (1985,
83), is a form of structural realism because according to it the theoretical structure
of scientiﬁc theories represents the modal structure of reality. Although Giere is
a scientiﬁc realist and van Fraassen is not, both of them are prominent defenders
of the semantic approach to scientiﬁc theories. Indeed, although van Fraassen’s
recent defence of his structural empiricism is clearly a response to Worrall’s advo-
cacy of structural realism, the e mphasis on structure in understanding scientiﬁc
knowledge and representation is notable throughout his work. We argue in the
next section that the semantic approach is the appropriate framework for our
form of structural realism. ⁴⁰
2.3.3 The semantic approach
The so-called ‘syntactic’ (or ‘received’) view of theories was developed by various
logical empiricist philosophers, including especially Rudolf Carnap, Ernst Nagel,
and Hans Reichenbach. These philosophers recognized that some elements of
our theoretical knowledge seem to be independent of the empirical facts. For
example, Newton’s second law states that the force on a body is proportional to
the rate of change of its momentum, where the constant of proportionality is
called the inertial mass. This law cannot be tested in an experiment, because it is
part of what gives meaning to the concepts employed to describe the phenomena.
Hence, it was argued by the logical empiricists that a physical theory can be split
into a part that expresses the deﬁnitions of the basic concepts and the relations
among them, and a part which relates to the world. The former part also includes
the purely mathematical axioms of the theory, and trivially all the logical truths
⁴⁰ Ladyman (1998) introduced ontic structural r ealism in the context of the semantic approach
to scientiﬁc theories.

--- Page 125 ---

112 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
expressible in the language of the theory. If this part of the theory constitutes a
priori knowledge, it is purely of matters of convention. The factual content of
the theory is conﬁned to the latter part, so the fundamental empiricist principle
that the physical world cannot be known by pure reason is satisﬁed.
The logical empiricists tried to use logic to show how the theoretical language
of science is related to the everyday language used to describe the observable
world. They were motivated by the veriﬁcation principle, according to which a
(non-tautological) statement is meaningful iff it can be veriﬁed in the immediacy
of experience, and by the veriﬁability theory of meaning, according to which
the meaning of particular terms (other than logical constants) is either given in
experience directly, or consists in the way in which those terms relate to what is
g i v e ni ne x p e r i e n c ed i r e c t l y .
The idea is that a physical theory will have a canonical formulation such that:
(1) L is a ﬁrst-order language with identity and K is a calculus deﬁned for L.
(2) The non-logical terms of L can be partitioned into two disjoint sets, one of
which contains the observation terms,V
O, and the other of which contains
the theoretical terms,V T .
(3) There are two sublanguages of L, and corresponding restrictions of K, such
that one contains no V T terms (LO) and the other no V O terms (VT ). These
together of course do not make up L since L also contains mixed sentences.
(4) The observational language is given an interpretation in the domain of con-
crete observable entities, processes, and events, and the observable properties
thereof. An ‘interpretation’ of a language L (in the sense of model theory used
here) is a metalinguistic attribution of a reference to each of the non-logical
terms in L. If the axioms of a theory are true under some interpretation then
it is a model for the theory.
(5) The theoretical terms of L are given a partial interpretation by means of two
kinds of postulates:
(a) theoretical postulates which deﬁne internal relations between the V
T terms
and which do not feature V O terms; and
(b) correspondence rules or bridge principles which feature mixed sentences and
relate the V T and V O terms. ( These are also known as ‘dictionaries’,
‘operational deﬁnitions’, ‘coordinative deﬁnitions’, and so on depending
on the author, but all these phrases refer to a set of rules which connect
theoretical terms to observable states of affairs.)
The theoretical postulates are the axioms of the theory, and the purely theoretical
part of the theory is the deductive closure of these axioms under the calculus
K. The theory as a whole, TC, is the conjunction of T and C, where T is
the conjunction of the theoretical postulates and C is the conjunction of the
correspondence rules.

--- Page 126 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 113
Initially it was required that the theoretical terms of theories be given
explicit deﬁnitions. ( This was originally Carnap’s goal but he abandoned it
after his 1936–7.) ⁴¹ An example of such a deﬁnition of a theoretical term
VT is:
∀x(VTx ↔ [Px → Qx])
where P is some preparation of an apparatus (known as a test condition)
and Q is some observable response of it (so P and Q are describable using
only observation terms). For example, suppose it is the explicit deﬁnition of
temperature: any object x has a temperature of t iff it is the case that, if x
were put in contact with a thermometer then it would give a reading of t.
If theoretical terms could be so deﬁned, then this would show that they are
convenient devices which are in principle eliminable and need not be regarded
as referring to anything in the world. ( This view is often called ‘semantic
instrumentalism’.)
It was soon realized that explicit deﬁnition of theoretical terms is high-
ly problematic. Perhaps the most serious difﬁculty is that, according to this
deﬁnition, if we interpret the conditional in the square brackets as material
implication, theoretical terms are trivially applicable when the test conditions
do not obtain (because if the antecedent is false the material conditional
is always true). In other words, everything that is never put into con-
tact with a thermometer has temperature t. (Interpreting the conditional
as strict implication was not an option for the logical positivists since this
means invoking a notion of metaphysical necessity, and in any case does
not help.)
The natural way to solve this problem is to allow subjunctive assertion into
the explicit deﬁnitions. That is, we deﬁne the temperature of object x in terms
of what would happen if it were to be put into contact with a thermometer;
temperature is understood as a dispositional property. Unfortunately this raises
further problems. First, unactualized dispositions, such as the fragility of a glass
that is never damaged, seem to be unobservable properties, and they give rise
to statements whose truth conditions are problematic for empiricists, namely
counterfactual conditionals such as ‘if the glass had been dropped it would
have broken’ where the antecedent is asserted to be false. Dispositions are also
modal, and the logical empiricists disavowed objective modality. Second, explicit
deﬁnitions, dispositional or not, for terms like ‘spacetime curvature’, ‘spin’, and
‘electron’ have never been provided and there are no grounds for thinking that
they could be.
⁴¹ For an excellent account see Demopoulos (forthcoming a).

--- Page 127 ---

114 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
However, the advocates of the received view did not abandon the attempt
to anchor theoretical terms to the observable world. Carnap’s next attempt
(1936–7) treats correspondence rules as ‘reduction sentences’ of the form:
Px → [Qx → Vx ], Rx → [Sx →¬ Vx ]
These do not deﬁne theoretical terms but nonetheless connect them with
observational ones and so ensure the former’s cognitive meaningfulness. ( This also
avoids the problem of trivial applicability faced by explicit deﬁnitions.) Reduction
sentences, together with theoretical postulates, offer a partial interpretation for
them. They are also intended to specify procedures for applying the theory to
phenomena. Theoretical concepts such as those of vital forces and entelechies
were criticized by the logical empiricists because their advocates failed to express
them in terms of precise, testable laws.
Now according to the view developed so far, TC is only fully interpreted
with respect to its V
O terms, which refer to ordinary physical objects (such as
ammeters, thermometers, and the like) and their states; the V T terms are only
partially interpreted. Consider all the possible interpretations of TC such that the
V
O terms have their normal meanings and under which TC is true; these are the
models of TC. The problem for the advocate of this approach is now that there
will be lots of these models in general so there is no unique interpretation for
the theory as a whole. Hence it would seem to make no sense to talk of it being
true or false of the world. Hempel (1963, 695) and Carnap (1939, 62) solved
this problem by stipulating that TC is to be given an intended interpretation;
theoretical terms are interpreted as (putatively) referring to the entities and so on
appropriate to the normal meanings of them in scientiﬁc (and everyday) use.
This entails that the meanings of terms like ‘electron’ that derive from the
picture of electrons as tiny billiard balls or classical point particles are important
in determining the targets of theoretical reference. Once the explicit deﬁnition
project is abandoned, then it must be accepted that the meanings of the V
T terms
that do not have testable consequences are nonetheless important in determining
their reference. As Suppe puts it:
When I give a semantic interpretation to TC, I am doing so relative to the meanings I
already attach to the terms in the scientiﬁc metalanguage. In asserting TC so interpreted,
I am committing myself to the meaning of ‘electron’ and so on, being such that electrons
have those observable manifestations speciﬁed by TC. (1977, 92)
This version of the received view is committed to ‘excess’ or ‘surplus’ meaning of
theoretical terms over and above the meaning given by the partial interpretation
in terms of what can be observed. (Herbert Feigl (1950) recognized this explicitly
and argued for the view that theoretical terms genuinely refer to unobservable
entities as a consequence.)

--- Page 128 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 115
Perhaps the most widespread criticism of the received view is that it relies upon
the distinction between observational and theoretical terms. This distinction is
supposed to correspond to a difference in the way language works; the former
terms are more or less deﬁned ostensibly and directly refer to observable features
of the world, while the latter are deﬁned indirectly and refer to unobservable
features of the world. Examples of the former are supposed to include ‘red’,
‘pointer’, ‘heavier than’; examples of the latter would include ‘electron’, ‘charge
density’, ‘atom’. It has been widely argued (for example by Putnam 1962) that
there is no objective line to be drawn between observational and theoretical
language, and that all language is theory-dependent to a degree. Moreover,
eliminating theoretical terms, even if it were possible, would not eliminate talk
of the unobservable, because it is possible to talk about the unobservable using
V
O terms only, for example by saying there are particles that are too small to see.
Whether or not the distinction between observational and theoretical terms can
be drawn in a non-arbitrary way, the received view also faces criticism concerning
the correspondence rules. These were supposed to have three functions: (i) to
generate (together with the theoretical postulates) a partial interpretation of
theoretical terms, (ii) to ensure the cognitive signiﬁcance of theoretical terms by
connecting them with what can be observed, (iii) to specify how the theory is
related to the phenomena. There are several problems in respect of (iii). First,
if it is true that correspondence rules are part of the theory, then whenever
a new experimental technique is developed in the domain of the theory, and
the correspondence rules change to incorporate the new connections between
theoretical terms and reality, the theory will change. We don’t suppose there is
any fact of the matter here; but it is surely a sound pragmatic objection that
this suggests the collapse of the highly useful distinction between theories and
models. Another problem, raised by Suppe (1977, 104), is that there are typically
an indeﬁnite number of ways of applying a theory, and so there ought to be an
indeﬁnite number of correspondence rules; but the formulation of the received
view requires that there are only ﬁnitely many. Furthermore, a theory is applied
to phenomena by using other theories to establish a causal chain between the
states of affairs described by the theory and the behaviour of some measuring
apparatus. For example, theories of optics are needed to link the occurrence of
line spectra with changes in the energy states of an electron. The correspondence
rules in this case will incorporate principles of optics and will themselves offer
mechanisms and explanations for the behaviour of measuring devices. Suppe
concludes that correspondence rules are not part of the theory as such, but rather
they are auxiliary assumptions about how the theory is to be applied.
Many people, notably Nancy Cartwright (1983, 1989), have argued that the
received view is misleading about how scientiﬁc theories are applied, because it
is rarely if ever the case that it is possible to derive some concrete experimental
prediction from a theory simply by the provision of auxiliary assumptions about
background conditions. Rather, it is argued, the connections between abstract

--- Page 129 ---

116 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
theory and concrete experiment are complex and non-deductive, and involve the
use of many theories, models, and assumptions that are not formulated as part of
the original theory.
The basis for the demise of the syntactic view and the origins of the semantic
approach have been clearly set out by Fred Suppe (1977). The latter begins
with Beth who was concerned to provide ‘a logical analysis—in the broadest
sense of this phrase—of the theories which form the actual content of the
various sciences’ (Beth 1949, 180), and with Patrick Suppes who pioneered the
set-theoretic representation of theories later developed by Sneed, Stegmüller, and
others. Two main desiderata, the need for appropriate formalizations of scientiﬁc
theories (‘logical analysis’), and the goal of accurate accounts of how they are
regarded in practice (the ‘actual content’), motivate the semantic approach. Van
Fraassen elaborated and generalized B eth’s approach, arguing that theories and
models are essentially mathematical structures, and that experiments produce
data models which are abstract structures. A theory is empirically adequate to the
extent that the latter models are embeddable in the former (1980, ch. 3). (He
also showed how to unite models in a common state-space in terms of which
laws of coexistence and succession can be represented (see, for example, 1989).)
Van Fraassen’s later work incorporates Giere’s understanding of a theory as
consisting of a theoretical deﬁnition, which deﬁnes a certain class of systems, and
a theoretical hypothesis, which asserts that certain kinds of real systems are related
in certain ways to certain members of that class. For example, the theoretical
deﬁnition might deﬁne the models of a simple harmonic oscillator, and the
theoretical hypothesis might assert that pendula are approximately modelled
by that class when variables in the model are taken to represent a pendulum’s
bob’s mass and the length of its string (Giere 1988b). Suppe (1989) develops
the notion of a relational system, which consists of a set of possible states on
which various sequencing relations are imposed. Although, van Fraassen, Suppe,
and Giere divide along different lines in the realism debate, each using the
semantic approach for different ends, the core idea which binds them together
is the claim that theories are better thought of as families of models rather than
as partially interpreted axiomatic systems. That is, theories are not collections
of propositions or statements, but are ‘extralinguistic entities which may be
described or characterised by a number of different linguistic formulations’
(Suppe 1977, 221).
French and Ladyman (1997, 1998, 1999) and Bueno et al. (2002) have argued
that by focusing on the relational s tructure of mathematical models, a unitary
account of the various senses of the word ‘model’ as used in scientiﬁc practice
can be given, as well as an illuminating account of scientiﬁc representation
and idealization. In this they follow Patrick Suppes who introduced his essay
‘A Comparison of the Meaning and Use of Models in Mathematics and the
Empirical Sciences’ with a series of quotations referring to different kinds of
models, proceeding from models in the sense of model theory in mathematical

--- Page 130 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 117
logic, to ones drawn from physics and through to social science models; and
claimed that
the concept of model in the sense of Tarski may be used without distortion and as a
fundamental concept in all of the disciplines from which the above quotations are drawn.
In this sense I would assert that the meaning of the concept of model is the same in
mathematics and the empirical sciences. The difference to be found in these disciplines is
to be found in their use of the concept. (Suppes 1961, 165)
In the context of the syntactic approach, within which a theory is taken to be a set
of sentences, realism amounts to the commitment to standard (correspondence)
referential semantics, and to truth, for the whole theory. How should we
understand questions about the relationship between theoretical objects and the
world in terms of the semantic conception of theories? Giere addresses this issue
in his writings on the semantic approach. Unlike van Fraassen, he seems to accept
that the semantic approach transforms the terms of the scientiﬁc realism debate.
In particular, Giere (1985) argues that it is unreasonable to expect all theoretical
representation in science to ﬁt the mould in which philosophers cast linguistic
representation; Tarskian semantics is not appropriate for a consideration of
the representative role of the tensor calculus and differential manifolds or
Hilbert space. One reason for this is that Giere’s ‘constructive realism’ stops
short of asserting that real systems resemble models in all respects. Instead,
he claims that models are at best similar to real systems in many or most
aspects.
Giere’s version of the semantic approach relies on a notion of similarity
in speciﬁed respects and to speciﬁed degrees. French and Ladyman deploy
the notion of partial isomorphism or partial homomorphism to represent the
relationships between theoretical structures and models of the phenomena. ⁴² In
his original paper on structural realism, Worrall argues that, ‘[m]uch clariﬁcatory
work needs to be done on this position, especially concerning the notion of one
theory’s structure approximating another’ (1989). The approach of French and
his collaborators (see also da Costa and French 2003) represents inter-theoretical
relationships as partial morphisms holding between the model-theoretic structures
representing the theories concerned. They offer case studies such as high-energy
physics (French 1997), and the London and London theory of superconductivity
(French and Ladyman 1997). ⁴³
⁴² Partial isomorphism is introduced and applied to the history of superconductivity in French
and Ladyman (1997), and see also French and Ladyman (1998); partial homomorphism is
introduced in Bueno et al. (2002).
⁴³ In our view the supposed independence of models from theory is much exaggerated. For
example, the recent collection edited by M organ et al. (1999) contains numerous references to the
idea that models are ‘autonomous agents’. Taken literally this claim seems absurd; since models
don’t do anything they can’t be agents. However, we take it that it is meant to suggest that models
have a sui generis role in scientiﬁc practice, and that their development is often independent of
theoretical considerations. Of course, it is quit e correct to point out that in general models cannot

--- Page 131 ---

118 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
However the details of the semantic view are developed (and we think that
lots of formal and informal approaches may be useful, perhaps, for example,
using category theory rather than set theory for some purposes), ⁴⁴the important
implications of the view for our position in this book are:
(a) The appropriate tool for the representation of scientiﬁc theories is mathe-
matics.
(b) The relationships between successive theories, and theories at different
scales whether spatio-temporal or energetic, are often limiting relations
and similarities of mathematical structure (formally captured by structure-
preserving maps or morphisms of various kinds), rather than logical relations
between propositions.
(c) Theories, like Newtonian mechanics, can be literally false as fundamental
physics, but still capture important modal structure and relations.
The syntactic view demands quantiﬁcation over a domain of individuals, whether
theoretical and observable objects in a physicalist version, or sense-data in a
phenomenalist version. The semantic view encourages us to think about the
relation between theories and the world in terms of mathematical and formal
structures. Giere claims, and we agree, that once the semantic approach is adopted
the crucial issue is whether or not theoretical models tell us about modalities.
He argues that they do and states that (his) ‘[c]onstructive realism is thus a
model-theoretic analogue of the view advocated by Grover Maxwell’ (1985,
83). Therefore, he says, constructive realism is a species of structural realism
(ibid.). Van Fraassen (1989, 1991) also emphasizes this issue, and, as we discuss
in 2.3.2, argues that modality is solely a feature of models. In this respect his
empiricism resembles logical empiricism, but the former’s incorporation of the
semantic approach is a crucial difference between them. We follow van Fraassen
in this but our commitment to objective modality is a further departure from
logical empiricism.
2.3.4 Real patterns, structures, and locators
It is not part of our realism that every time a scientist quantiﬁes over something
in formulation of a theory or hypothesis she is staking out an existential
be simply deduced from theories together with background assumptions. On the other hand, it is
quite wrong to suggest that it is the norm for the development of models to be entirely independent
of theoretical matters, and indeed the case of the development of the London and London model
of superconductivity cited by Morrison and Suarez in their papers in the above volume is one
for which French and Ladyman (1997) argue in de tail that theoretical considerations played an
important role.
⁴⁴ An especially useful reference is Ruttkamp (2002). Her explication of the semantic theory is
both elegant and comprehensive, and develops its philosophic al signiﬁcance by application to the
recent arguments between realists and disunity theorists like Cartwright, rather than just to the
more dated realist criticisms of the logical empiricist model of scientiﬁc theories.

--- Page 132 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 119
commitment. As we argue in Chapter 5, especially in special sciences one must
often explore the way theories are practically put to work in some detail to
tease out their ontological commitments; one cannot just read them off textbook
formulations of theories. Indeed, we will a rgue that, semantic appearances
notwithstanding, we should not interpret science—either fundamental physics or
special sciences—as metaphysically committed to the existence of self-subsistent
individuals.
To help us track the distinction between reference that is merely apparent
from linguistic/propositional formulations of theories, and genuine ontological
commitment in science, we will rehabilitate practice from early twentieth-century
philosophy of science in distinguishing between formal and material modes of
discourse. Discourse in the formal mode is always to be understood relative to
a background of representational conventions (ideally, as the positivists stressed,
formally axiomatized conventions, though in practice this ideal is usually only
regulatory). Discourse in the material mode purports to refer directly to properties
of the world. For most everyday purposes, where local misunderstanding is
unlikely, scientists do not bother to draw any distinction resembling this.
However, we claim that we can ﬁnd differences in scientists’ behaviour when
they extend and modify theories which we philosophers then use the distinction
to capture. Thus when we say that some bit of discourse by scientists is ‘material
mode’ or ‘formal mode’ discourse we should not be interpreted as making a priori
conceptual assertions; such claims are to be interpreted as (elliptical) veriﬁable
predictions about scientiﬁc practice. (When we call some of our own discourse
‘formal mode’ or ‘material mode’ we are of course just announcing policy.)
In terms of this distinction, we will make some further terminological stip-
ulations. We will later say that what exists are (‘real’) ‘patterns’. ‘Real patterns’
should be understood in the material mode. Then ‘structures’ are to be under-
stood as mathematical models—sometimes constructed by axiomatized theories,
sometimes represented in set theory—that elicit thinking in the formal mode.
We will argue that there is no tension between this view of structures, and the
claim that ‘the world has modal structure’. Objective modalities in the material
mode are represented by logical and mathematical modalities in the formal mode.
All legitimate metaphysical hypotheses are, according to us, claims of this kind. A
metaphysical hypothesis is to be motivated in every case by empirical hypotheses
that one or more particular empirical substructures are embedded in (homo-
morphic to) particular theoretical structures in the formal mode that represent
particular intensional/modal relations among measurements of real patterns. We
see no reason not to refer to physical measurement results as ‘phenomena’, so
long as it is understood that phenomena are not sense-data in the positivists’
sense. The hypothesis that some phenomena possibly instantiate a particular real
pattern is motivated in each case by the representation of extensional relations
among actual phenomena in a (formal-mode) data model embedded in (homo-
morphic to) the relevant empirical substructure. ‘High-level theories’ are used to

--- Page 133 ---

120 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
Formal Mode Material Mode
Logical/Mathematical
modality represents Objective modality
Structure: Theories 
and models represents
Real pattern
High-level theory 
(HLT)
hypothetico-
deduction needed to 
relate HLT to the 
world
embedded
in/homomorphic
with
Empirical
substructure represents
Intensional/Modal
relations among the 
phenomena
embedded
in/homomorphic
with
instantiated by
Data model Represents Measured
phenomena and 
extensional relations 
among them
Locators
Index relative to an address 
system
Objects, properties, events, and 
processes

--- Page 134 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 121
derive predictions of intensional/modal relations from structures. For clarity, we
represent this network of relations in chart form on the previous page.
We have not yet explained the bottom row of the chart, which represents a
terminological and conceptual innovation of ours.
Our realism consists in our claim that successful scientiﬁc practice warrants
networks of mappings as identiﬁed above between the formal and the material.
We will defend belief in the viability of such mappings in a way compatible with
the PNC, by appeal to scientiﬁc practice.
When we go on to deny that, strictly speaking, there are ‘things’, we will mean
to deny that in the material world as represented by the currently accepted scientif-
ic structures, individual objects have any distinctive status. Some real patterns, we
will argue, behave like things, traditionally conceived, while others behave like tra-
ditional instances of events and processes. In a PNC-motivated metaphysic these
distinctions lose all signiﬁcance except purely practical, book-keeping, signiﬁcance
for human beings in certain sorts of special circumstances. From the metaphysical
point of view, what exist are just real patterns. To put the point another way,
to deﬁne ‘real pattern’—something we will postpone until Chapter 4—is to say
everything there is to be said about the criteria for existence. Science motivates
no separate metaphysical theories about objects, events, and processes.
In order to be able to refer to particular real patterns before specifying
the structures that represent them but without relying on the conventional
distinctions between objects, events, and processes, we need a special bit of
technical vocabulary. One picks out a real pattern independently of its struc-
tural description by an ostensive operation—that is, by ‘pointing at it’. This
is intended as evocative talk for operations of ﬁxing, stabilizing, and main-
taining salience of some data from one measurement operation to another.
(So, think of ‘pointing’ as meaning ‘directing a measurement apparatus’.) In
the fully generalized sense, this means that one indicates the real pattern’s
location in some coordinate system with high enough dimensionality to per-
mit its disambiguation from other real patterns. (What this dimensionality
must be is itself an empirical question for scientiﬁc investigation, as we will
see.) We will thus speak of all of the traditional kinds of objects of refer-
ence—objects, events, processes—by mentioning their locators.⁴⁵A locator is
to be understood as an act of ‘tagging’ against an established address system. ⁴⁶
Such address systems can be formal representations (for example, a map or a
spatio-temporal coordinate system) or could be referenced to cognitive disposi-
tions that induce common structural reference points among a group of observers
⁴⁵ Floridi (2003) refers to roughly our notion of loc ator by co-opting ‘observable’ as a special
term of art for the purpose. We suggest that, in light of the past century’s controversies in the
philosophy of science, this suggestion invites confusion.
⁴⁶ This usage alludes to the idea that locators are aspects of non-conceptual content, and as such
are dynamic, pre-cognitive representational relations between subjects and spaces in which subjects
orient. See the extensive literature on such content that began with Cussins (1990).

--- Page 135 ---

122 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
who share measurement data. (In practice, use of the former is often parasitic
upon the latter, but need not be in principle—perhaps observers with very
different cognitive structures, and so responsive to very different salience cues,
could use mathematics to establish common index systems for locating.)
Use of a locator in a given instance involves no commitment to a type–token
distinction: there are locators for each of ‘Napoleon’, ‘French emperors’, ‘French
people’, and ‘people’. This is another way of expressing our idea that everything
that exists is a real pattern, and that that is all there is to say about what there is.
Nothing we have just said should be interpreted as expressing a particular
epistemological thesis. That is, we are not suggesting that one begins by locating
real patterns and then discovers their structural descriptions. Location is a
recursive practice, and generally goes on against the background of some already
developed structure. In practice, then, a locator will be a partial interpretation
of a structure in the context of another, presupposed, structure. By ‘partial
interpretation’ we mean no more, at least in the ﬁrst place, than an indication
of where in the universe measurements should be taken that will be relevant
to assigning values to variable parameters of the structural element in question.
Thus the locator ‘Orycteropus afer’ (the aardvark) directs us to take measurements
in certain sorts of terrestrial African habitats within a certain range of temporal
coordinates, and focused on certain sorts of behavioural regularities and certain
sorts of genetic processes; the locator ‘market’ directs us to take measurements
wherever certain minimum thresholds of complexity in cognitive processing
capacities, sociality, and scarcity of inputs to batteries are jointly found; and the
locator ‘top quark’ directs us to take measurements everywhere in the universe. ⁴⁷
How precisely a given locator, in the context of a given theoretical structure, tells
us to focus our measurements varies with the reﬁnement of empirical theory. One
of the things that science does as it progresses, according to the account we will
give, is add precision to locators. When we wish to mention a particular locator,
either for exemplary purposes or because that locator is of general metaphysical
signiﬁcance (as the locator for the top quark probably is but the locator for
aardvarks probably is not), we will write ‘aardvark ( L)’. So this should not be
read as purporting to refer to collections of substantival, pattern-independent
individual aardvarks (since we do not presume there are such things, and will
indeed doubt that there are such things). It denotes, again, an element of some
already partially elaborated structure plus measurement instructions.
2.4 WHAT IS STRUCTURAL REALISM?
We hope to have convinced the reader that both standard scientiﬁc realism
and constructive empiricism face serious difﬁculties. However, a commitment
⁴⁷ Our usage of ‘direct’ here again alludes to dynamical non-conceptual content.

--- Page 136 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 123
to objective modality will be compatible with the no-miracles argument because
if science describes objective modal relations among the phenomena, as well as
just what actually happens, then it is no miracle that theory-laden features of
scientiﬁc methodology, such as the use of background theories in testing new
ones, and the practice of theory conjunction are successful. Scientiﬁc realism
without a commitment to objective modality is unable to explain the success of
science, because there is no connection between unobservable entities and the
phenomena we observe other than constant conjunction in the actual world,
and that doesn’t explain anything. If theorists are able sometimes to capture the
objective modal structure of the world then it is no surprise that successful novel
prediction sometimes works, and the practice of theory conjunction ought to
lead to progress at the empirical level. Constructive empiricism in its structuralist
form, when combined with a commitment to objective modality, does not face
the problems we identiﬁed which turn on van Fraassen’s eschewal of modal
realism.⁴⁸Finally, the idea that science describes the objective modal structure of
the world is not undermined by theory change in the history of science, since all
the well-conﬁrmed modal relations expressed by old theories are approximately
recovered in their successors.
Recent work has revealed that many different forms of structuralism and
structural realism can be found in the work of some of the greatest philosophers
of science. Barry Gower’s (2000) historical survey of structural realism discusses
how structuralism ﬁgures in the thought of Cassirer, Schlick, Carnap, and Russell.
Worrall approvingly cites Poincaré as a structural realist (and Zahar 1994 and
Gower seem to agree with this reading of him). However, Mary Domski (1999)
has argued convincingly that Poincaré was not any kind of realist in the modern
sense of the term. His structuralism was combined with neo-Kantian views about
the nature of arithmetic and group theory, and with conventionalism about the
geometry of space and time. Hence, she argues, Poincaré is better thought of
as a structural empiricist or a structural neo-Kantian. Meanwhile, Stathis Psillos
(1999) has explored the connections between structuralism and the Ramsey
sentence approach to scientiﬁc theory as it ﬁgured in the development of Carnap’s
philosophy from logical positivism to ontologically relativist empiricism. We shall
have more to say about Russell and Cassirer, and about Ramsey sentences, below.
Given the intricate connections between structuralist views about science and
theories in epistemology, semantics, and metaphysics, we will not here offer
a complete taxonomy, or even a partial history of them. Instead, we begin
(following Ladyman 1998) by asking a fundamental question about structural
realism, namely, is it metaphysics or is it epistemology? Worrall’s paper is
ambiguous in this respect. At times his proposal seems to be that we put an
epistemic constraint on realism to the effect that we only commit ourselves to
⁴⁸ The problem of inductive libertarianism is not obviously removed by the adoption of objective
modality but we will suggest how it can be in 4.5.

--- Page 137 ---

124 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
believing in the structural content of a theory, while remaining agnostic about
the rest. This is suggested by his citation of Poincaré who talks of the redundant
theories of the past capturing the ‘true relations’ between the ‘real objects which
Nature will hide forever from our eyes’ (1905, 161). Elsewhere, he declares that
‘what we call objective reality is … what is common to many thinking beings
and could be common to all; … the harmony of mathematical laws’ (1906, 14).
Similarly, Zahar’s structural realism is a f orm of Kantian transcendental idealism
according to which science can never tell us more than the structure of the
noumenal world; the nature of the entities and properties of which it consists are
epistemically inaccessible to us. ⁴⁹
On the other hand, Worrall’s position in his 1989 paper is not explicitly an
epistemic one, and other comments suggest a departure from the metaphysics
of standard scientiﬁc realism. For example, he says: ‘On the structural realist
view what Newton really discovered are the relationships between phenomena
expressed in the mathematical equations of his theory’ (1989, 122). If the
continuity in scientiﬁc change is of ‘form or structure’, then perhaps we should
abandon commitment to even the putative reference of theories to objects and
properties, and account for the success of science in other terms. Others who
have contributed to structural realism have more explicitly signalled a signiﬁcant
departure from traditional realist metaphysics. For example, Howard Stein:
[O]ur science comes closest to comprehending ‘the real’, not in its account of ‘substances’
and their kinds, but in its account of the ‘Forms’ which phenomena ‘imitate’ (for ‘Forms’
read ‘theoretical structures’, for ‘imitate’, ‘are represented by’). (1989, 57)
In the next section we will argue that structural realism gains no advantage
over traditional scientiﬁc realism if it is understood as merely an epistemological
reﬁnement of it. Thereafter, we will explain how structural realism can be taken
as a metaphysical position. Argument for structural realism in accordance with
the PNC, which requires appeal to physics, will be given in the next chapter,
when we adduce support from considerations in the foundations of quantum
mechanics, spacetime physics, quantum information theory, and research in
quantum gravity.
2.4.1 Against epistemic structural realism (ESR)
One way of thinking about structural realism is as an epistemological modiﬁcation
of scientiﬁc realism to the effect that we only believe what scientiﬁc theories
tell us about the relations entered into by unobservable objects, and suspend
judgement as to the nature of the latter. There are various forms this might
⁴⁹ Thomas Ryckman (2005) calls Kantian structu ral realism ‘transcendental structuralism’. Our
view is what he calls ‘transcendent structuralism’, as opposed to van Fraassen’s ‘instrumental
structuralism’.

--- Page 138 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 125
take. For example, the unobservable objects may be thought of as unknown
or as unknowable. Either way we get the claim that scientiﬁc theories tell us
only about the form or structure of the unobservable world and not about its
nature. For Poincaré structural knowledge in science is knowledge of ﬁrst-order
properties and relations. Russell (1927) and Carnap (1928) took this one step
further and argued that we don’t even know the relations, rather all we know
is their properties and relations. On this extreme form of structuralism science
only tells us about purely logical features of the world.
Ladyman (1998) discusses Russell’s view and argues that in general epistemo-
logical forms of structural realism do not signiﬁcantly improve the prospects of
standard scientiﬁc realism, and hence that structural realism should be thought
of as metaphysically rather than epistemically revisionary. ⁵⁰We will now brieﬂy
reprise this argument.
A position called structural realism, which amounts to an epistemological
gloss on traditional scientiﬁc realism, was, as Worrall mentioned, detailed and
advocated by Grover Maxwell (1962, 1970a, 1970b, 1972). Maxwell set out
to defend a robust scientiﬁc realism, but he wanted this to be compatible with
what he called ‘concept empiricism’ about the meaning of theoretical terms, and
he also wanted to explain how we can have epistemic access to unobservable
entities. The problem as Maxwell saw it was that theories talk about all sorts of
entities and processes with which we are not ‘acquainted’. How, he wondered,
can we then know about and refer to them and their properties? The answer
that Maxwell gave, following Russell’s emphasis on structure and relations in his
later philosophy (see, for example, Russell 1927), was that we can know about
them by description, that is, we can know them via their structural properties.
In fact, he argues, this is the limit of our knowledge of them, and the meanings
of theoretical terms are to be understood purely structurally. Maxwell explicates
this notion that the structure of the theory exhausts the cognitive content of
its theoretical terms, by considering the Ramsey sentence of the theory. As is
well known, Ramsey’s method allows the elimination of theoretical terms from
a theory by replacing them with existentially qua ntiﬁed predicate variables (or
names in the case of Lewis 1970). If one replaces the conjunction of assertions of
a ﬁrst-order theory with its Ramsey sentence, the observational consequences of
the theory are carried over, but direct reference to unobservables is eliminated.
If we formalize a theory in a ﬁrst-order language: ∏(O
1,…, O n;T1,…, T m),
then the corresponding Ramsey sentence is ∃t1,…, ∃tm
∏(O1,…, O n;t1,…,
tm). Thus the Ramsey sentence only asserts that there are some objects, properties,
⁵⁰ Psillos (2001) refers to the ‘upward path’ to structural realism as beginning with empiricist
epistemological principles and arriving at structural knowledge of the external world. The ‘downward’
path is to arrive at structural realism by weakening standard scientiﬁc realism as suggested by Worrall.
Epistemic structural realists include Worrall, Zahar, Votsis, and Morganti (2004). The latter differs
from the others by arguing that ESR should amount to agnosticism about whether there is a domain
of individuals over and above relational structure.

--- Page 139 ---

126 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
and relations that have certain logical features, satisfying certain implicit deﬁ-
nitions. It is a higher-order description, but ultimately connects the theoretical
content of the theory with observable behaviour. However, it is a mistake to
think that the Ramsey sentence allows us to eliminate theoretical entities, for
it still states that these exist. It is just that they are referred to not directly, by
means of theoretical terms, but by description, that is via variables, connectives,
quantiﬁers, and predicate terms whose direct referents are (allegedly) known
by acquaintance. Thus Maxwell (and Russell) claimed that knowledge of the
unobservable realm is of its structural rather than intrinsic properties, or, as is
sometimes said, limited to knowledge of its second-order properties. It is arguable
that this is the purest structuralism possible, for the notion of structure employed
refers to the higher-order properties of a theory, those that are only expressible
in purely formal terms.
This is an epistemological structural realism meant to vindicate and not
to revise the ontological commitments of scientiﬁc realism. On this view the
objective world is composed of unobservable objects between which certain
properties and relations obtain; but we can only know the properties and
relations of these properties and relations, that is, the structure of the objective
world. However, there are serious difﬁculties with this view which were originally
raised by Newman (1928) and which were rediscovered by Demopoulos and
Friedman (1985). The basic problem is that structure is not sufﬁcient to pick
out uniquely any relations in the world. Suppose that the world consists of
a set of objects whose structure is W with respect to some relation R, about
which nothing else is known. Any collection of things can be regarded as having
structure W provided there is the right number of them. ⁵¹ As Demopoulos
and Friedman point out, if ∏ is consistent, and if all its purely observational
consequences are true, then the truth of the corresponding Ramsey sentence
follows as a theorem of second-order logic or set theory (provided the initial
domain has the right cardinality—and if it does not then consistency implies
that there exists one that does). The formal structure of a relation can easily be
obtained with any collection of objects provided there are enough of them, so
having the formal structure cannot single out a unique referent for this relation;
in order to do so we must stipulate that we are talking about the intended
relation, which is to go beyond the structural description. ‘Thus on this view,
only cardinality questions are open to discovery!’ (Demopoulos and Friedman
1985, 627); everything else will be known a priori.
This leads Demopoulos and Friedman to conclude that reducing a theory to
its Ramsey sentence is equivalent to reducing it to its empirical consequences,
and thus that: ‘Russell’s realism collapses into a version of phenomenalism or
⁵¹ This is because according to the extensional characterization of relations deﬁned on a domain
of individuals, every relation is identiﬁed with some set of subsets of the domain. The power set
axiom entails the existence of every such subset and hence every such relation.

--- Page 140 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 127
strict empiricism after all: all theories with the same observational consequences
will be equally true’ (1985, 635). This conclusion can be reached by a different
path. It has been proved, by Jane English (1973), that any two Ramsey sentences
that are incompatible with one another cannot have all their observational
consequences in common. In other words, if we treat a theory just as its
Ramsey sentence then the notion of theoretical equivalence collapses into that
of empirical equivalence. Therefore, equating the structure of a theory to what
is embodied in its Ramsey sentence cannot do justice to Worrall’s intention
in proposing structural realism, since he is quite clear that commitment to the
structure of a theory goes beyond commitment to the strictly empirical level of
at h e o r y .⁵²
In any case, it is hard to see how Maxwell’s epistemology and semantics could
help deal with the problem of theory change that structural realism is intended
to solve. After all, as Maxwell himself pointed out, his structural realism does
not dispense with reference to theoretical entities, but it makes that reference
a function of the (place of the theoretical terms in the) overall structure of
the theory, as manifested in the Ramsey sentence. The problem of ontological
discontinuity is left untouched by simply adopting Ramsiﬁcation. In fact, it seems
even worse if contextualism about the meaning of theoretical terms is adopted to
this extent. Hence, this epistemic reading of structural realism is of no help with
the problem of theory change. The Ramsey sentence of a theory may be useful
to a concept empiricist because it shows how reference to unobservables may
be achieved purely by description, but this is just because the Ramsey sentence
refers to exactly the same entities as the original theory. ⁵³
⁵² Jeff Ketland (2004) argues in detail that the Newman objection trivializes the Ramsey sentence
formulation of ESR. Worrall and Zahar (2001), Cruse (2005), and Melia and Saatsi (2006) defend
the Ramsey sentence approach against model-theoretic arguments by questioning the assumption
that all predicates which apply to unobservables must be eliminated in favour of bound variables.
Mixed predicates such as ‘extended’ are those that apply to both observable and unobservable
objects. The Newman objection does not go through if mixed predicates are not Ramsiﬁed, because
a model of the Ramsey sentence will not necessarily be one in which what is claimed regarding the
mixed properties and relations holds. In response, Demopoulos (forthcoming b) points out that
the Ramsey sentence of a theory with mixed predicates where the latter are not Ramsiﬁed will be
true provided the original theory is satisﬁable—hence the claim that the content of the Ramsey
sentence is merely the observational content of th e original theory plus a cardinality claim is still
true when mixed predicates are considered. Melia and Saatsi (2006) also argue that intensional
notions, such as naturalness and causal signiﬁcance, may be applied to properties to save the Ramsey
sentence formulation of ESR from triviality. ( This recalls the defence of Russell’s structuralism
against Newman discussed in Hochberg 1994.) Demopoulos also raises two problems with this
strategy: ﬁrst, even non-natural relations can have signiﬁcant claims made about them in a theory,
and second, the cognitive signiﬁcance of unramsiﬁed theories is independent of a commitment to
‘real’ or ‘natural’ relations. Hence, Demopoulos insists that the Ramsey sentence of a theory and
the theory itself are importantly different.
⁵³ Frank Jackson (1998), Rae Langton (1998), and DavidLewis (forthcoming) also advocate views
similar to ESR. Jackson refers to ‘Kantian physicalism’ (23 – 4), Langton to ‘Kantian Humility’, and
Lewis to ‘Ramseyian Humility’. Jackson argues that science only reveals the causal/relational prop-
erties of physical objects, Langton argues that sci ence only reveals the extrinsic properties of physical

--- Page 141 ---

128 Scientiﬁc Realism, Constructive Empiricism, and Structuralism
With reference to the case of the transition between classical electrodynamics
and quantum electrodynamics (QED), Lyre says:
Whereas from the viewpoint of an ontology of objects, many of the entities in the
transition of Maxwell’s theory to QED have changed … there is a considerable element
of retention of group structure and its embedding into a larger framework which makes
the scientiﬁc progress much less discontinuous than it looks on the level of objects.
(2004, 664)
Worrall’s approach to structural realism withits emphasis on the Ramsey sentence
of a theory and the distinction between observational and theoretical terms is
thoroughly embedded in the syntactic view of theories that adopts ﬁrst-order
quantiﬁcational logic as the appropriate form for the representation of physical
theories. Since ontic structural realism is not formulated in these terms, the
Newman problem does not arise for ontic structural realism. In particular, we
will eschew an extensional understanding of relations without which the problem
cannot be formulated. According to Zahar (1994, 14) the continuity in science
is in the intension not the extension of its concepts. If we are to believe that the
mathematical structure of theories is what is important, then, as Zahar suggests,
we need a different semantics for theories, one that addresses the representative
role of mathematics directly.
Bearing in mind that structural realism is supposed to be realist enough
to take account of the no-miracles argument, and in particular the record of
successful novel predictions which some theories enjoy, there is a minimal
metaphysical commitment that we think structural realism must entail. This
is that there are mind-independent modal relations between phenomena (both
possible and actual), but these relations are not supervenient on the properties
of unobservable objects and the external relations between them. Rather, this
structure is ontologically basic. This is enough to make structural realism
distinct from standard realism but also from constructive empiricism. From this
metaphysical thesis there follow plenty of realist methodological and epistemic
implications but, we hope, no unsustainable beliefs in the speciﬁc ontologies that
are employed to help us grasp the structure of the world according to particular
theories.
objects, and both then argue that their intrinsic natures, and hence the intrinsic nature of the world,
are epistemically inaccessible. Jackson points out t hat this inference can be blocked if the natures of
objects and their intrinsic properties are identiﬁed with their relational or extrinsic properties, but
argues that this makes a mystery of what it is that s tands in the causal relations. The metaphysical
article of faith to the effect that objects and pr operties must have intrinsic natures prior to entering
into relations is one that we reject. Our naturalism leads us to reject such metaphysical doctrines if
they are not supported by science, and we argue at length in the next chapter that they are not. We
return to precisely this issue in 3.4. Lewis’s argument also begins from the observation that science
only tells us about the causal roles occupied by fundamental objects and properties. Ney (forthcom-
ing b) argues that on Lewis’s view, unlike the Kantian view of Langton, intrinsic properties ground
causal ones, and hence that the former can be known via the latter, and so Lewis’s argument fails.

--- Page 142 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 129
2.5 CONCLUSION
We have argued that a version of structural realism that incorporates a minimal
commitment to objective modal structure achieves consilience arising from the
following considerations:
(1) The no-miracles argument (theory conjunction and novel prediction).
(2) Theory change.
(3) Scientiﬁc representation.
(4) The problems with constructive empiricism, in particular, the modality of
observability and inductive libertarianism.
The importance of modality in the understanding of scientiﬁc knowledge was
well understood by Peirce:
[W]e must dismiss the idea that the occult state of things (be it a relation among atoms
or something else), which constitutes the reality of a diamond’s hardness can possibly
consist in anything but in the truth of a gene ral conditional proposition. For to what else
does the entire teaching of chemistry relate except to the ‘behaviour’ of different possible
kinds of material substance? And in what does that behaviour consist except that if a
substance of a certain kind should be exposed to an agency of a certain kind, a certain
kind of sensible result would ensue, according to our experiences hitherto. As for the
pragmaticist, it is precisely his position that nothing else than this can be so much as
meant by saying that an object possesses a character. He is therefore obliged to subscribe
to the doctrine of a real Modality, including real Ne cessity and real Possibility. (Peirce,
1960–6, v. 5, 457)
In the next chapter, we argue that our form of structural realism is also motivated
by the contents of our best physical theories, namely quantum theory and general
relativity. In later chapters we will go on to argue that, supplemented with
concepts from information theory, the position defended here makes possible
a plausible account of laws, causation, and explanation, and the relationships
among the special sciences, and between them and fundamental physics.

--- Page 143 ---

3
Ontic Structural Realism and the Philosophy
of Physics
James Ladyman and Don Ross
Ontic Structural Realism (OSR) is the view that the world has an objective modal
structure that is ontologically fundamental, in the sense of not supervening on
the intrinsic properties of a set of individuals. According to OSR, even the
identity and individuality of objects depends on the relational structure of the
world. Hence, a ﬁrst approximation to our metaphysics is: ‘There are no things.
Structure is all there is.’ We of course acknowledge that special sciences are richly
populated with individual objects. Thus, to accommodate their elimination
from metaphysics we will owe a non-ad hoc account of the point and value of
reference to and generalization over objects in sciences other than fundamental
physics. We will argue that objects are pragmatic devices used by agents to orient
themselves in regions of spacetime, and to construct approximate representations
of the world. In keeping with the PNC, this account must not imply revision
of special sciences for the sake of metaphysical comfort. We postpone this task,
and then the closely related account of the metaphysical status of causation, to
Chapters 4 and 5 respectively. In the present chapter our purpose is to motivate
ontic structural realism from contemporary fundamental physics, as the PNC
requires.
This chapter argues for a position that consists in the conjunction of elim-
inativism about self-subsistent individuals, the view that relational structure is
ontologically fundamental, and structural realism (interpreted as the claim that
science describes the objective modal structure of the world). For ‘modal’ read
‘nomological’ if you like. We do not take it to be ‘causal structure’, for reasons
to be explained, but will argue later that causal structure is the pragmatically
essential proxy for it in the special sciences (but not in fundamental physics). Part
of the motivation for our denial that there are metaphysically fundamental indi-
viduals comes from our veriﬁcationism. The epistemic structural realist thinks

--- Page 144 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 131
that all we can know is structure, but it is the structure of an unknowable realm
of individuals. However, we shall argue that in the light of contemporary physics
the PNC entails that talk of unknowable intrinsic natures and individuals is
idle and has no justiﬁed place in metaphysics. This is the sense in which our
view is eliminative; there are objects in our metaphysics but they have been
purged of their intrinsic natures, identity, and individuality, and they are not
metaphysically fundamental.
It might be thought that veriﬁcationists ought to be agnostic about whether
there are unknowable objects over and above the knowable structure of the
world. We suppose that there might be other universes which have no causal,
spatio-temporal, or any other kind of connection with our own. We certainly
can’t have any evidence that there are no such universes, by hypothesis. Does
this mean we ought to be agnostic about their existence? This depends on where
the burden of proof lies. Should we reject the existence of things in which we
could have no reason to believe, or suspend judgement about them? Perhaps the
latter is the more enlightened option, but then we ought to be agnostic about a
literal inﬁnity of matters—whatever a nyone can conceive without contradicting
physics. Should we be agnostic about the existence, somewhere, of two-headed
gerbils that sing the blues? If the agnosticism a philosopher advises us to take
up towards the unknowable noumenal objects is strictly analogous to this then
we are sanguine about agreeing to it. Of course, an epistemic structural realist
may insist in a Kantian spirit (recall the discussion of Kantian humility in 2.4.1,
and see 3.4 below) on more than this, namely that there being such objects is a
necessary condition for our empirical knowledge of the world. This claim is one
about which we are not agnostic, but which we deny. The burden of proof is on
us to show that ontic structural realism (OSR) as motivated by current physics is
intelligible without any Kantian residue.
As we saw in the previous chapter, Worrall’s motivation for introducing struc-
tural realism was the need to respond to the pessimistic meta-induction. French’s
and Ladyman’s advocacy of OSR is motivated by two further desiderata: (a) the
need for an ontology apt for contemporary physics, and a way of dissolving some
of the metaphysical conundrums it presents; and (b) the need for a conception of
how theories represent the world that is compatible with the role of models and
idealizations in physics. Two leading philosophers of physics, Simon Saunders
and Michael Redhead, share these broad motivations and arrive at interestingly
comparable positions. We have already mentioned Saunders’s (1993a) paper on
continuity in structural representation in physics, and more recently he (2003a,
b, c, d) and David Wallace (2003a) have deployed structuralism to solve the
problem of how macroscopic objects with more or less determinate properties
can be recovered from the Everett interpretation of quantum states (the so-
called preferred basis problem). Redhead’s classic paper on theories and models
(1980) reﬂects a long-standing concern with representation in physics, and he

--- Page 145 ---

132 Ontic Structural Realism
has endorsed structural realism as a way of interpreting quantum ﬁeld theory
(1999).¹
Some of the pioneers of structuralism in twentieth-century philosophy of
science were also concerned with (a) above. For example, although in his
discussion of Cassirer’s work Gower (2000) conﬁnes himself to an epistemological
reading of structural realism, French and Ladyman (2003a) have argued that
Cassirer, like Weyl, was concerned to replace an ontology based on individuals
with one more suited to twentieth-century science. French has recently examined
the role of group theory in the development of quantum mechanics (1999,
2000), and explored the idea of the group-theoretic ‘constitution’ of objects as
sets of invariants under symmetry transformations which can be found in the
writings of Cassirer, Eddington, Schrödinger, Weyl, and others. Here we shall
explain how modern physics undermines classical metaphysical intuitions, and
then argue for OSR as a response. ² As Ernan McMullin says: ‘imaginability
must not be made the test for ontology. The realist claim is that the scientist is
discovering the structures of the world; it is not required in addition that these
structures be imaginable in the categories of the macroworld’ (1984, 14). ³
The demand for an ontology based on individuals may be criticized on the
grounds that it is the demand that the mind-independent world be imaginable
in terms of the categories of the world of experience. OSR allows for a global
relation between models and the world, which can support the predictive success
of theories, but which does not supervene on the successful reference of theoretical
terms to individual entities, or the truth of sentences involving them.
3.1 IDENTITY AND INDIVIDUALITY IN QUANTUM
MECHANICS ⁴
The debate about whether quantum particles are individuals began with the
development of quantum statistics. There is a fundamental difference between the
way classical statistical mechanics and quantum theory deal with the permutation
¹ Others who follow Ladyman (1998) in regarding structural realism as a metaphysical response
to the ontological import of modern physics as well as a solution to the problem of theory change
include: Bain (2003 and 2004), Esfeld (2004), Lyre (2004), Stachel (2002 and 2006).
² The other strand of structuralism in the philosophy of science is that associated with Russell
and Carnap which we discussed in the previous chapter. Though Russell had much of interest to
say about the physics of his time (see C hapter 5 below), his and Carnap’s versions of structuralism
were more directly motivated by epistemological and semantic problems than by ontological issues
arising from physics.
³ McMullin (1990) explains how Duhem was a realist about the relations found in laws but not
about explanations in terms of an ontology. Duhem seems to have been an epistemic structural realist.
⁴ The classic paper in the philosophical literature about these issues is French and Redhead
(1988). See also French (1989, 1998), Teller (1989), and van Fraassen (1991).

--- Page 146 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 133
of indistinguishable elementary particles. ⁵ The crucial point is illustrated by the
following example. Imagine that there are two particles (1 and 2), and two
boxes (A and B), where each of the particles must be in one box or the other. ⁶
Classically there are four possible conﬁgurations for the system:
B o t h1a n d2i nA ;b o t h1a n d2i nB ;1i nAa n d2i nB ;1i nBa n d2i nA .
If these are regarded as equipossible, each will be assigned a probability of
1/4.
The situation is quite different in quantum mechanics (QM), where there are
only three possible states:
Both 1 and 2 in A; both 1 and 2 in B; one of 1 and 2 in A and the other in B.
Hence, if these are regarded as equipossible, each will be assigned a probability
of
1/3. In quantum statistics, then, what would be regarded as two possible states
of affairs classically is treated as one possible state of affairs. ⁷ This is formalized
by the so-called ‘indistinguishability postulate’: ⁸
If P is the operator corresponding to the interchange of the particles 1 and 2 in a
two-particle quantum state, /Psi112,
P/Psi112 = /Psi121 and P/Psi121 = /Psi112,
then, for observable property, Q:
⟨P/Psi112|Q|P/Psi112⟩=⟨ /Psi112|Q|/Psi112⟩, ∀Q,∀/Psi112.
⁵ Both classical and quantum elementary particles of a given type are regarded as indistinguishable
in the sense that they will all have the same mass, size, and shape (if any), charge, and so on; but
they may in principle be distinguished by their spatio-temporal or other state-dependent properties.
We may think of the former properties as ‘essential’, in th e sense that they are characteristic of the
natural kind to which a particular particle belongs, as opposed to the ‘accidental’ properties which
are those that a particle just happens to have, such as its velocity or position at a particular time.
(Note that this distinction between essential and accidental properties does not correspond to that
between permanent and temporary properties; an electron might happen accidentally to have the
same position throughout the history of the universe.) Some authors talk of ‘identical particles’
(for example, van Fraassen 1991) but they mean by this just what we mean by indistinguishable
particles, that is, particles that are qualitatively identical because they are in the same state, and
yet numerically (or quantitatively) distinct. Note also that if Lee Smolin (2001) is right about
quantum gravity then even the properties of quantum particles that we now regard as essential
will turn out to be dynamical and dependent on the contingent evolution of the universe (see
3.7.2).
⁶ This example constructed for pedagogical purposes is not physically realistic as the quantum
particles could be in a superposition of the state corresponding to being in box A and the state
corresponding to being in box B. The point being explained here, namely that permutation of
particles does not lead to physically distinct sta tes in quantum mechanics, is nonetheless a sound
one.
⁷ For a detailed discussion of the relationship between metaphysics and statistics see Huggett
(1997, 1999). A number of papers on the issues discussed in this section can be found in Castellani
(1998).
⁸ See Greenberg and Messiah (1964).

--- Page 147 ---

134 Ontic Structural Realism
So, according to the formalism of QM, the permutation of indistinguishable
particles in some state is not observable, and states which differ only with respect
to the permutation of particles of the same kind are treated as the same state
labelled differently.
Early in the history of QM this led some physicists to argue that quantum
particles are not individuals. To understand what is at stake here we must separate
the related concepts of distinguishability (or discernibility) and individuality. The
former epistemic notion concerns what enables us to tell that one thing is different
from another. The latter metaphysical notion concerns whatever it is in virtue
of that two things are different from one another, adding the restriction that
one thing is identical with itself and not with anything else. ⁹ There are three
main candidates in the philosophical tradition for a principle of individuation
for physical objects:
(1) transcendent individuality: the individuality of something is a feature of it
over and above all its qualitative properties; ¹⁰
(2) spatio-temporal location or trajectory;
(3) all or some restricted set of their properties (the bundle theory).
Ordinary everyday objects, such as leaves and snowﬂakes, never, it seems, possess
all the same properties; they are distinguishable by both their spatio-temporal
properties and their intrinsic properties. ¹¹ The particles of classical physics of a
given type were thought to share all their intrinsic properties. But classical physics
assumed a principle of impenetrability, according to which no two particles could
occupy the same spatio-temporal location. Hence, classical particles were thought
to be distinguishable in virtue of each one having a trajectory in spacetime distinct
from every other one. Thus for everyday objects and for classical particles, the
principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles (PII) is true, and it is plausible to
argue (with Leibniz) that individuality and distinguishability amount to the same
thing. After the advent of QM the status of PII has been the subject of debate,
⁹ The distinction is due to the scholastic philosopher Suarez.
¹⁰ This is similar to Post’s (1971) notion of tr anscendental individuality, also adopted by French
and Redhead (1988). Different ways of cashing it out include Locke’s substantial substratum; the
notion of a ‘bare particular’; and the notion of haecceity or thisness due to Duns Scotus and
rehabilitated by Adams (1979).
¹¹ Intrinsic properties are normally deﬁned to be those which an object may possess independently
of everything else that exists, or independently of whether or not anything else exists (so that the
property of being the only existing entity does not come out as intrinsic; see Lewis 1983, Langton
and Lewis 1998, and Lewis forthcoming). Hence, the mass and charge of classical particles, and the
shape and size of a person are thought to be intrinsic properties. Extrinsic properties are just those
that are not intrinsic; weight, being the brother of, and so on, are extrinsic properties. Another
usage common in the foundations of QM (see fo r example, Jauch 1968, 275) treats the intrinsic
properties of a system as those that do not depend on the state of the system, and the extrinsic
properties as those that do. This seems to equate intrinsic with essential. In any case we shall adopt
the former deﬁnitions as the latter one would seem to beg the question of whether spatio-temporal
properties are intrinsic or extrinsic since they are obviously state-dependent.

--- Page 148 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 135
and the possibility of some principle of individuation that appeals to some feature
of particles other than their qualitative properties has been taken seriously. ¹²
In the formalism of QM particles are not always assigned well-deﬁned
trajectories in spacetime. Furthermore, two or more particles in an entangled
state may possess exactly the same monadic and relational properties that are
expressible by the formalism of the theory. Consider a pair of electrons in the
orbital of a helium atom for example. They have the same energy eigenstate, and
the same position state (which is not localized), but because they cannot have all
the same quantum states as each other by the Pauli exclusion principle, their spin
state is such that in any given direction in space they must have opposite spins as
represented by the singlet state:
/Psi1
12 = 1
√
2
{| ↓⟩1|↑ ⟩2 −|↑ ⟩ 1|↓ ⟩2}
(Here the electrons are labelled 1 and 2, and the spin components of + and
− along an arbitrary axis are represented by up and down arrows respectively.)
Clearly, according to this state description there is no property of particle 1 that
cannot also be predicated of particle 2. ¹³
Hence, quantum particles appear sometimes to possess all the same intrinsic
and extrinsic properties. If two electrons really are two distinct individuals, and
it is true that they share all the same properties, then it seems that there must be
some principle of individuation that transcends everything that can be expressed
by the formalism in virtue of which they are individuals. If we assume for now
that the quantum description is complete, then we are left with a dilemma:
either PII is false, the quantum particles are individuals and there must be
some principle of individuation of type (1) above; or quantum particles are not
individuals and PII is moot in this context. ¹⁴
French argues that this means that QM gives rise to a form of metaphysical
underdetermination (French 1989, 1998), since there are (at least) two meta-
physical packages compatible with it. According to the ﬁrst of these, quantum
particles have transcendent individuality. They are individuated by something
¹² PII is easiest to state in the contrapositive form, namely there are no two things that share
all their properties. This is trivially true unless its scope is restricted to exclude identity-involving
properties.
¹³ In what follows we shall usually only consider fermions (such as electrons or protons), because
they are regarded as the particles of matter, as opposed to bosons (such as photons) which are
the quanta of the various ﬁelds representing physical forces. Bosons and fermions differ in various
respects including the statistics they obey and their spin magnitudes. For our purposes it is worth
noting that bosons can be in identical quantum stat es that are not entangled states of more than
one particle. Hence, there can be indeﬁnitely many of them on the end of a pin.
¹⁴ Here we only consider synchronic identity. Identity over time is also highly problematic for
quantum particles since QM does not attribute d eﬁnite trajectories to them and so if an electron
is absorbed and then later an electron is emitted by the atom, it seems that there is no fact of the
matter about whether the same electron is involved in each process.

--- Page 149 ---

136 Ontic Structural Realism
that transcends the empirical facts, and for some reason they are unable to enter
into certain entangled states (the spin-statistics theorem says that bosons can only
occupy symmetric states (those whose mathematical description is unchanged
by the permutation of particles), and fermions can only occupy antisymmetric
states—those whose mathematical description is multiplied by − 1i ft h ep a r t i c l e s
are permuted). It is worth noting that on this view the naming or labelling of
the particles is problematic. This is because a descriptivist account of reference is
unworkable if PII fails, and because a rigid designation account seems to imply
the wrong statistics, in particular, that we ought to count a two-particle state as
distinct from the same one with the two particles interchanged. The alternative
metaphysical picture abandons the idea that quantum particles are individuals,
perhaps in favour of a ﬁeld theoretic construal of them.
Three metaphysical and methodological reasons have been offered by various
authors for preferring the non-individualistic interpretation of quantum particles:
(i) PII is incompatible with the individuals package under fairly reasonable
assumptions, but abandoning this framework allows that it is true; ¹⁵(ii) positing
individuals plus states that are forever inaccessible to them is ontologically
proﬂigate, amounting to the acceptance of ‘surplus structure’; (iii) a principle of
individuality of type (1) above must be metaphysical in the sense that it posits
what van Fraassen has called ‘empirically surplus factors’ (1991).
None of these considerations are conclusive, for several reasons. (i) There is
no empirical way to conﬁrm PII and so concluding that quantum particles are
not individuals to safeguard this principle might be merely the expression of
a metaphysical or metalogical preference based on experience of macroscopic
objects. (ii) There are many cases in the history of science where so-called surplus
structure in the formulation of a theory has later been found to be of empirical
importance (see French 1995, 1997). The surplus structure in Hilbert space
allows for states that are neither symmetric nor antisymmetric and hence for
particles which are neither fermions nor bosons but instead obey ‘para-statistics’.
(iii) Van Fraassen’s point about empirically surplus factors will obviously not
persuade the scientiﬁc realist. Hence, the underdetermination is not easily
¹⁵ These reasonable assumptions are the Principle of Stat istical Mechanics (which says that states
with equal phase space volume are equiprobable), and the Completeness assumption (which states
that there are no hidden variables not described by the quantum formalism). Of course, there is
a version of quantum theory, namely Bohm theory, according to which QM is not complete and
particles do have deﬁnite trajectories at all times. However, Harvey Brown et al. (1996) argue that
the ‘particles’ of Bohm theory are not those of cl assical mechanics. The dynamics of the theory are
such that the properties, like mass, charge, and so on, normally associated with particles are in fact
inherent in the quantum ﬁeld and not in the particles. It seems that the particles only have position.
We may be happy that trajectories are enough to individuate particles in Bohm theory, but what
will distinguish an ‘empty’ trajectory from an ‘occupied’ one? Since none of the physical properties
ascribed to the particle will actually inhere in points of the trajectory, giving content to the claim
that there is actually a ‘particle’ there would seem to require some notion of the raw stuff of the
particle; in other words haecceities seem to be needed for the individuality of particles of Bohm
theory too.

--- Page 150 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 137
broken. Van Fraassen (1991) argues that this is all the more reason to say
‘goodbye to metaphysics’ (1991, 480) because it presents a challenge to standard
scientiﬁc realism that cannot be met and so is a reason to embrace constructive
empiricism. Ladyman (1998) and French and Ladyman (2003a, b) have argued
in response that, since the locus of this metaphysical underdetermination is
the notion of an individual, we should reconceive individuals in structural
terms.
Saunders (2003c, 2003d, and 2006) offered an interesting new twist on these
issues by pointing out that French and Ladyman assume that the identity of
indiscernibles should be interpreted in terms of what Quine called ‘absolute
discernibility’ (1960, 230, and 1976 [1981]). Two objects are absolutely dis-
cernible if there exists a formula in one variable which is true of one object and
not the other. For example, ordinary physical objects are absolutely discernible
because they occupy different positions in space and time. Absolutely discernible
mathematical objects include i and 1, since 1 is the square of itself and i is not.
Two objects are ‘relatively discernible’ just in case there is a formula in two free
variables which applies to them in one order only. Moments in time are relatively
discernible since any two always satisfy the ‘earlier than’ relation in one order
only. An example of mathematical objects which are not absolutely discernible
but are relatively discernible include the points of a one-dimensional space with
an ordering relation, since, for any such pair of points x and y, if they are not
the same point then either x > yo rx < y but not both. Finally, two objects are
‘weakly discernible’ just in case there is two-place irreﬂexive relation that they
satisfy. For example, Max Black’s (1952) two spheres, which are intrinsically
identical and a mile apart in an otherwise empty space, are obviously only weakly
discernible. Clearly, fermions in entangled states like the singlet state violate both
absolute and relative discernibility, but they satisfy weak discernibility since there
is an irreﬂexive two-place relation which applies to them, namely the relation
‘is of opposite spin to’. So we can regard such entities as individuals without
violating PII, by adopting its weakest form: weak rather than strong or relative
discernibility as the necessary condition for distinct individuality. ¹⁶
Note that in the context of philosophy of mathematics, many philosophers
have followed Russell in arguing that it is incoherent to suppose there could be
individuals which don’t possess any intrinsic properties, but whose individuality
is conferred by their relations to other individuals:
[I]t is impossible that the ordinals should be, as Dedekind suggests, nothing but the terms
of such relations as constitute a progression. If they are to be anything at all, they must
be intrinsically something; they must differ from oth er entities as points from instants, or
colours from sounds. What Dedekind intended to indicate was probably a deﬁnition by
¹⁶ Elementary bosons can be in states such that two of them are not even weakly discernible, so
Saunders concludes that they are not individuals. Composite bosons cannot be in exactly the same
quantum states.

--- Page 151 ---

138 Ontic Structural Realism
means of the principle of abstraction … But a deﬁnition so made always indicates some
class of entities having … a genuine nature of their own. (Russell 1903, 249)
The argument is that without distinct individuals in the ﬁrst place, there
is nothing to stand in the asymmetric relations that are supposed to confer
individuality on the relata. Contemporary philosophers of mathematics have
been most inﬂuenced in this respect by Paul Benacerraf (1965 [1983]) who
argued that objects to be properly so called must be individuals, and that
therefore a structuralist construal of abstract objects like numbers must fail.
According to Benacerraf, an object with only a structural character could be
identiﬁed with any object in the appropriate place in any exemplary structure
and could not therefore be an individual. However, we agree with Saunders
that the weak notion of individuality (according to which weak discernibility
is all that is necessary for individuality) he advocates is perfectly coherent. It is
question-begging against the kind of structuralism we advocate to oppose it on
the grounds of a mere prejudice in favour of a stronger form of discernibility.
We note that while Saunders’s view vindicates an ontology of individuals in the
context of QM, it is a thoroughly structuralist one in so far as individuals are
nothing over and above the nexus of relations in which they stand. ¹⁷
Of course our best quantum theories are ﬁeld theories and the standard
scientiﬁc realist might be tempted to dismiss the problems of individuality
arising for many-particle QM on this basis. However, there are several problems
with this. First, as with classical mechanics, the fact that non-relativistic many-
particle QM has had enormous empirical success and is a paradigm of a good
scientiﬁc theory means that the standard scientiﬁc realist ought to be able to
say what it would be to be a realist about it; otherwise realism will only apply
to the one true theory of the world, if there is one, and, since we are clearly
not there yet, would be of no relevance to actual theories. Second, we ought
to be able to recover the concept of fundamental particles used widely by
¹⁷ Leitgeb and Ladyman (forthcoming) consider cases from graph theory that violate even
weak formulations of PII. They argue that (i) the identity or difference of places in a structure
is not to be accounted for by anything other than the structure itself and that (ii) mathematical
practice provides evidence for this view. Another philosopher who has applied graph theory to
the metaphysics of physical reality in defence of a broadly structuralist view is Dipert (1997). He
claims that the world is an asymmetric graph because he believes that facts about the numerical
identity and diversity of objects must supervene on the relational facts about each node in the
graph representing the world’s structure, whereas in symmetric graphs there are nodes that admit of
exactly the same structure descriptions. Leitgeb and Ladyman argue that the only reason to accept
such a supervenience requirement is the mistaken claim that facts about numerical identity and
diversity must be grounded somehow; instead, the idea of a structure that does admit of non-trivial
automorphism is perfectly intelligible and even suggested by mathematical practice. Whether the
empirical world has such a structure is an open question. Note that, as Leitgeb and Ladyman point
out, graph theory is apt for representing many of th e issues discussed in this chapter including the
representation of a pair of weakly indiscernible objects with the unlabelled graph consisting of two
nodes standing in an undirected relation. A further analogy is that in an unlabelled graph the nodes
can be aggregated but not enumerated like fermions (see n. 18 below).

--- Page 152 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 139
physicists and chemists from the ontology of ﬁeld theory, and so questions about
their nature remain meaningful. Third, quantum ﬁeld theories are no easier to
interpret realistically in terms of individuals than ordinary quantum theory and
raise new and equally compelling interpretative problems. Quantum ﬁelds are
very different from classical ﬁelds, for the quantum ﬁeld consists of operators
parametized with spacetime points:
These operator values associated with the space-time points are not speciﬁc values of some
physical quantity. The speciﬁc or concrete value s are, as one initially expects, the states,
or equivalently, the catalogue of probability amplitudes for all possible measurements.
( Teller 1990, 613)
Thus, the operators represent not the values of physical quantities but those
quantities themselves. Teller is clear on how the interpretative problems of
non-relativistic QM (particularly the measurement problem) are inherited by
quantum ﬁeld theories.
This leads Redhead to argue against a ‘classical-style realism of possessed
values, not against a broader realism of physical structure’ (1995, 7):
[R]ealism about what? Is it the entities, the abstract structural relations, the fundamental
laws or what? My own view is that the best candidate for what is ‘true’ about a physical
theory is the abstract structural aspect. (1995, 2)
Success requires ‘explanation with reference to validating the structural framework of
the theory’. (1995, 7)
Fourth, the problem of individuality is not solved by shifting to ﬁeld theories; if
anything it becomes more intractable. As Teller points out:
Conventional quantum mechanics seems incompatible with a classical notion of property
on which all quantities always have deﬁnite values. Quantum ﬁeld theory presents an
exactly analogous problem with saying that the number of ‘particles’ is always deﬁnite.
(1990, 594)
In quantum ﬁeld theories the state may be a superposition of different deﬁnite
particle number states. Furthermore, for a given state of the ﬁeld (how many
particles there are) is dependent on the frame of reference adopted. So particles
seem to lose their reality in the ﬁeld theoretic approach. Teller himself advocates
an interpretation in terms of ‘quanta’ which are excitations of the ﬁeld that may
be aggregated like particles (we can say there is a state with so many quanta), but
cannot be enumerated (we cannot say this is the ﬁrst, this the second, and so on);
quanta are not individuals. ¹⁸
¹⁸ Decio Krause (1992) developed a formal framework for non-individual entities based on an
extension of set theory to include sets which have a cardinality but no ordinality; sets of quanta
would have this feature. A similar project has been undertaken by Chiara et al. (1998) and her
co-workers. This kind of analysis is developed in breadth and detail in French and Krause (2006).
Lowe also thinks that fermions like electrons are countable but not individuals since there is no fact
of the matter about which is which (2003b, 78).

--- Page 153 ---

140 Ontic Structural Realism
Ernst Cassirer rejected the Aristotelian idea of individual substances on the
basis of physics, and argued that the metaphysical view of the ‘material point’ as
an individual object cannot be sustained in the context of ﬁeld theory. He offers
a structuralist conception of the ﬁeld:
The ﬁeld is not a ‘thing’, it is a system of effects ( Wirkungen), and from this system no
individual element can be isolated and retained as permanent, as being ‘identical with
itself ’ through the course of time. The individual electron no longer has any substantiality
in the sense that it per se est et per se concipitur; it ‘exists’ only in its relation to the ﬁeld, as
a ‘singular location’ in it. (1936 [1956], 178) ¹⁹
OSR agrees with Cassirer that the ﬁeld is nothing but structure. We can’t
describe its nature without recourse to the mathematical structure of ﬁeld
theory. Holger Lyre also argues for structural realism in the interpretation of
quantum ﬁeld theory. He argues that ‘the traditional picture of spatiotemporally
ﬁxed object-like entities is undermined by the ontology of gauge theories in
various ways and that main problems with traditional scientiﬁc realism … can
be softened by a commitment to the structural content of gauge theories, in
particular to gauge symmetry groups’ (2004, 666). He goes on to note that his
favoured interpretation of gauge theories (in terms of non-separable holonomies)
is one according to which the fundamental objects are ontologically secondary to
structure. ( The notion of structure he has in mind is group-theoretic structure
to which we return below.) ²⁰
In contemporary accounts, ﬁelds are local, in the sense that ﬁeld quantities are
attributed to spacetime points (or, taking into account quantum entanglement,
spacetime regions). The problem of individuality now arises again as that of
whether ﬁelds themselves are individuals or whether they are the properties
of spacetime points; this pushes the problem back to whether the spacetime
points are individuals. This latter issue is bound up with the debate about
substantivalism in the foundations of General Relativity (GR) to which we now
turn.²¹
¹⁹ This description of the ﬁeld as ‘a system of effects’ raises an analogue of the problem about
relations without relata which we discuss below, namely, how can we have an effect without a
something which is doing the effecting?
²⁰ See also Auyang (1995), who adopts a Kantian approach to quantum ﬁeld theory. According
to her, spacetime is absolute, in the sense that it is presupposed by the concept of individuals, but
is not a substance. Spatio-temporal relations are only ‘implicit’ (138), but their structure makes
‘events’ numerically distinct, so events are individuated structurally. The conceptual structure of
the world as a ﬁeld is represented by a ﬁbre bundle ( 133). Events are entities in an interacting
ﬁeld system (129) (which are identiﬁed by a parameter of the relevant base space in a ﬁbre bundle
formulation) and divided into kinds via groups (130 – 2). Auyang thinks that neither spacetime
structure, nor event structure should be given ontological priority: ‘[t]he event structure and the
spatio-temporal structure of the o bjective world emerge together’ (135).
²¹ Note that when it comes to quantum ﬁeld theory in a curved spacetime, ‘a useful particle
interpretation of states does not, in general, exist ’ (Wald 1984, 47, quoted in Stachel 2006, 58). See
also Malament (1996) and Clifton and Halvorson (2002), who show that there is a fundamental
conﬂict between relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory and th e existence of localizable particles.

--- Page 154 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 141
3.2 INDIVIDUALITY AND SPACETIME PHYSICS
In the context of GR the old debate between substantivalism and relationalism
about space must be reconstrued in terms of spacetime. ²² To a ﬁrst approxi-
mation, the former view holds that the points of the spacetime manifold exist
independently of the material contents of the universe, while the latter maintains
that spatio-temporal facts are about the relations between various elements of
the material contents of spacetime. The ma in foundational novelty of GR is that
spacetime itself is dynamical according to the theory. The state of a universe
in GR is speciﬁed by a triple <M, g, T >, where M is a differential manifold
with a topology, g is a local Minkowski metric, T is the stress-energy tensor and
encodes the distribution of matter and energy in spacetime, and where g and T
satisfy Einstein’s ﬁeld equations. The latter are preserved under all diffeomorphic
coordinate transformations (general covariance). The gravitational ﬁeld in GR is
identiﬁed with the metrical structure of spacetime.
There has been much dispute about whether GR supports relationism or
substantivalism about spacetime. The theory lacks a preferred foliation of
spacetime into space and time, and its metric and geometry are dynamical,
suggesting relationism (because if spacetime is not a ﬁxed background structure
there is less reason to think of it as a substance). On the other hand, the stress-
energy tensor T does not uniquely determine the structure of spacetime, as there
is a solution to the ﬁeld equations where the whole universe is rotating, which is
an absurdity from a Machian point of view and is suggestive of substantivalism.²³
Moreover, the theory provides for the transfer of energy from physical objects to
spacetime itself. Another problem for the relationist is that the ﬁeld equations
of GR have solutions where spacetime is entirely empty of matter. Hence, the
theory seems to imply that spacetime can exist and have properties and structure,
independently of its material contents. Furthermore, prima facie, the theory
quantiﬁes over spacetime points and predicates properties of them. Perhaps the
most compelling argument in favour of substantivalism is that spacetime in GR
is physical in the sense that it acts on matter and matter acts on it (unlike
Minkowski spacetime in Special Relativity). ²⁴
On the other hand, the main problem for substantivalism is that the general
covariance of the ﬁeld equations of GR means that any spacetime model and its
²² There is much debate about what exactly Newton and Leibniz thought, of course, and the
relationships between dynamics and geometry, and notions of absolute space and time, and ideas
about substance and ontological priority, are complex. See, for example, DiSalle (1994).
²³ See Sklar (1974).
²⁴ Harvey Brown argues that the physical relationship between spacetime structure and matter
is completely mysterious in Special Relativity. The violation of the action– reaction principle by
spacetime, because it affects matter but not vice versa, has also been invoked as a reason to be
suspicious about ontological commitment to Minkowski spac etime in Special Relativity. See Brown
and Pooley (forthcoming), Brown (2005).

--- Page 155 ---

142 Ontic Structural Realism
image under a diffeomorphism (an inﬁnitely differentiable, one-one and onto
mapping of the model to itself ) are in all observable respects equivalent to one
another; all physical properties are expressed in terms of generally covariant
relationships between geometrical objects. In other words, since the points of
spacetime are entirely indiscernible one from another, it makes no difference
if we swap their properties around so long as the overall structure remains the
same. This is made more apparent by the so-called ‘hole argument’ which shows
that if diffeomorphic models are regarded as physically distinct then there is a
breakdown of determinism:
X =< M , g, T > is a solution of GR, d:M → Mi sad i f f e o m o r p h i s m.
Then X
′ =< M, d ∗g, d ∗T > is also a solution of GR .
Let h be a hole diffeomorphism, that is h differs from the identity map inside
a region R of M, but smoothly becomes the identity at the boundary of R and
outside. There are arbitrarily many such hs for R. Hence, the state inside R
cannot be determined by the state outside R no matter how small R is, and
so determinism fails. Substantivalists cannot just bite the bullet and accept this
since, as Earman and Norton (1987) argue, the question of determinism ought
to be settled on empirical/physical grounds and not metaphysical ones.
There have been a variety of responses to this problem. Lewis (1986) and Brig-
house (1994) suggest accepting haecceitism about spacetime points, but argue
that it shouldn’t worry us that haecceitistic determinism, that is determinism
with respect to which points end up with which metrical properties, fails. Melia
(1999) also criticizes the notion of determinism employed by Earman and Nor-
ton. Nonetheless most philosophers of physics seem to have concluded that if
spacetime points do have primitive identity then the substantivalist who is com-
mitted to them must regard the failure of haecceitistic determinism as a genuine
failure of determinism. Hence, others have sought to modify the substantivalism.
It is fair to ask: if spacetime is a substance, what is the substance in question? Is
it the manifold alone, the manifold plus the metric, or the manifold, metric, and
the matter ﬁeld? ²⁵
According to manifold substantivalism, the manifold itself represents space-
time. Earman and Norton (1987) argue that manifold substantivalism is the
appropriate way to understand substantivalism in the context of GR because
it embodies the distinction between the container and the contained that they
regard as the deﬁnitive commitment of substantivalism. One way round the hole
argument for manifold substantivalists is to adopt metric essentialism, namely
the idea that the manifold M has its metrical properties essentially so that
there is no other possible world where the same points have different properties
(see Maudlin 1990). This means that the identity of each spacetime point
²⁵ This is often called super-substantivalism; see Sklar (1974).

--- Page 156 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 143
depends on its metrical properties and that general covariance fails. The problem
with this is that physicists seem to regard diffeomorphic models as equivalent.
We think the correct response to the hole argument is that recommended
by Robert DiSalle (1994). He suggests that the structure of spacetime be accepted
as existent despite its failure to supervene on the reality of spacetime points. A
similar view has been proposed by Carl Hoefer, who argues that the problems
for spacetime substantivalism turn on the ‘ascription of primitive identity to
space-time points’ (1996, 11). Hence, it seems that the insistence on interpreting
spacetime in terms of an ontology of underlying entities and their properties
is what causes the problems for realism about spacetime. This is similar to the
position developed by Stein (1968) in his famous exchange with Grünbaum,
according to which spacetime is neither a substance, or a set of relations between
substances, but a structure in its own right. It seems that the ontological
problems of QM and GR in respect of identity and individuality both demand
dissolution by OSR.
The analogy between the debate about substantivalism, and the debate about
whether quantum particles are individuals was ﬁrst explicitly made by Ladyman
(1998), but others such as Stachel (2002) and Saunders (2003c) have elaborated
it. However, Pooley (2006) argues that there is no such analogy, or at least
not a very deep one, in part because he thinks that there is no metaphysical
underdetermination in GR. According to him the standard formulations of the
theory are ontologically committed to the metric ﬁeld, and the latter is most nat-
urally interpreted as representing ‘spacetime structure’ (89). However, there is a
long-standing dispute about this between so-called ‘sophisticated substantivalists’
on the one hand (see for example, Brighouse 1994 and Butterﬁeld 1989), and
Earman and others on the other hand (see Earman and Norton 1987 and Belot
and Earman 2000, 2001). The latter maintain that the essence of relationism
is the doctrine of Leibniz equivalence according to which diffeomorphic mod-
els always represent the same physically possible situation. Hence they argue
that since sophisticated substantivalists accept Leibniz equivalence, and deny
manifold substantivalism, sophisticated substa ntivalism is a ‘pallid imitation’ of
relationism (Belot and Earman, 2001, 249). On the other hand, Pooley argues
that the only metaphysical dispute in GR concerns what he calls ‘haecceitist’
(manifold) and ‘anti-haecceitist’ (sophisticate d or metric) substantivalism, and
he argues that there is no underdetermination in relation to this issue since the
haecceitist version is plainly wrong. He argues, contrary to Belot and Earman
2000, that the substantivalist can accept that diffeomorphic models do not
describe distinct possible worlds despite differing in respect of the permutation
of spacetime points, and that to do so is not ad hoc if one supposes that the
numerical distinctness of the individual points is grounded in their positions
in a structure (Pooley 2006, 103). On this view, in so far as there are points
in GR, they are the members of equivalence classes under the diffeomorphism
group.

--- Page 157 ---

144 Ontic Structural Realism
Pooley argues that the permutation invariance that underlies the problems of
individuality in QM is very different from the diffeomorphism invariance of GR,
because the latter case concerns a symmetry of the theory, whereas the former
case concerns symmetries of solutions of the theory as well as the theory itself.
He is surely right that there are considerable formal differences between the two
cases. However, for our purposes these are less important than the fact that both
QM and GR give us every reason to believe that the realists must interpret the
theories as describing entities whose identity and individuality are secondary to
the relational structure in which they are embedded.
Mauro Dorato is also a structuralist about spacetime: ‘To say that spacetime
exists just means that the physical world exempliﬁes, or instantiates, a web
of spatiotemporal relations that are described mathematically’ (2000, 7). He
thinks that spacetime has objective existence, but not as a substance, and that
a structuralist form of realism about spacetime avoids the problems facing
substantivalism and captures all the features that make relationism so attractive.
However, Dorato insists that, ‘to the extent that real relations, as it is plausible,
presuppose the existence of relata, then spatiotemporal relations presuppose physical
systems and events’ (2000, 7; his emphasis). Dorato thinks that we may avoid the
supervenience of such relations on their relata by adopting a form of Armstrong’s
bundle theory of individuals, but it is not clear whether such a move eliminates
all non-structural elements. Indeed, he earlier remarks that ‘ spacetime points can
only be identiﬁed by the relational st ructure provided by the gravitational ﬁeld ’
(2000, 3; his emphasis). This, of course, throws the issue back to the ﬁeld, and
Dorato agrees with Cao in his review of the latter’s book (Dorato 1999) that
the existence of spatio-temporal relations must be underpinned by the existence
of the gravitational ﬁeld, understood as a ‘concrete’ and hence, presumably,
non-structural, entity.²⁶
However, there is some ambiguity here. Dorato identiﬁes Cao as an ontic
structural realist, because the latter denies that the structures postulated by ﬁeld
theories must be ‘ontologically supported by unobservable entities’ (Cao 1997,
5). Dorato writes that, according to Cao,
while structural relations are real in the sense that they are testable, the concept of
unobservable entities that are involved in the structural relations always has some
conventional element, and the reality of the enti ties is constituted by, or derived from,
more and more relations in which they are involved. (2000, 3)
²⁶ Dorato gives a version of the Redhead argument here which we discuss below. He says, ‘I don’t
know how one can attribute existence as a set of relations in an observable or unobservable domain
without also requiring that these relations be exempliﬁed by non-abstract relata,n a m e l yt h eﬁ e l d
itself, to be regarded as a new type of substance, radically different from the traditional, Aristotelian
ousia’ (Dorato 1999, 3; his emphasis). That Dorato is inclined towards a form of epistemic structural
realism is clear from his insistence that, although we often identify physical entities via their relations,
‘epistemic strategies for identiﬁcations should no t be exchanged for ontological claims’ (1999, 3).
Dorato argues that structural realism needs entity realism to be plausible (1999, 4).

--- Page 158 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 145
Dorato comments that, ‘[i]n this respect, entities postulated by physical theories
are to be regarded as a web of relations, not presupposing substance-like entities
or ‘‘hangers’’ in which they inhere’ (2000, 3). This is once again reminiscent of
Cassirer who said: ‘To such a point also no being in itself can be ascribed; it
is constituted by a deﬁnite aggregate of relations and consists in this aggregate’
(1936, 195).²⁷
3.3 OBJECTIVITY AND INVARIANCE
Given that we have argued that relational structure is more ontologically
fundamental than objects we need to say something about how objects ought to
be regarded. In the next chapter we will offer a positive account of ‘real patterns’
that accounts for commitment to objects in the generalizations of the special
sciences. When it comes to fundamental physics, objects are very often identiﬁed
via group theoretic structure. Hence, Eddington says: ‘What sort of thing is
it that I know? The answer is structure. To be quite precise it is structure of
the kind deﬁned and investigated in the mathematical theory of groups’ (1939,
147). Group theory was ﬁrst developed to describe symmetry. A symmetry is a
transformation of some structure or object which leaves it unchanged in some
respect. A group of symmetry transformations is a mathematical object which
consists of the set of transformations, including the identity transformation and
the inverse of each transformation, and the operation of composing them, where
the result of two composed transformations is itself in the original set. Objects can
be identiﬁed in terms of which symmetry transformations leave them unchanged
or invariant.²⁸
For example, one of the most fundamental distinctions between kinds of
particles is that between fermions and bosons. This was described group theo-
retically by Weyl and Wigner in terms of the group of permutations, and the
former’s approach to relativity theory was similarly group-theoretic. ²⁹In the case
of QM, Weyl asserts that: ‘All quantum numbers, with the exception of the
so-called principal quantum number, are indices characterizing representations
of groups’ (1931, xxi). The central point of philosophical relevance here is
that the mathematical idea of invari ance is taken by Weyl to characterize the
²⁷ Esfeld and Lam (forthcoming) argue for structural realism about spacetime, as does Bain
(2003): ‘Conformal structure, for instance, can be realized on many different types of ‘‘individuals’’:
manifold points, twisters or multivectors … What is real, the spacetime structuralist will claim, is
the structure itself and not the manner in w hich alternative formalisms instantiate it’ (25).
²⁸ The history of symmetries in science is discussed in Mainzer (1996).
²⁹ See Ryckman (2005) for a beautiful account of the history of relativity theory and Weyl’s
role in it. Ryckman argues that the work of Eddington and Weyl was profoundly inﬂuenced by
the phenomenology of Husserl. The latter seems to have understood objectivity in terms of in-
variance.

--- Page 159 ---

146 Ontic Structural Realism
notion of objectivity.³⁰ It is this that liberates physics from the parochial con-
ﬁnes of a particular coordinate system. For Weyl appearances are open only to
intuition (in the Kantian sense of subjective perception) and therefore agreement
is obtained by giving objective status only to those relations that are invariant
under particular transformations. What is particularly striking is the way that
Weyl uses the insights gathered from his work on transformations and invariants
in relativity theory to make his crucial contribution to the development of QM.
The choice of the momentum space representation of Schrödinger amounts to
the choice of a coordinate system. Weyl saw immediately that the proto-theories
of Schrödinger and Heisenberg had fundamental mathematical similarities. He
therefore took them to be in all important respects different versions of the same
theory:
[T]he essence of the new Heisenberg-Schrödinger-Dirac quantum mechanics is to be
found in the fact that there is associated with each physical system a set of quantities,
constituting a non-commutative algebra in the technical mathematical sense, the elements
of which are the physical quantities themselves. (Weyl 1931, viii)
Weyl here anticipates von Neumann’s uniﬁcation of the theories in his classic
text on QM, and indeed Dirac in his book on the theory cites Weyl as the only
previous author to employ the same ‘symbolic method’ for the presentation of
the theory as he does himself. This method according to Dirac ‘deals directly in
an abstract way with the quantities of funda mental importance (the invariants
etc., of the transformations)’ and therefore it goes ‘more deeply into the nature
of things’ (1930, viii). Dirac uses vectors, and not rays in Hilbert space like Weyl
and von Neumann, in his treatment of QM, but both he and Weyl recognized
that the mathematical status of the two rival theories of QM as alternative
representations of the same mathematical structure makes preference for either
eliminable once a uniﬁed framework is available. ³¹
The idea then is that we have various representations of some physical structure
which may be transformed or translated into one another, and then we have an
invariant state under such transformations which represents the objective state
of affairs. Representations are extraneous to physical states but they allow our
empirical knowledge of them. Objects are picked out by the identiﬁcation of
³⁰ Weyl’s views have recently been revived by Sunny Auyang (1995) in an explicitly neo-Kantian
project which attempts to solve the problem of objectivity in QM. Auyang seeks to extract the
‘primitive conceptual structure’ in physical theories and she too ﬁnds it in what she calls the
‘representation-transformation-invariant structure’. This is essentially group-theoretic structure.
Auyang, like Born and Weyl, thinks that such invariant structure under transformations is what
separates an objective state of affairs from its various representations, or manifestations to observers
under different perceptual conditions.
³¹ It may not have been until the empirical success resulting from Dirac’s relativistic theory of
the electron, which was based on the underlying group structure, that it was widely acknowledged
by physicists that the abstract structure of a group is of greater signiﬁcance than particular
representations of it. Indeed, in the early days of QM Weyl reports that some talked of eliminating
the ‘group pest’ (Weyl 1931, x).

--- Page 160 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 147
invariants with respect to the transformations relevant to the context. Thus, on
this view, elementary particles are hypostatizations of sets of quantities that are
invariant under the symmetry groups of particle physics. When we move to gauge
quantum ﬁeld theories, group theory is even more important as each theory is
associated with a different symmetry group, and the uniﬁcation of theories was
achieved by looking for theories with the relevant combined symmetry. (For
example, U(1) for QED, SU(2) for the theory of the weak interaction, and
SU(2) × U(1) for the uniﬁed electroweak theory.) Here is Lyre again: ‘a group
theoretic deﬁnition of an object takes the group structure as primarily given,
group representations are then constructed from this structure and have a mere
derivative status’ (2004, 663). He goes on to note that the objects of a theory are
members of equivalence classes under symmetry transformations and no further
individuation of objects is possible. Similarly, Kantorovich (2003) argues that
the symmetries of the strong force discovered in the 1960s are ontologically prior
to the particles that feel that force, namely the hadrons, and likewise for the
symmetries of the so-called ‘grand uniﬁcation’ of particle physics in the standard
model.³²
The founders of structuralism shared an appreciation of the importance of
group theory in the ontology of physics. Ernst Cassirer held that the possibility
of talking of ‘objects’ in a context is the possibility of individuating invariants
(1944). Similarly, Max Born says: ‘Invariants are the concepts of which science
speaks in the same way as ordinary language speaks of ‘‘things’’, and which it
provides with names as if they were ordinary things’ (1953, 149), and: ‘The
feature which suggests reality is always some kind of invariance of a structure
independent of the aspect, the projection’ (149). He goes so far as to say: ‘I think
the idea of invariant is the clue to a relational concept of reality, not only in
physics but in every aspect of the world’ (144). ³³
Consider the following remark by Howard Stein:
if one examines carefully how phenomena are ‘represented’ by the quantum theory … then
… interpretation in terms of ‘entities’ and ‘attri butes’ can be seen to be highly dubious … I
think the live problems concern the relation of the Forms … to phenomena, rather than
the relation of (putative) attributes to (putative) entities … (1989, 59)
The forms in question are given in part by the invariance structure of theories. ³⁴
³² Although he does not cite French and Ladyman, Kantorovich does refer to van Fraassen’s
(2006) discussion of ‘radical structuralism’ (which is the latter’s name for OSR) as closest to his
own view.
³³ This undercuts Putnam’s paradox: objects are given only up to isomorphism.
³⁴ The importance of group theory in the development of structuralism deserves further
historical analysis. It played a crucial role in epistemological reﬂections on geometry in relation
to Klein’s Erlanger programme (Birkhoff and Bennett 1988). See French (1998, 1999, 2000)
and Castellani (1998) who have explored the onto logical representation of the fundamental objects
of physics in terms of sets of group-theoretic i nvariants by Weyl, Wigner, Piron, Jauch, and
others.

--- Page 161 ---

148 Ontic Structural Realism
3.4 THE METAPHYSICS OF RELATIONS
To be an alternative to both traditional realism and constructive empiricism,
structural realism must incorporate ontological commitment to more than the
empirical content of a scientiﬁc theory, namely to the ‘structure’ of the theory.
We have argued that relational structure is ontologically subsistent, and that
individual objects are not. However, the idea that there could be relations
which do not supervene on the properties of their relata runs counter to a
deeply entrenched way of thinking. The standard conception of structure is
either set-theoretic or logical. Either way it is assumed that a structure is
fundamentally composed of individuals and their intrinsic properties, on which
relational structure supervenes. The view that this conceptual structure reﬂects
the structure of the world is called ‘particularism’ by Teller (1989) and ‘exclusive
monadism’ by Dipert (1997).³⁵It has been and is endorsed by many philosophers,
including, for example, Aristotle and Leibniz.
In particular, consider the doctrine that David Lewis calls Humean superve-
nience:
[A]ll there is to the world is a vast mosaic of local matters of particular fact, just one
little thing and then another … We have geometry: a system of external relations of
spatio-temporal distance between points (of spacetime, point matter, aether or ﬁelds or
both). And at these points we have local qualities: perfectly natural intrinsic properties
which need nothing bigger than a point at which to be instantiated … All else supervenes
on that. (1986, x)
Recall that intrinsic properties are those which may be possessed by something
independently of whether or not there are other entities, such as charge, mass,
and so on. Extrinsic properties are non-intrinsic properties, such as being
north-east of Bristol. By ‘all else’ Lewis means all truths of causation, laws,
and identity over time. He argues that all that exists, according to physics, is
a web of intrinsic properties of objects and spatio-temporal relations, extrinsic
properties are determined by that. There are no abstract entities nor any necessary
connections. ‘[A]ll the facts there are about the world are particular facts, or
combinations thereof ’ (ibid. 111). Lewis argues that Humean supervenience is
only contingently true, and that: ‘If physics itself were to teach me that it is false,
I wouldn’t grieve’ (ibid. xi).
Indeed, it is surely natural science, and in particular mechanistic materialism,
that has inspired the addition of Humean supervenience to particularism.
Although Lewis considers that QM may indeed teach that Humean supervenience
is false, this is a lesson he refuses to learn, on the grounds that QM is ‘imbued
³⁵ Dipert argues for a structuralist metaphysics in te rms of the theory of graphs. It is noteworthy
that some research in quantum gravity makes use of graph theory and cognate mathematics.

--- Page 162 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 149
with instrumentalist frivolity’, ‘double thinking deviant logic’ and ‘supernatural
tales’ (ibid.). Yet if we are to be scientiﬁc realists (as Lewis would claim) we
should surely have our metaphysics informed by our best physics, and we can
hardly object that we will only do this if the deliverances of physics coincide with
our prejudices. The interpretation of quantum theory may well be fraught with
difﬁculty but the theory has produced many novel predictions and has been well
conﬁrmed to an unprecedented degree of precision. ³⁶We have already explained
how quantum theory challenges the assumption that the entities which physics
describes are individuals. We now turn to what it has to tell us about the ontology
of relations, and in particular, about whether relations are supervenient on the
properties of their relata as Humean supervenience requires.
If two electrons are in a joint state that is ‘entangled’ (like the singlet state)
then according to QM they do not have any non-relational state-dependent
properties. Paul Teller proposes the existence of ‘non-supervenient relations’
(see, for example, 1989), that is, relations that do not supervene on the monadic
properties of their relata, in the interpretation of entangled states in QM. On this
view, facts about relations must be understood as irreducible to facts about the
non-relational properties of individuals; hence this is opposed to particularism
as deﬁned above. As mentioned previously, these relations are part of a classical
ontology of individuals in Teller’s picture. However, it is worth investigating
the nature of these non-supervenient relations in order to appreciate how QM
challenges classical intuitions about ontology, like those which motivate Lewis’s
notion of Humean supervenience. ³⁷
Jeremy Butterﬁeld (1992) has argued that non-supervenient relations are
equivalent to what Lewis (1986) calls ‘external relations’. According to Lewis, an
internal relation is one which supervenes on the intrinsic properties of its relata,
in the sense that there can be no difference in the relations between them without
a difference in their intrinsic properties. For example, if two objects are related
by ‘bigger than’, then this relation supervenes on the sizes of the two objects.
On the other hand, an external relation is one which fails to supervene on the
intrinsic properties of its relata, but does supervene on the intrinsic properties of
their ‘composite’. The example Lewis gives is of the spatial separation of a proton
and an electron orbiting it (a hydrogen atom), where this system is understood
classically as if it were like the Moon orbiting the Earth. This relation will not
³⁶ We could read Lewis as saying that he won’t take ontological lessons from QM until there
is a satisfactory resolution of the measurement problem, but Bell’s theorem tells us that any such
resolution must do violence to at least part of Lewis’s metaphysical picture. As we pointed out in
1.2.3, Bell’s theorem is not about QM, but rather reveals constraints on any empirically adequate
successor to QM. Entanglement, as identiﬁed with the violation of Bell inequalities, is an empirical
discovery not a theoretical posit. Lewis later engaged with QM in more depth, but his earlier work is
what has been most inﬂuential. Note, while recalling our invective about domesticating metaphysics
in 1.1, that his preferred solution to the measurement problem is the one that he ﬁnds to be ‘a
comfortable and plausible way for nature to work’ (2004, 10).
³⁷ Michel Bitbol (forthcoming) points out that Kant called such relations ‘ungrounded relations’.

--- Page 163 ---

150 Ontic Structural Realism
supervene on the intrinsic properties of the relata (since their duplicates could be
further apart). Lewis then seems simply to deﬁne the composite of the electron
and nucleus as the two of them with their spatio-temporal properties, so that
their spatial separation does supervene on them taken together. The composite
cannot be just the set of the two of them (62). ³⁸
All the external relations that we can think of are such spatial or spatio-temporal
relations. Consider the relation of ‘being each others’ mirror image’. Does this
supervene on the properties of the composite of two objects? If we suppose that
it picks up all the spatio-temporal relations of the objects then it would seem so.
The same presumably goes for the relation of ‘being inside of ’. However, notice
that such relations also supervene on the intrinsic and relational properties that
each element of the composite has independently of the whole or the other part.
So if a book is inside a bag we can imagine that this relation consists in nothing
more than the positions of the two objects relative to everything else there is in
the world. Similarly, the spatial separation of the electron and its proton (or the
Moon and the Earth) supervenes on the relational, in particular, spatial properties
each object has quite independently of the other or of the composite as a whole
(the position of each relative to the Sun, say). The existence of such relations does
not trouble Lewis because it does not threaten Humean supervenience, which
is fundamentally the thought that there are no necessary connections between
distinct existences. Spatio-temporal relations may not supervene on intrinsic
properties but they do supervene on relational properties of the relata that are
mutually independent.
The entangled states of QM do not supervene on the intrinsic properties
of their relata, because in an entangled state with respect to some observable
each particle has no state of its own with respect to that observable but rather
enters into a product state. The only intrinsic properties that an entity in an
entangled state has that are independent of the other entities in that state
are its state-independent properties such as charge, mass, and so on, and in
general, its relational properties depend on the other entities to which it is
related. Hence, unlike external relations, the non-supervenient relations into
which several quantum particles may enter are not even supervenient on the
relational properties which their relata possess independently of each other. They
are much more independent of the properties of the individual particles than
spatio-temporal relations between classical objects. This would seem to refute
Humean supervenience in so far as the doctrine is supposed to be inspired by
science as Lewis claims. ³⁹
³⁸ Recall the discussion of the met aphysical notion of composition in 1.2.3.
³⁹ Carol Cleland (1984) introduced a distinction between a weakly non-supervenient relation,
where the relation is not determined by non-relational attributes of the relata, but the latter are
possessed by the relata, and a strongly non-supervenient relation, where the relata lack any relevant
non-relational attributes altogether. French ( 1989) argues that entangled states are strongly non-
supervenient. See also Esfeld (2004), who agrees that pointing to the existence of non-supervenient

--- Page 164 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 151
To recap, standard metaphysics assumes that:
(i) There are individuals in spacetime whose existence is independent of each
other.⁴⁰ Facts about the identity and diversity of these individuals are
determined independently of their relations to each other. ⁴¹
(ii) Each has some properties that are intrinsic to it.
(iii) The relations between individuals other than their spatio-temporal relations
supervene on the intrinsic properties of the relata (Humean supervenience).
(iv) PII is true, so there are some properties (perhaps including spatio-temporal
properties) that distinguish each thing from every other thing, and the
identity and individuality of physical objects can be accounted for in purely
qualitative terms.
We have argued against all these theses (except (iv) suitably modiﬁed). Both QM
and relativity theory teach us that the n ature of space, time, and matter raises
profound challenges for a metaphysics that describes the world as composed of
self-subsistent individuals. In so far as quantum particles and spacetime points
are individuals, facts about their identity and diversity are not intrinsic to them
but rather are determined by the relational structures into which they enter. We
have argued that entanglement as described by QM teaches us that Humean
supervenience is false, and that all the properties of fundamental physics seem to
be extrinsic to individual objects. ⁴² Finally, PII is true only in its weakest form
when applied to fermions, and even so, Leitgeb and Ladyman (forthcoming)
note that there is nothing to rule out the possibility that the identity and diversity
of individuals in a structure is a primitive feature of the structure as a whole that
is not accounted for by any other facts about it.
John Stachel (2006), reviewing the discussion of the relative ontological
priority of relations and things, identiﬁes four views:
(I) There are only relations, and no relata.
(II) There are relations in which the things are primary, and their relations are
secondary.
relations is insufﬁcient to capture quantum entanglement because the failure of supervenience is
different from the failure of spatio-temporal relations to supervene on the intrinsic properties of
their relata.
⁴⁰ Einstein in a letter to Max Born (1971, 170–1; quoted in Hagar 2005, 757 and Maudlin
2002a, 48) says that the idea of independently existing objects comes from ‘everyday thinking’.
He also regards it as a necessary presupposition of physics. Subsequent developments seem to have
proved him wrong in this second speculation.
⁴¹ Recall from 1.2.1 Lowe’s claim: ‘Certainly, it seems that any satisfactory ontology will
have to include self-individuating elements, the only question being which entities have this
status —space-time points, bare particulars, tropes, and individual substances all being among the
possible candidates’ (2003b, 93)
⁴² Weyl says that it has been assumed that descriptions of relations between particles refer to the
intrinsic attributes of things in themselves, but that ‘in quantum theory we are confronted with a
fundamental limitation to this me taphysical standpoint’ (1931, 76).

--- Page 165 ---

152 Ontic Structural Realism
(III) There are relations in which the relation is primary, while the things are
secondary.
(IV) There are things, such that any relation between them is only apparent.
OSR is construed as either (I) or (III). (I) seems to be incoherent, because:
(a) The Earth is bigger than the Moon.
(b) (a) asserts that there is a certain relation between the Earth and the Moon.
The best sense that can be made of the idea of a relation without relata is the
idea of a universal. For example, when we refer to the relation referred to by
‘larger than’, it is because we have an interest in its formal properties that are
independent of the contingencies of their instantiation. To say that all that there
is are relations and no relata, is therefore to follow Plato and say that the world
of appearances is illusory.
However, Stachel points out that (I) can be read as asserting that, while
there are relata, they can be analysed into further relational structure themselves.
(I) means therefore that ‘it’s relations all the way down’. ⁴³
Michael Esfeld (2004) is clear in his rejection of (I) and claims that:
(a) Relations require relata.
But he denies that:
(b) These things must have intrinsic properties over and above the relations in
which they stand.⁴⁴
Esfeld also rejects (III) and (like Pooley) seems to hold:
(V) There are things and relations but neither is primary or secondary.
However, it is not clear whether this is consistent with Esfeld’s avowed determi-
nation to make his metaphysics empirically motivated, because, as discussed in
3.1, Saunders (2003a, 2003b, and 2006) shows that, because fermions satisfy PII
formulated in terms of weak discernibility, it is possible to regard all facts about
the identity and diversity of them as supervenient on facts about the relations
into which they enter, suggesting at least that relations are primary to things.
⁴³ Cf. Saunders (2003d, 129). Stachel denies that there is any reason to think (I) holds in
general. We disagree and maintain that contemporary physics gives us good reason to expect that
(I) is correct. (We return to this issue in 3.7.3 .) Note that Stachel is not pursuing the kind of
unifying metaphysics in which we are engaged here, but rather a case by case description.
⁴⁴ This is slightly misleading since the particles in entangled states still have their intrinsic
essential or state-independent properties. Esfeld’s point is surely that quantum particles need not
have any intrinsic properties relevant to the relation in question. What is important is that even
if the state-independent properties of QM are genuinely intrinsic rather than emergent from some
further structure (and that seems unlikely), the fact that particles in entangled states may have all
the same properties and relations as each other means that they cannot be individuated by such
intrinsic properties.

--- Page 166 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 153
In any case, disagreements among structuralists aside, none of the philosophers
we have been discussing afﬁrm (II) or (IV), or the existence of self-subsistent
individual things. Saunders clearly agrees with Esfeld that fermions are not
self-subsistent because they are the individuals that they are only given the
relations that obtain among them. There is nothing to ground their individuality
other than the relations into which they enter. The individuality of quantum
particles is ontologically on a par with (V), or secondary to (III), the relational
structure of which they are parts. (In Einstein’s terms, particles do not have
their own ‘being thus’.) Stachel (III) and says that in so far as the entities
of modern physics have individuality they ‘inherit it from the structure of
relations in which they are enmeshed’ (2006, 58). Tim Maudlin argues that this
means the end of ontological reductionism, and abandoning the combinatorial
conception of reality that comes from thinking of the world as made of
building blocks, each of which exists independently of the others (1998, 59).
As he says, and contrary to what Lewis thinks, ‘The world is not just a set
of separately existing localized objects, externally related only by space and
time’ (60).
There is thus growing convergence among philosophers of physics that
physics motivates abandonment of a met aphysics that posits fundamental self-
subsistent individuals. Since this is essentially a negative point, it might seem
to be grist to the mill of the constructive empiricist. After all, according to
van Fraassen, the opposition between constructive empiricism and standard
scientiﬁc realism is really that between empiricism and metaphysics, so every
retreat from a metaphysical commitment found to be unmotivated by empirical
phenomena constitutes a local victory for constructive empiricism. Howev-
er, we argued in the previous chapter that even the constructive empiricist
cannot do without some metaphysics, in particular, without a commitment
t oo b j e c t i v em o d a lr e l a t i o n s .W ea r g u e di nC h a p t e r2t h a ti ti sj u s ts u c h
a commitment that structural realism needs in order to avoid regarding the
success of scientiﬁc induction as miraculous. If science tells us about object-
ive modal relations among the phenomena (both possible and actual), then
occasional novel predictive success is not miraculous but to be expected. Fur-
thermore, the fact that scientiﬁc theories support counterfactual conditionals
is also explained. Provision of these explanations is not a matter of satisfying
philosophical intuitions, but of unifying scientiﬁc practices and theories. We
thus suggest that in addition to the negative thesis that physical theory should
not be interpreted in terms of underlying objects and properties of which the
world is made, we are motivated in accordance with the PNC to take seriously
the positive thesis that the world is structure and relations. Individual things
are locally focused abstractions from modal structure. By modal structure we
mean the relationships among phenomena (tracked or located, for reasons and
according to principles we will discuss in Chapter 4, as things, properties,

--- Page 167 ---

154 Ontic Structural Realism
events, and processes) that pertain to necessity, possibility, potentiality, and
probability.⁴⁵
Of course, all the considerations from physics to which we have appealed do
not logically compel us to abandon the idea of a world of distinct ontologically
subsistent individuals with intrinsic properties. As we noted, the identity and
individuality of quantum particles could be grounded in each having a primitive
thisness, and the same could be true of spacetime points. What we can establish
is that physics tells us that certain aspects of such a world would be unknowable.
Recall from Chapter 2 that Rae Langton calls accepting this limitation ‘Kantian
Humility’ (1998), while Lewis (forthcoming) speaks of ‘Ramseyan humility’, and
Frank Jackson accepts that ‘we know next to nothing about the intrinsic nature
of the world. We know only its causal cum relational nature’ (1998, 24). Peter
Unger (2001) also argues that our knowledge of the world is purely structural
and that qualia are the unknowable non-structural components of reality. On
our view, things in themselves and qualia are idle wheels in metaphysics and
the PPC imposes a moratorium on such purely speculative philosophical toys.
Like Esfeld (2004, 614–16), we take it that such a gap between epistemology and
metaphysics is unacceptable. Given that there is no a priori way of demonstrating
that the world must be composed of individuals with intrinsic natures, and given
that our best physics puts severe pressure on such a view, the PNC dictates that
we reject the idea altogether.
3.5 OBJECTIONS TO ONTIC STRUCTURALISM
(1) Relations are impossible without relata.
This objection has been made by various philosophers including Redhead
(personal communication), Psillos (2001), Morganti (2004), and Chakravartty
(1998) who says: ‘one cannot intelligibly subscribe to the reality of relations
unless one is also committed to the fact that some things are related’ (ibid.
399). In other words, the question is, how can you have structure without
(non-structural) objects, or, in particular, how can we talk about a group without
talking about the elements of a group? Even many of those sympathetic to the
OSR of French and Ladyman have objected that they cannot make sense of the
idea of relations without relata (see, for example, Esfeld 2004, Lyre 2004, and
Stachel 2006).
This objection has no force against the view propounded in this chapter.
As French and Ladyman emphasize, the claim that relata are constructed as
abstractions from relations doesn’t imply that there are no relata; rather the
⁴⁵ The structure of dispositions described by Mumford (2004) and Psillos’s (forthcoming) idea
of nomological structure are cognate.

--- Page 168 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 155
opposite. A core aspect of the claim that relations are logically prior to relata
is that the relata of a given relation always turn out to be relational structures
themselves on further analysis. ⁴⁶ I tm a yb ea r g u e dt h a ti ti si m p o s s i b l et o
conceive of relational structures without making models of them on domains
of individuals. For example, although GR only ever licences us to make claims
about an equivalence class of models under the diffeomorphism group, in practice
physicists always work within some model or other. Speculating cautiously about
psychology, it is possible that dividing a domain up into objects is the only way
we can think about it. Certainly, the s tructuralist faces a challenge in articulating
her views to contemporary philosophers schooled in modern logic and set
theory, which retains the classical framework of individual objects represented
by variables subject to predication or membership respectively. In lieu of a
more appropriate framework for structuralist metaphysics, one has to resort to
treating the logical variables and constants as mere placeholders which are used
for the deﬁnition and description of the relevant relations even though it is the
latter that bear all the ontological weight. The same approach is followed in the
interpretation of physics: we see, on a scintillation screen, for example, bright
ﬂashes of light—individual ﬂashes. On the basis of such observable phenomena
we then try to carry over our metaphysics of individuality which is appropriate
for the classical domain, and quantum particles are classiﬁed via the permutation
group which imposes the division into the natural kinds of fermions and bosons.
However, in the light of the above discussion we maintain that the elements
themselves, regarded as individuals, have only a heuristic role (see French 1999).
Poincaré adopted a very similar approach in a paper of 1898. ⁴⁷He defends a
group-theoretic approach to geometry and in response to the objection that in
order to study the group it needs to be constructed and cannot be constructed
without matter, he says ‘the gross matter which is furnished us by our sensations
was but a crutch for our inﬁrmity’ (1898, 41), which serves only to focus our
attention upon the structure of the group. ⁴⁸We may not be able to think about
structure without hypostatizing individuals as the bearers of structure, but it does
not follow that the latter are ontologically fundamental.
Some of the critics cited above object that OSR is not ‘worked out’ as
metaphysics.⁴⁹However, it is far from clear that OSR’s rivals are ‘worked out’ in
any sense that OSR isn’t. There in no general agreement among philosophers that
any of the metaphysical theories of, say, universals is adequate. We ask the reader
to consider whether the main metaphysical idea we propose, of existent structures
that are not composed out of more basic entities, is any more obscure or bizarre
than the instantiation relation in the theory of universals. We think it better
⁴⁶ An example from pure mathematics is that of the open s et, which is a brute object in algebraic
topology, but a relational structure in analysis.
⁴⁷ This example is due to Mary Domski (1999).
⁴⁸ Poincaré understands group structure in Kantian terms as a pure form of the understanding.
⁴⁹ See for example Psillos (2001).

--- Page 169 ---

156 Ontic Structural Realism
to attempt to develop the metaphysics presented in this book than to continue
to use off-the-shelf metaphysical categories inherited from the ancient Greeks
that are simply not appropriate for contemporary science or mathematics. ⁵⁰We
might as well just put it thus: we really mean what the PNC says.
(2) Structural realism collapses into standard realism.
Psillos (1995) claims that structural realism presupposes distinctions between
the form and content of a theory, or between our ability to know the structure and
our ability to know the nature of the world.⁵¹The (sensible) realist will not accept
these distinctions, according to Psillos. He argues that one success of the scientiﬁc
revolution was the banishing of mysterious forms and substances that might not
be fully describable in structural terms, and the consequent concentration of the
mechanical philosophers on quantitative descriptions of the properties of things.
For Psillos, properties in mature science are deﬁned by the laws in which they
feature: the nature of something consists in its basic properties, and the equations
expressing the laws these obey.
Similarly, Ernan McMullin, in his paper ‘A Case for Scientiﬁc Realism’, says:
‘What are electrons? Just what the theory of electrons says they are, no more, no less,
always allowing for the likelihood that the theory is open to further reﬁnement’
(1985, 15).
We have a theory of electrons that describes their behaviour in terms of the laws,
interactions, and so on, to which they are subject. This description, which may
be termed a structural one, gives us the last word on electrons, says the realist.
This is what Psillos means when he says that ‘the nature and the structure of a
physical entity form a continuum’ (1995). Hence, for Psillos, structural realism
cannot be distinguished from traditional realism without a dubious distinction
between structure and nature. ⁵²
So it seems the realist can claim that structural realism is no different
from scientiﬁc realism in so far as it advises a structural understanding of
theoretical entities, because ‘restriction of belief to structural claims is in fact no
restriction at all’ (Papineau 1996, 12). Thus construed, it gains no advantage
over traditional realism with the problem of theory change because it fails to
make any distinction between parts of theories that should and shouldn’t provoke
ontological commitment. Realists may well think that all their knowledge of the
⁵⁰ Structuralism of a certain kind has become popular in metaphysics recently in the form
of causal essentialism. This is the doctrine that the causal relations that properties bear to other
properties exhaust their natures. See for example, Shoemaker (1980), and also Mumford (2004),
who adopts a structural theory of properties, an d Bird (2007) whose theory of dispositions is in
some ways structuralist. Harte (2002) discusses an interesting Platonic form structuralism.
⁵¹ Stanford (2003, 570) also argues that we cannot distinguish the structural claims of theories
from their claims about content or natures.
⁵² This is just the complaint of Braithwaite against Eddington’s structuralism (Braithwaite
1940, 463).

--- Page 170 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 157
unobservable is structural, whether they explicate this in the Ramsey way or not,
but this will not help them with ontological discontinuity.
In reply, ﬁrst consider the claim that the understanding of ‘natures’ in terms of
forms, substances, and the likes was overthrown by the scientiﬁc revolution. How
was the ‘nature’ of atoms understood? Atoms were understood as individuals.
Boltzmann incorporated such an understanding of the nature of atoms in terms of
their individuality into Axiom I of his mechanics. Second, the above discussion of
individuality with respect to entities in physics, and the metaphysics of relations
makes it clear that standard scientiﬁc rea lism has been saddled with traditional
metaphysics.
(3) Structural realism might be right for physics but not for the rest of science.
Gower (2000) is one of those who makes the point that structural realism
seems less natural a position when applied to theories from outside of physics.
We agree that this is a feature of science that requires (metaphysical) explanation;
in Chapters 4 and 5 we will provide this. In those chapters we will show how
structural realism about special sciences is necessary if one is to avoid ascribing
a different level of ontological seriousness to them than one ascribes to physics.
Scientists don’t observe any such asymmetry, so this conclusion must be avoided
by the naturalist as being inconsistent with the PNC.
(4) Isn’t structure also lost in theory change?
Stanford (2003, 570–2) argues that mathematical structure is often lost in
theory change, as does Otavio Bueno (in private discussion). This is an important
point. However, the problem is surely not analogous to the one the realist faces
with respect to ontological discontinuity. The realist is claiming that we ought to
believe what our best scientiﬁc theories say about the furniture of the world in the
face of the fact that we have inductive grounds for believing this will be radically
revised, whereas the structural realist is only claiming that theories represent
the relations among, or structure of, the phenomena and in most scientiﬁc
revolutions the empirical content of the old theory is recovered as a limiting case
of the new theory. As Post claimed, there simply are no ‘Kuhn-losses’, in the sense
of successor theories losing all or part of the well-conﬁrmed empirical structures
of their predecessors (1971, 229). In sum, we know that well-conﬁrmed relations
among phenomena must be retained by future theories.
(5) If there is no non-structure, there is no structure either.
In a paper delivered in Leiden in 1999, van Fraassen argues that the heart of
the problem with our kind of radical structuralism is this:
It must imply: what has looked like the structure of something with unknown qualitative
features is actually all there is to nature. But with this, the contrast between structure and
what is not structure has disappeared. Thus, from the point of view of one who adopts
this position, any difference between it and ‘ordinary’ scientiﬁc realism also disappears.

--- Page 171 ---

158 Ontic Structural Realism
It seems then that, once adopted, it is not to be called structuralism at all! For if there is
no non-structure, there is no structure either. But for those who do not adopt the view,
it remains startling: from an ext ernal or prior point of view, it seems to tell us that nature
needs to be entirely re-conceived. (van Fraassen 2006, 292–3)
The essence of van Fraassen’s objection here is that the difference between
mathematical (uninstantiated) structure and physical (instantiated) structure
cannot itself be explained in purely structural terms. ⁵³
Van Fraassen (2006, 293–4) reiterates the point in the context of Fock space
formalism used in quantum ﬁeld theory: all that there is cannot merely be the
structure of this space, he insists, because then there would be no difference
between a cell being occupied and a cell being unoccupied. However, just because
our theory talks of occupation numbers does not imply that what is occupying
the cell must a non-structural object, individual or not. As Auyang points out,
‘To say the ﬁeld is in a state | n(k1),n(k2), … > is not to say that it is composed
of n(k1) quanta in mode k1 and so on but rather n(k1) quanta show up in an
appropriate measurement’ (Auyang 1995, 159).
Our view is this: scientiﬁc realists take it that the appearances are caused
by unseen objects and that the behaviour of these objects can be invoked to
explain the appearances. But the resources of the manifest image cannot be
(directly) used for satisfactory representation in physics. Hence, mathematics has
an ineliminable role to play in theories. When theories are empirically adequate
they tell us about the structure of the phenomena and this structure is (at least in
part) modal structure. However there is still a distinction between structure and
non-structure. Merely listing relations among locators does not state anything
with modal force. Therefore, it doesn’t specify structure in our sense and it isn’t
yet scientiﬁc theory as we’ve defended it. Physical structure exists, but what is it? If
it is just a description of the properties and relations of some underlying entities
this leads us back to epistemic structural realism. What makes the structure
physical and not mathematical? That is a question that we refuse to answer. In
our view, there is nothing more to be said about this that doesn’t amount to
empty words and venture beyond what the PNC allows. The ‘world-structure’
just is and exists independently of us and we represent it mathematico-physically
via our theories. ⁵⁴( This may sound suspiciously Kantian. We can best explain
why it isn’t when we have introduced more theoretical resources than we have
done so far. The reader is asked to be patient on this point until 6.1. But OSR
as we develop it is in principle friendly to a naturalized version of Platonism, a
point we will also touch on in Chapter 4.)
(6) Structural realism cannot account for causation.
⁵³ There is an analogy here with the theory of universals and the problem of exempliﬁcation.
⁵⁴ A similar complaint is made by Cao (2003). Saunders (2003d) points out that there is no
reason to think that ontic structural realists are committed to the idea that the structure of the world
is mathematical.

--- Page 172 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 159
Psillos (forthcoming), along with Cao (2003), argues that OSR cannot account
for causal relations. However, Saunders (2003d, 130) argues that causal structure
is a species of modal structure, and as such the advocate of OSR can happily
endorse the claim that the world has an objective causal structure. However,
we are doubtful that fundamental physics motivates a metaphysics that requires
us to acknowledge objective causal structure, for reasons we will give. This way
of seeing off the criticism invites another: though physics doesn’t require the
metaphysician to work causation into the s tructural fabric, it is harder to avoid
this while maintaining a realist attitude towards special sciences. We discuss these
issues at length in Chapter 5.
3.6 MATHEMATICAL STRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL
STRUCTURE
According to OSR, if one were asked to present the ontology of the world
according to, for example, GR one would present the apparatus of differential
geometry and the ﬁeld equations and then go on to explain the topology and
other characteristics of the particular model (or more accurately equivalence class
of diffeomorphic models) of these equations that is thought to describe the actual
world. There is nothing else to be said, and presenting an interpretation that
allows us to visualize the whole structure in classical terms is just not an option.
Mathematical structures are used for the representation of physical structure
and relations, and this kind of representation is ineliminable and irreducible in
science. Hence, issues in the philosophy of mathematics are of central importance
for the semantic approach in general, an d the explication of structural realism in
particular. This is why van Fraassen says:
One of my great regrets in life is that I do not have a philosophy of mathematics; I will
just assume that any adequate such philosophy will imply that what we do when we use
mathematics is all right. (1994, 269)
The problem for him is that he is a nominalist. But it is worth brieﬂy considering
how some recent proposals in the p hilosophy of mathematics relate to structural
realism.
Some philosophers of mathematics have recently argued that mathematical
entities such as sets and other structures are part of the physical world and not
therefore mysterious abstract objects (see, in particular, Maddy 1990 and Resnik
1990). This may suggest a kind of Pythagoreanism, asserting the identity of
structures in mathematics and physics, and abandoning the distinction between
the abstract structures employed in models and the concrete structures that
are the objects of physics. ⁵⁵ The canonical concrete substance in physics is
⁵⁵ We brieﬂy reconsider this idea in 4.4.

--- Page 173 ---

160 Ontic Structural Realism
matter, but matter has become increasingly ephemeral in modern physics,
losing its connection with the impenetrable stuff that populates the everyday
world. Resnik (1990), Hale (1990), and Tymoczko (1991) have all made the
point that the ontology of modern physics seems to be increasingly abstract and
mathematical: ‘If you think mathemat ical objects are weird then take a look at
a physics textbook’ seems to be a simple common form of argument. As van
Fraassen points out, it is often not at all obvious whether a theoretical term refers
to a concrete entity or a mathematical entity (1994, 11). Consider, for example,
the term ‘wave function’. This may all merely be a matter of failing to distinguish
epistemology from metaphysics: the fact that we only know the entities of
physics in mathematical terms need not mean that they are actually mathematical
entities. But there are other grounds for dispensing with the abstract/concrete
distinction.
The distinction is usually made in terms of either causal power or spatio-
temporality. Hence, it is said that concrete objects have causal powers while
abstract ones do not, or, on the other hand, that concrete objects exist in
space and time while abstract ones do not. These categories seem crude and
inappropriate for modern physics. Causation is problematic in the microscopic
domain where, for example, the singlet state in the Bohm-EPR experiment
fails to screen off the correlations between the results in the two wings of the
apparatus, and thus fails to satisfy the principle of the common cause. Nobody
has so far proposed an acceptable account of causation for this situation. Yet
there is nothing special about the set up that prevents the problem generalizing
to all entangled states. Furthermore in quantum ﬁeld theory there is no absolute
direction of causation for gauge interactions and causality seems to be even less
well understood. If we consider the spatio-temporal criterion of concreteness
then we are faced with the problem that the structure of spacetime itself is an
object of physical investigation. Yet it can hardly be in spacetime. (Again note
that we return to the status of causa tion in fundamental physics in Chapter 5,
sections 1–4.)
Moreover, the dependence of physics on ideal entities (such as point masses
and frictionless planes) and models also offers another argument against attaching
any signiﬁcance to the abstract/concrete distinction. It is worth noting also that
the statistics obeyed by electrons are analogous to those obeyed by pounds sterling
in a British bank account rather than by actual physical pounds. For example, if
two people have two pounds between them in their bank accounts but no pounds
are divided, then there are three possible distributions: one of them has both, the
other has both, or they have one each. This is like the distribution of electrons
in boxes described above. (Actual physical pound coins of course obey classical
statistics.) These considerations are not compelling but do suggest the possibility
of a rapprochement between the objects of physics and of mathematics.

--- Page 174 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 161
Mathematical structuralists have long argued that the applicability of mathe-
matics is due to the world instantiating mathematical structure. ⁵⁶Mathematical
objects are usually regarded as having no essential properties or natures. Rather
they merely appear as arguments in formulae. This is regarded by mathematical
structuralists as evidence for their view that mathematics is the study of structures,
where these are understood to be fully characterized when the relations obtaining
between the objects making up the structure are characterized, without any need
to say anything whatsoever about the nature of objects themselves. ⁵⁷
3.7 FURTHER REFLECTIONS ON PHYSICS
So far we have motivated OSR by means of a consilience argument that appeals
to considerations from the realism debate in general philosophy of science, and
also to the philosophy of quantum physics and GR. However, although the
latter are stable components of advanced physics, it might be objected that,
given the PNC and PPC, we ought to be able to show that OSR is motivated
by cutting-edge physics. There is a quick response to this, namely, to claim
that since there is no agreed-upon theory of quantum gravity, and no uniﬁed
theory of all the fundamental forces recognized by physics, there are as yet no
lessons to be drawn for metaphysics from these parts of physics. This would be
a fair response up to a point but we nonetheless concede that we ought to have
something more to say. Hence, we will brieﬂy explain some of the issues in the
search for a theory of quantum gravity, and attempt to draw some lessons for
our proposed metaphysics from the developments to date. In particular, there
are two related and fundamental m etaphysical questions that we must address,
because it is alleged by some that contemporary physics has decided them for
us, namely, whether or not all times are real, and whether or not all physically
possible occurrences are real.
⁵⁶ For an excellent survey see Reck and Price (2000). The most well-known advocates of struc-
turalism in the philosophy of mathematics are Parsons (1990), Resnik (1997), and Shapiro (1997).
Recent surveys include Hellman (2005) and MacBride (2005). Ladyman (2005) deploys Saun-
ders’s (2003a) version of PII mentioned above to defend mathematical structuralism against the
identity problem raised by Keränen (2001) and MacBride (2005). See also Leitgeb and Ladyman
(forthcoming).
⁵⁷ These observations lead to two versions of mathematical structuralism: a realist view according
to which mathematical structures exist in their own right independently of being instantiated by a
concrete structure; and an eliminativist position according to which statements about mathematical
structures are disguised generalizations about set s of objects that exemplify them (see Shapiro 1997,
149–50). The relationship between ontic structural realism and ante rem structuralism has been
explored by Psillos (forthcoming), Busch (2003), a nd Pooley (2006). As Pooley points out, Shapiro
does not deny that mathematical objects exist, but he does deny that they have a nature over and
above their relationship to the other objects in the relevant structure.

--- Page 175 ---

162 Ontic Structural Realism
The former question is often claimed by philosophers to have been answered
in the afﬁrmative by Special Relativity (SR), and the latter is claimed by some
inﬂuential philosophers of physics to have been answered in the afﬁrmative
by QM. Furthermore, some philosophers of physics argue that these issues are
directly analogous, and that the block universe of Minkowski spacetime, in which
all times are real, must be married with the Everettian multiverse, in which all
physical possibilities are real. However, we argue that these are both scientiﬁcally
open questions. If this is right then our naturalism requires that the metaphysics
espoused in this book must be neutral with respect to them. We will go further
and suggest grounds for questioning whether they could in principle be answered
by physics at all, and tentatively propose quietism about them. Finally, we reﬂect
on the implications of quantum information theory and recent proposals for the
interpretation of QM both for OSR, and to support the use we make of the
notion of information in the next chapter.
3.7.1 Still or sparkling?
There are several distinct though often conﬂated issues in the metaphysics of
time:
(i) Are all events, past, present and future, real?
(ii) Is there temporal passage or objective becoming?
(iii) Does tensed language have tenseless truth conditions?
Call the view that all events are real ‘eternalism’, the view that only the present
is real ‘presentism’, and the view that all past and present events are real
‘cumulative presentism’. ( The latter is defended by Michael Tooley (1997)
although not under this name.) Those who believe in the passage of time or
objective becoming often also believe that the process of becoming is that of
events coming into existence and going out of existence, but this need not
be so; to suppose there is becoming, one need only believe that there is some
objective feature of the universe associated with the passage of time. Objective
becoming could be like a light shining on events as they are brieﬂy ‘present’, and
is therefore compatible with eternalism. ⁵⁸On the other hand, both presentism
and cumulative presentism entail a positive answer to question (ii), since if
events do come into existence, whether or not they then stay existent or pass
out of existence, this is enough to constitute objective becoming. Presentism
and becoming have also been associated with the idea that tensed language does
not have tenseless truth conditions. However, this is not a necessary connection
as Michael Tooley (1997) argues. So even though the standard opposition is
between those who answer ‘no’ to (i), ‘yes’ to (ii), and ‘no’ to (iii) on the one
⁵⁸ Tim Maudlin (2002b) argues that the passage of time may be an objective feature of the
universe even if eternalism is true.

--- Page 176 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 163
hand (the defenders of McTaggart’s ‘A-series’), and those who answer ‘yes’ to (i),
‘no’ to (ii), and ‘yes’ to (iii) (the defenders of McTaggart’s ‘B-series’), a variety of
more nuanced positions are possible. We of course do not believe that philosophy
of language can have any bearing on the metaphysical issues addressed by (i) and
(ii), and hence we will have nothing to say about (iii).
There is a further celebrated question about time:
(iv) Does time have a privileged direction?
Clearly if (i) or (ii) are answered positively then that is enough to privilege a
particular direction in time. However, eternalism and the denial of objective
becoming are compatible with time having a privileged direction, since there
could be some feature of the block universe that has a gradient that always points
in some particular temporal direction. For example, the entropy of isolated
subsystems of the universe, or the universe itself, might always increase in some
direction of time. Another well-known possible source of temporal direction
was proposed by Reichenbach (1956) who argued that temporal asymmetry is
grounded in causal asymmetry: in general, correlations between the joint effects
of a common cause are screened off by the latter but the joint causes of a common
effect are uncorrelated. Although some have claimed that Reichenbach’s Principle
of the Common Cause is violated, not least by the behaviour of entangled states
in QM (see for example van Fraassen 1991), we take it that such considerations
are sufﬁcient to show that conceptually the question of the direction of time
must be separated from questions about eternalism. However, it may be that
no physical meaning can be attached to the idea of the direction of time in the
whole universe, because no global time coordinate for the whole universe can be
deﬁned, or because many can and there is no principled way to choose between
them. The latter case is implied by SR, to which we turn.
The status of time in SR differs from its status in Newtonian mechanics in that
there is no objective global distinction between the dimensions of space and that
of time. Spacetime can be split into space and time, but any such foliation is only
valid relative to a particular inertial frame, which is associated with the Euclidean
space and absolute time of the coordinate system of an observer. This seems to
imply eternalism, since if there is no privileged foliation of spacetime, then there
is no global present, and so the claim that future events are not real does not
refer to a unique set of events. ⁵⁹Furthermore, many have argued that, since SR
implies the relativity of simultaneity, whether or not two events are simultaneous
is a frame-dependent fact, and therefore there is no such thing as becoming. ⁶⁰
However, this is too quick. It is possible to advocate a form of becoming that is
⁵⁹ Of course, one could argue that the very notion of reality must be relativized to observers, but
this is to give up on the kind of metaphysics to which we are committed.
⁶⁰ The literature on these topics is voluminous but among the most inﬂuential papers are Gödel
(1949), Putnam (1967), and Stein (1968) and (1989).

--- Page 177 ---

164 Ontic Structural Realism
relative to observers or events, so strictly speaking it is only absolute becoming
that is ruled out by the lack of absolute time in SR. Since the light cone structure
of Minkowski spacetime is Lorentz-invariant, it can be regarded as absolute. It is
easy then to deﬁne a notion of the open future of an event E, since any event E ′
in the forward light cone of E will have events in its backwards light cone that
are not in the backwards light cone of E, meaning that there is a sense in which
it can be claimed that E
′ is not determinate at E. This notion of becoming is
objective in the sense that all observers will agree about which events are in the
open future of a given observer at a particular point in his or her history, because
all observers agree about the light cone structure of spacetime. ⁶¹
In any case there is a fundamental problem with drawing metaphysical
conclusions about the nature of time from SR, namely that it is a partial physical
theory that cannot describe non-inertial frames of reference, or gravity. ⁶² For
that we must turn, in the ﬁrst instance, to GR, and the implications of that
theory for time are not clear. This is because GR gives us ﬁeld equations that are
compatible with a variety of models having different global topological features,
and different topological structures may have very different implications for the
metaphysics of time. ⁶³ For example, if the topology of the universe is globally
hyperbolic then it is possible to deﬁne a single global foliation of spacetime for
it; otherwise it may not be. Clearly we must then turn to cosmological models of
the actual universe, of which there are many compatible with the observational
data. As yet there is no agreement about which of these is the true one. Highly
controversial issues about the cosmological constant and so-called dark energy,
dark matter, and the nature of singularities, as well as the various approaches to
the search for a theory of quantum gravity, all bear on the question of whether
spacetime will turn out to admit of a global foliation, and hence on whether
absolute time is physically deﬁnable. Even if it does turn out to be deﬁnable,
there remains the question of whether such a deﬁnition ought to be attributed
any metaphysical importance. For example, it is possible to deﬁne something
called ‘cosmic time’ which is based on the average properties of the universe’s
global matter distribution under the expansion of the universe. Some have argued
that we can regard Cosmic Time as giving us a privileged foliation (Lucas and
Hodgson 1990). However, others argue that the fact that such a foliation can be
⁶¹ Another possibility is to argue that while Spec ial Relativity is empirically adequate, the
empirical evidence is nonetheless compatible with the existence of a privileged foliation. This would
be to advocate what Sklar (1974) calls a compensatory theory along the lines of that originally
proposed by Lorentz and Fitzgerald. This is the strategy adopted by Tooley (1997) for example. The
PNC forbids the revision of scientiﬁc theories on purely philosophical grounds, so the proposal of a
privileged foliation contra to SR requires a scientiﬁc moti vation. One possible scientiﬁc motivation
is the adoption of a solution to the measurement problem that posits a preferred frame of reference
(see below). Another is the identiﬁcation of fo undational problems with the account of relativistic
phenomena in the Minkowski spacetime framework (see Bell 1987 and Brown 2005).
⁶² Tooley (1997) and Sider (2001) both conﬁne discussion to SR.
⁶³ Belot (2005a) argues that which category our universe falls into is an open question.

--- Page 178 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 165
deﬁned gives us no reason to regard it as having an objective signiﬁcance (Berry
1989), not least because it is based on averages that have nothing to do with the
phenomenological experience of everyday simultaneity for objects whose states
of motion are not the same as the state of motion of the galaxies in our region of
the universe with respect to which cosmic time is deﬁned (see Bourne 2004).
Non-relativistic many-particle QM does not directly bear on the philosophy
of time since the status of time in the formalism is not novel in the same
way as in relativity. However, it has often been argued that quantum physics
is relevant to questions about the openness of the future, becoming, and the
direction of time, because of the alleged process of collapse of the wave function.
Since Heisenberg (1962) it has been popular to claim that the modulus squared
of the quantum mechanical amplitudes that are attached to different eigen states
in a superposition represent the probabilities of genuinely chancy outcomes,
and that when a measurement is made there is an irreversible transition from
potentiality to actuality in which the information about the weights of the
unactualized possible outcomes is lost forever. Hence, measurement can be
seen as constituting irreversible processes of becoming that induce temporal
asymmetry. However, that quantum measurements need not be so understood
is shown by the time-symmetric treatment of quantum measurements in the
formalism of Aharonov et al. (1964). ⁶⁴Similarly, if there is no collapse, as in the
Everett interpretation, then again there is no temporal asymmetry in QM.
The upshot seems to be that the status of the arrow of time in QM is open.
The tension between SR and QM is made into a deﬁnite contradiction if collapse
of the wave function is regarded as an objective physical process, as in the
dynamical collapse theories along the lines developed by Ghiradi et al. (1986), or
if non-local hidden variables are introduced as in Bohm theory, since both imply
action at a distance and pick out a preferred foliation of spacetime ( Timpson
and Brown forthcoming, Maudlin 1994). ⁶⁵ The real questions concern what
happens to time if quantum theory is married with GR, and we return to that
issue below. (Since relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory is based on the background
of Minkowski spacetime the status of time in the former is the same as in SR.)
There is also a vast literature about whether or not the second law of
thermodynamics represents a deep temporal asymmetry in nature. The entropy
of an isolated system always increases in time, and so this seems to be an example
of the arrow of time being introduced into physics. If the whole universe is
regarded as an isolated object, and if it obeys the second law, then it would
seem that there is an objective arrow of time in cosmology. However, it is not
clear what the status of the second law is with respect to fundamental physics.
⁶⁴ See also Leggett (1995) and Stamp (1995).
⁶⁵ Myrvold (2002) shows that physical collapse models ca n be consistent with relativity theory
if collapse is regarded as foliation relative feature of the world. It also seems that it may be possible
to construct a version of GRW which is Lorentz-invariant after all (see Maudlin 2007).

--- Page 179 ---

166 Ontic Structural Realism
One possibility is that the second law holds only locally, and that there are
other regions of spacetime where entropy is almost always at or very near its
maximum. (Boltzman himself thought this was the case in his later years.) Even
if thermodynamics seems to support the arrow of time, it is deeply puzzling
how this can be compatible with an underlying physics that is time-symmetric.
Conservative solutions to this problem ground the asymmetry of the second law
in boundary conditions rather than in any revision of the fundamental dynamics.
The most popular response is to claim that the law does indeed hold globally
but that its so doing is a consequence of underlying time-reversal invariant laws
acting on an initial state of the universe that has very low entropy. ⁶⁶ This is
called the ‘Past Hypothesis’ by Albert (2000). A much more radical possibility
(see for example, Prigogine 1980) is that the second law is a consequence of the
fact there is a fundamental asymmetry in time built into the dynamical laws of
fundamental physics. Given the outstanding measurement problem in QM those
who propose radical answers to problems in thermodynamics and cosmology
often speculate about links between them and the right way of understanding
collapse of the wave function. Roger Penrose (2001), for example, suggests that
gravity plays a role.
It has also been suggested that the local thermodynamic arrow of time is
a consequence of the expansion of the universe (Gold 1962). Certainly, if
cosmological explanations of the second law are sought, its origin must have
something to do with gravity. This is beca use gravity is universally attractive,
and dominates the effects of the other forces at large scales. It is the force that
seems to lead to the creation of ordinary matter. Penrose (2004, 706 and 728)
argues that what he calls ‘gravitational entropy’ must be taken into account
when considering the entropy of the universe as a whole, and maintains that the
gravitational entropy of a system is higher when it is less uniform and lower when
it is more uniform, which is just the opposite of how entropy varies with thermal
uniformity. According to his calculations, the initial low entropy state of the
universe is so special that the phase space volume associated with it is a maximum
of 1 part in 10 to the 10 to the 123 of the total phase space volume. Given
this and the fact that the fundamental constants are ﬁne-tuned to the extent
that minute changes in their values would result in a universe that could not
support our material being, anthropic reasoning often rears its ugly head in this
arena. On the other hand, Lee Smolin (2000) speculates that universes are ten a
penny, being born in the black holes of their parents and inheriting their laws
and constants with minor mutations, and so being subject to natural selection
since different universes will have different degrees of fertility. Clearly, both the
⁶⁶ It is necessary to posit this because standard argument s in statistical mechanics which show
that it is overwhelmingly likely that a typical state of an isolated system will evolve into a higher
entropy state in the future also show that it is overwhelmingly likely that the state in question
evolved from a past state that had higher entropy too. See, for example, Albert (2000, ch. 4).

--- Page 180 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 167
question of eternalism, and the arrow of time, lead inexorably to cosmology and
thence to the realm of quantum gravity that we discuss below.
3.7.2 Quantum gravity ⁶⁷
A theory of quantum gravity must do all of the following: say what happens in
nature at the Planck length (10 − 33 cm); recover GR as a low-energy limit; and
provide a background spacetime, at least phenomenologically, for conventional
quantum theories. What else it should do is a matter of great contention. Some,
such as advocates of string theory and M-theory like Brian Greene (2004), think
it must also unify the four fundamental forces of nature; others, such as Smolin
(2006), argue that, in the ﬁrst instance at least, it need only amount to a quantized
version of GR. A further question is whether quantum gravity must also be a
cosmological theory of one (unique and actual) universe, rather than allowing
for models representing a variety of universes. Partly because the most obvious
phenomenological domain of quantum gravity is at such high energies as to be
experimentally inaccessible, and partly because the theoretical search has led to
so many bizarre and conceptually diverse a lternatives, the debate about quantum
gravity even among physical cosmologists often becomes explicitly philosophical.
This also happens because quantum gravity must reconcile a number of profound
tensions between GR and quantum theories.
Most obviously, quantum physics is the physics that best describes the
phenomena when we look at very short length scales, and GR is physics that
was speciﬁcally designed with a distinction between local and global properties
of spacetime in mind, and sought to describe deviations from the topological,
geometrical, and metrical properties of Minkowski spacetime that only show up
in large-scale structure—this is the scale tension. Second, GR depends on the
identiﬁcation of inertial and gravitat ional mass, and the equivalence between
accelerating and gravitational frames, whereas quantum theory was originally
developed to account for the interaction between electro-magnetic radiation and
matter. Initially, it was only the energy states of matter that were quantized, but
subsequently it has proved possible, with differing degrees of success, to quantize
all the fundamental forces, with the exception of gravity—this is the force
tension. Third, relativistic theories obey the condition that there are invariant
and hence objective causal pasts for events, whereas in QM there are non-local
correlations that some regard as evidence of action at a distance—this is the
causal tension. Finally, there is the radically different status of time in quantum
theory versus GR. In the former, time is a parameter external to all physical
systems; in the latter it is a coordinate with no particular physical signiﬁcance.
More speciﬁcally there is something called ‘The Problem of Time’ the upshot of
⁶⁷ Introductions to the philosophy of quantum g ravity include Callender and Huggett (2001)
especially the introduction, and Rovelli (2004, ch. 1). Wallace (2000) is also very helpful.

--- Page 181 ---

168 Ontic Structural Realism
which is that theories of quantum gravity are in danger of saying there can be no
change in the universe over time (we return to this below).
The approach of string theorists is to treat GR as the low-energy limit of
a quantum ﬁeld theory of strings (which are two dimensional time-like world
sheets within a background ten or more dimensional space), and hence to
assume that quantum theory is basically correct and that GR must give the
ground. Depending on who one listens to, string theory has either already led
us a considerable distance down the road to a complete theory of quantum
gravity, or it has achieved absolutely nothing that counts as physics rather than
mathematics. String theory and the related perturbative quantum GR are both
sometimes referred to as covariant quantum gravity, and both involve a particle
interpretation of GR in terms of massless spin-2 bosons called ‘gravitons’. The
latter approach is perturbative since it begins by treating GR as if it were
a linear theory and then adding non-linear parts as corrections. The linear
theory in question is obtained by supposing that the ﬁelds are very weak so
that spacetime is nearly ﬂat. Hence the background structure in question is
that of Minkowski spacetime. The biggest problem for this approach is that
the inﬁnite quantities thrown up in calculations are not renormalizable. String
theory’s achievement was to solve the renormalization problem by treating
vibrating strings as fundamental entities and recover GR on the basis of the fact
that one of the string vibration modes corresponds to massless spin-2 bosons.
String theory then became superstring theory as super-symmetry (that treats
bosons and fermions as equivalent) was added. String theorists have followed the
methodology that was used in the construction of quantum ﬁeld theories, namely
the search for fundamental symmetries. If the string theory vision is correct then
the ultimate fundamental physics will describe the universal symmetries of the
universe. (Another important commonality between string theory and classical
and quantum physics is that they posit a continuous space and time, which is
departed from by some rival programmes—see below.)
Lee Smolin is highly critical of string theory and argues that it is not falsiﬁable
in the sense that it makes no ‘falsiﬁable predictions for doable experiments’
(2006, 197). He claims there are no fundamental global symmetries, on grounds
that those theories that posit them are not fully empirically adequate. His
view is that the two big ideas that drive string theory, namely uniﬁcation and
symmetry, have run their course, and that there have been no substantially
new results in particle physics since 1975. He points out that the standard
model has so many adjustable parameters that any likely experimental data from
particle accelerators can be accommodated by it. ⁶⁸ He also emphasizes that
there are at least 10
100 possible string theories, and argues that all the ones that
have been studied disagree with the data. Super-symmetric string theory has
⁶⁸ There are at least nineteen free parameters in the standard model plus almost as many from
cosmology.

--- Page 182 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 169
105 free parameters. Hence, Smolin claims, partisans will be able to maintain
that whatever comes out of the next generation of particle accelerators conﬁrms
super-symmetry.⁶⁹
He also criticizes string theory for being ‘background dependent’ in the sense
that it relies on a background spacetime structure. Smolin predicts that the
correct theory of quantum gravity will be relational in the sense that it won’t
posit any background structure which does not change with time but which is
necessary for the deﬁnition of kinematical quantities and dynamical laws (ibid.
199). Newtonian mechanics, SR, quantum theories including quantum ﬁeld
theories, and string theory are all background-dependent and rely on various
structures that are outside the scope of the dynamics of the theory. For example,
in ordinary QM the spacetime and the algebraic structure of Hilbert space are
part of the background structure. On the other hand, GR, understood as a
cosmological theory of the whole universe, is a relational theory in the sense
that the physically important structural fea tures of the theory are dynamical.
The equivalence class of diffeomorphic models that describes the world will not
ﬁx the values of ﬁelds at points (as noted in 3.2), but it will ﬁx the dimension
and topology of the spacetime, as well as the light cone structure (and hence
the causal order of events) and a measure of the spacetime volume of sets that the
light cone structure deﬁnes. Indeed, it turns out that one cannot say what the
observables are without solving the dynamics, because all observables describe
relations between degrees of freedom and the question of the physical identity of
spacetime points is inextricable from how the values of observables are associated
with them. The only background structure in GR consists of the dimensionality,
the differential structure, and the topology.
String theorists now seem to have accepted that background independence
is a desideratum. Brian Greene speculates about a background free version of
string theory, and the search for so-called M-theory is partly motivated by the
need for a way of thinking about strings that does not treat them as vibrations
in a background spacetime. However, no such theory yet exists. ⁷⁰Meanwhile,
Smolin has inspired a signiﬁcant minority of researchers to seek background
independence in other approaches to quantum gravity, and he shows how this
notion plays out in the context of a variety of these theories. He suggests
that the history of physics testiﬁes to the success of the pursuit of background
independence. It is true that progress has sometimes been made in physics by
eliminating background structure. SR eliminated the background structure of
⁶⁹ Curiel (2001) bemoans the paucity of contact with observation in quantum gravity research.
⁷⁰ There are ﬁve versions of string theory but it was known that there were pairs that were dual,
that is, inter-transformable. Edward Witten convinced st ring theorists that these ﬁve versions were
mutually inter-translatable versions of a single theory after all and that theory has been dubbed
M-theory (see Greene 2004). M-theory ups the number of spatial dimensions to ten and hence
the total dimensionality of spacetime to eleven. There are tentative suggestions of links between
M-theory and loop quantum gravity (see below).

--- Page 183 ---

170 Ontic Structural Realism
absolute space and time, and then GR eliminated the background structure of
Minkowski spacetime. On the other hand, there have been many background-
dependent theories that have been highly successful, including quantum theories.
Smolin himself concedes that GR is background-dependent in certain respects.
Furthermore, consider the success of the pursuit of symmetry and uniﬁcation
of forces that motivates string theory, in genera ting the standard model and the
uniﬁed ﬁeld theories based on the knitting together of the symmetry groups
previously discovered to be governing the separate forces. Smolin and Greene’s
dispute can be construed as concerning which of the following two desiderata
for fundamental physics holds trumps: symmetry or background independence.
The empirical evidence is equivocal, to say the least.
Among background-independent approaches the most well-known is canonical
quantum gravity. This approach seeks a quantum theory of gravity, but not
necessarily a uniﬁcation of all the fundamental forces. The idea is to quantize
GR after it has been formulated as a phase-space theory subject to a Hamiltonian
constraint so that sets of temporally successive three-spaces are models of the
ﬁeld equations of GR. This gives rise to the famous Wheeler–DeWitt equation,
and the infamous Problem of Time. Essentially the latter arises because to treat
GR as a phase-space theory means ﬁrst splitting spacetime into slices of space and
time. We can do this in many ways, each corresponding to a different deﬁnition
of time, but the diffeomorphism invariance of GR means that each slicing is
related to the others by a gauge transformation. The further complication is
that successive slices can themselves be related by gauge transformations. The
invariance of the state of the universe under gauge transformations thus means
that the physical states of the universe must be time-independent, and so nothing
changes, assuming that only gauge inva riant quantities are physically real.
The latest version of the canonical programme is loop quantum gravity. The
pioneers of this approach include Abhay Ashtekar, Carlo Rovelli, John Baez, and
Lee Smolin. It is based on the reformulation of GR as a theory of connections on
a manifold, rather than as a theory of the metrics on a manifold. This is usually
advocated as a fully relational approach, although Rickles (2005) argues that the
hole problem arises in loop quantum gravity too and that it is not necessarily fully
relational. He argues that theories like loop quantum gravity admit of multiple
interpretations and that there are grounds for pessimism about whether quantum
gravity will settle the substantivalism/rela tionism debate as Belot and Earman
(2001) suggest. Canonical quantum gravity in general, and loop quantum gravity
in particular, is only partly relational like GR in so far as it similarly takes for
granted the topology, dimensionality, and differential structure of a manifold.
Other approaches include:
• Causal set theory:⁷¹ this is a background-independent approach motivated by
the assumption that at the Planck scale spacetime geometry will be discrete, and
⁷¹ See Dowker (2003), Sorkin (1995), and the discussion in Stachel (forthcoming).

--- Page 184 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 171
by the fact that a discrete causal structure of events is almost sufﬁcient to
deﬁne a classical General Relativistic spacetime (see Malament 2006). The
formalism models spacetime as a partially ordered set of primitive elements
with a stochastic causal structure representing the probabilities for ‘future’
elements to be added to a given element. The ‘volume’ of spacetime is
then recovered from the number of elements. The ‘dynamical structure’ is
compatible with eternalism because the whole of spacetime can be considered
as a single mathematical structure, and temporal relations regarded as just
the order of elements. The probabilistic structure is required to be local. It
can be shown that a classical spacetime can always be approximated by a
causal set. However, the converse does not hold and this is a major problem
for this approach (see Smolin 2006). Note that a causal set is a partially
ordered set where the intersection of the past and future of any pair of events
is ﬁnite: ‘[T]he fundamental events have no properties except their mutual
causal relations’ (210).
• Causal triangulation models: these models use a combinatorial structure of a
large number of 4-simplexes (the 4-d version of a tetrahedron), from which a
classical spacetime will emerge as a low energy limit, and from which quantum
theory can be recovered if background assumptions are made. Interestingly,
the latest simulations of spacetime emerging dynamically from these models
generate it as four-dimensional on large scales, but two-dimensional at short
distances (and it is known that a qua ntum theory of gravity is renormalizable
in two dimensions).⁷²
• Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, twister theory, and non-commutative
geometry: these approaches are highly abstract and speculative at present. ⁷³
These are all known as ‘covariant’ approaches because they do not invoke a
preferred foliation of spacetime. Another covariant approach worth mentioning
has the unique feature that the temporal dimension is abandoned altogether:
• Barbour’s relationism: ⁷⁴time is supervenient on change, but change is just
differences between distinct instantaneous three dimensional spaces.
All of these research programmes use new and highly abstract mathematical
structures to describe the universe, and theorists hope to get the familiar
behaviour of spacetime and quantum particles to emerge as limiting behaviour.
It seems clear that we cannot yet say what the metaphysical implications of
quantum gravity are, but the possibilities range from eleven dimensions to two,
from a continuous fundamental structure to a discrete one, and from a world
with universal symmetries to one with none.
⁷² See http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0505113, and also Ambjorn et al. (2004).
⁷³ See Baez (2001), Penrose (2004, ch. 3 ), and Connes (1994) respectively.
⁷⁴ This may be a misnomer since Barbour’s ontology seems to include substantival space, albeit
without time. A comprehensive discussion of Barbour’s theory is Butterﬁeld (2002).

--- Page 185 ---

172 Ontic Structural Realism
For the project of this book, the main lesson of quantum gravity is that one
way or another the world is not going to be describable at the fundamental
level by means of the familiar categories from classical physics that derive
from the common-sense world of macroscopic objects. It seems that in all
the non-perturbative approaches to quantum gravity familiar macroscopic four-
dimensional spacetime is dynamically emergent ra ther than fundamental, and
in M-theory there are many more dimensions that we usually think. Thus it
appears overwhelmingly likely that some kind of mathematical structure that
resists domestication is going to be ineliminable in the representation of the
world in fundamental physics. With respect to the metaphysics of time, it seems
that it is an open question whether there is an objective global asymmetry in
time, and whether such dynamical structure as there is in the universe reﬂects
a fundamentally tensed reality or whether eternalism is true. (Mathematically,
perhaps the real issue is between three—or more—plus one dimensions and
four.) If M-theory is the correct theory of quantum gravity then there will
be universal symmetries that are not time-dependent, and they may deﬁne
a background independent structure. If there is no background-independent
structure and asymmetry in time is part of fundamental physics, then it may be
that there is ‘dynamics all the way down’ and reality is fundamentally tensed.
One possible motivation for the dynamical view is a principle that van Fraassen
sometimes seems to endorse, namely that there is nothing that’s both perfectly
general about all of reality and also true. This coheres with the idea that there
is dynamics all the way down in the universe, since any fundamental properties
that hold generally would necessarily be time-independent and hence amount
to background structure. Consider Smolin: ‘The universe is made of processes,
not things’ (2001, 49). Smolin insists that a lesson of both relativity theory and
quantum theory is that processes are prior to states. Classical physics seemed to
imply the opposite because spacetime could be uniquely broken up into slices of
space at a time (states). Relativity theory disrupts this account of spacetime and
in QM nothing is ever really still it seems, since particles are always subject to a
minimum amount of spreading in space and everything is ﬂux in quantum ﬁeld
theory, within which even the vacuum is the scene of constant ﬂuctuations.
Smolin and Rovelli seem to have accepted that we will not be able to describe
the whole universe at once. (We mention Rovelli’s radical relationism again
below.) On the other hand, we claim it is a metaphysical residue of obsolete
physics to suppose that the universe is ‘made of ’ anything, whether objects or
processes, and that such homely metaphors should be relinquished. Either way,
the block view cannot be ruled out a priori, and has generated some empirical
successes in the history of physics. Given that we seem for now to have reached
an impasse it is worth noting that each view must accommodate the success of
the other: the block view, if it is right, must eventually explain the second law
of thermodynamics, and the emergence of the phenomena that are described by
the dynamical laws of physics; and the process view must explain how something

--- Page 186 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 173
like the block universe of SR and GR emerges from a structure that is ultimately
dynamical. One possibility is that neither the dynamical or block extremes are the
whole story. Another is raised by attempts to recover the emergence of a foliation
of spacetime and the appearance of dynamics from an account of observers
as information-processing systems (see Saunders 1993b and 1995 and Hartle
2004). (We return to the Everett interpretation in the next section.)
However, one of the lessons of quantum gravity is that some philoso-
phers—especially standard scientiﬁc realists—have jumped to overly strong
metaphysical conclusions on the basis of not taking account of all the possibilities
still held open by physics. There are two leading examples where what some
philosophers treated as decisive rulings from physics are now questioned. One
of these is the case we have just been discussing, namely, whether or not we live
in a block universe. The other is the alleged discovery by quantum theory that
the world is not deterministic. In Bohm theory and the Everett approach, the
world comes out deterministic after all. Clearly, theories that seem to wear their
metaphysical implications on their sleeves often turn out to admit of physical
reconstruction in different terms. Many physicists have attempted to resolve
tensions between QM and GR by seeking what can be regarded as the key
metaphysical truth that lies behind each theory’s empirical success. For example,
Barbour and Smolin think that relationism is the basis for the success of relativity
theory. Often it is argued that the truth of quantization that lies behind the
empirical success of QM means that theorists should pursue discrete structures
of space and time as in the programmes of causal set theory. If each instant is
ontologically discrete then why should the timeline be continuous? On the other
hand, Hardy (2005) in his discussion of quantum versus classical probabilities,
and Deutsch (2004) in his discussion of quantum versus classical computation,
argue that there is a sense in which QM is more in keeping with continuity
than classical physics. The key insight of QM might also be regarded as the
superposition principle, and the consequent problem of entangled states, but
there are conceptual and empirical problems with the idea of the structure of
spacetime being subject to entanglement (see Penrose 2001).
So it is not clear which aspects of themetaphysical foundations of contemporary
physics—for example, continuous space and time, or four-dimensionalism—will
be preserved in quantum gravity. ⁷⁵However, there are certain modal relations
that will be preserved, just as those of classical mechanics were preserved in
QM and relativity theory. For example, the approximate validity of the Galilean
transformations at low relative velocities of the classical law of gravitation in
the latter case, and the recovery of the probabilities for the position of a
classical harmonic oscillator from n quantum harmonic oscillators as n becomes
large, or the form of various Hamiltonian functions, in accordance with Bohr’s
⁷⁵ Monton (forthcoming) points out that presentism is an open question in so far as a ﬁxed
foliation theory of quantum gravity has not been ruled out.

--- Page 187 ---

174 Ontic Structural Realism
correspondence principle, in the former. Note that in these cases, although
relations are preserved, the relata and even their logical type may not be.
For example, recall from 2.3 that gradV( < r >) = md2 < r >/ dt2, exhibits
continuity between classical and quantum mechanics having a similar form
to the Newtonian equation F = ma. But the quantum equation has as its
arguments the expectation values of Hermitian operators, whereas the classical
equation features continuous real variables. Further examples abound in the case
of quantum ﬁelds where more and more interactions are taken into account by
considering higher-order perturbation theories. Everyone working on the next
stage knows they must recover the last stage as a low energy limit. Indeed one
approach to quantum ﬁeld theory known as the effective ﬁeld theory approach
seeks only low energy limits rather than a fundamental description. ⁷⁶This is
true of quantum gravity also, where the recovery of classical GR and/or QM
as a low energy limit is the prime methodological principle. Note that what is
being recovered in all these cases is a theoretical structure that encodes the modal
structure of the phenomena at a high level of abstraction and not merely the
empirical structure or actual data.
We cannot say whether the correct theory of quantum gravity will be closely
related to one or more of the existing research programmes, or whether some
completely new approach will be necessary. Furthermore, there is no guarantee
that the problem of quantum gravity will be solved in the near future, or
indeed at all. Notwithstanding the conviction of the string theorists on the
one hand, and the arguments of Cartwright and others on the other, it seems
to us to be an open question what the outcome of the search for a theory
of quantum gravity will be, and profoundly contrary to the spirit of scientiﬁc
inquiry to declare the mission impossible. Given the diversity of philosophical and
foundational presuppositions and implications currently abroad—for example,
ranging from a return to absolute time to nihilism about time, and from ten-
dimensional continuous spaces to discrete graphs—there is little positive by way
of implications for metaphysics that we can adduce from cutting-edge physics.
However, there is often an emphasis on modal or causal structure in quantum
gravity; for example, Bell-locality is imposed ab initio in causal set theory.
However, when it comes to negative lessons, there is more to be said. None
of the existing contenders for a theory of quantum gravity is consistent with
the idea of the world as a spatio-temporal manifold with classical particles
interacting locally. This is not surprising to anyone who has thought about the
⁷⁶ Effective ﬁeld theories are only valid at certain energy scales and the move to different
scales may require the introduction of completely new physical processes (cf. Hartmann 2001 and
Castellani 2002). Cao and Schweber (1993) defend the claim that there will be a never-ending
tower of effective quantum ﬁeld theories and no fundamental theory. Note that the level structure
here is given by energy scales not spatial scales although these are not unrelated. The standard model
is widely regarded as an effective ﬁeld theory and not a fundamental one. Wallace (2006) argues
that the information that we get from effective ﬁeld theories is structural information.

--- Page 188 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 175
implications of Bell’s theorem. As we said in 1.2.3 and 3.4, it is important
that this is not a theorem about QM, but rather tells us something about any
possible empirically adequate successor to QM, namely that it cannot be both
local and posit possessed values for all measurable observables. We are justiﬁed
in treating as unmotivated the idea that any theory of quantum gravity will
be a local realist theory, and we should restrict consideration in metaphysics to
theories that are compatible with the violation of Humean supervenience implied
by entanglement. The structuralism that we have defended in this chapter ﬁts
naturally with cutting-edge physics. Here is St achel: ‘Whatever the ultimate
nature(s) (quiddity) of the fundamental entities of a quantum gravity theory turn
out to be, it is hard to believe that they will possess an inherent individuality
(haecceity) already absent at the levels of both general relativity and quantum
theory’ (2006, 58). As the editors of a recent collection on the foundations of
quantum gravity say:
There is a common core to the views expressed in these papers, which can be characterized
as the stance that relational structures are of equal or more fundamental ontological status
than objects. (Rickles et al. 2006, p. v) ⁷⁷
3.7.3 Everett–Saunders–Wallace quantum mechanics and Ontic
Structural Realism
There is a close analogy between the debate about time’s passage, and the debate
about the collapse of the wave function that has been remarked upon by a
number of authors (including Rovelli 1997 and Wallace 2002), but perhaps the
clearest and most systematic investigation is due to Saunders (1995). According
to his account, the notions of the present and of passage in Minkowski spacetime
are directly analogous to the notions of actuality and of collapse in Everettian
QM. Saunders coined the expression ‘the quantum block universe’ (1993b) to
refer to the picture of reality that we get by fusing SR with QM without collapse.
The idea is that just as in SR our notions of the present and passage must be
understood as entirely contextual and perspective-relative, so in Everettian QM
our notions of the unique outcome of a measurement and the collapse of the
wave function must be understood as thoroughly relativized to a branch of the
universal wave function. Just as, contrary to appearances all times are real, so all
possible outcomes of a measurement are real. What we refer to as the actual is
the branch in which we happen to ﬁnd ourselves.
It is well known that the Everett interpretation faces two major problems.
The ﬁrst is the probability problem that concerns how to recover the Born
rule that is used to interpret quantum states in terms of the probabilities of
⁷⁷ Dawid (forthcoming) argues that string theory supports a position akin to ontic structural
realism.

--- Page 189 ---

176 Ontic Structural Realism
measurement outcomes in a setting where it must be supposed that all the
outcomes associated with non-zero amplitudes occur. The second is the problem
of the preferred basis, namely what basis should be used for the representation
of a quantum state given that inﬁnitely many are possible, and only some
correspond to macroscopic objects like pointers in measurement devices having
deﬁnite positions.
David Deutsch and David Wallace have pioneered an interesting approach
to the probability problem using decision theory but we will have nothing to
say about this here since our concern is with metaphysics. ⁷⁸ One solution to
the problem of the preferred basis is to regard the position basis as privileged.
However, Saunders and Wallace reject this approach because there is no Lorentz-
invariant way to deﬁne the worlds that would result from doing so exactly.
Instead they defend the idea that decoherence generates an approximate basis,
and that this is sufﬁcient to recover the appearances of a deﬁnite macroworld
of localized pointer positions. We brieﬂy explain these issues below with a view
to establishing that (a) if the Everett interpretation of QM is correct then OSR
is the right account of the ontology of scientiﬁc theories, and (b) it is an open
question whether a no-collapse interpretation of QM commits us to the existence
of more than one macroworld.
Wallace (2002) argues that the idea of a foliation of Minkowski spacetime
deﬁned by the Lorentz frame appropriate to our current state of motion is only
sufﬁcient to generate a three-dimensional space that approximates to our everyday
conception of space. Analogously, the distinct ‘branches’ or ‘worlds’ within which
macroscopic objects are always in deﬁnite states are only approximate according
to Wallace. Wallace (2003a) argues for a view of our macroscopic everyday
ontology that is closely related to the theory being developed in this book. ⁷⁹
In particular, he argues that there is a false dichotomy between macroscopic
objects being exactly recoverable from the formalism of QM, and their being
illusory. The positive account he gives of macroscopic objects is based on
the use of decoherence theory to explain the appearance of an approximate
basis in which such objects have the relatively determinate states that they
are observed to have. Wallace is keen to avoid both versions of the Everett
interpretation which require a preferred basis in the physical world to be
written directly into the formalism, and many minds versions of the Everett
interpretation, which require a basis with respect to which macroscopic objects
⁷⁸ See Deutsch (1999), Wallace (2003b and 2006) , and Greaves (2004). Of course, meta-
physics and epistemology are not entirely independent here since many will reject Everettian
metaphysics if they believe that it can’t be used to recover the rationality of ordinary reliance
on the Born rule in epistemic practice. However, evaluation of the proposed resolution of the
Everettian probability problem would take us too far from our primary concerns. We are hap-
py to concede for the sake of argument that the probability problem can be solved by the
Everettian.
⁷⁹ He cites Worrall (1989)and Ladyman (1998) on structural realism, and also Dennett (1991a)
whose account of ‘real patterns’ we take up in the next chapter.

--- Page 190 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 177
have determinate properties to be given by the quantum mechanical properties
of the brains of conscious observers. ⁸⁰
The point about decoherence theory is that it shows in quantitative terms
how interference between terms that represent distinct states of macroscopic
objects very quickly becomes negligible. Macroscopic objects are systems with a
very large number of correlated degrees of freedom and the idea is that when a
microscopic system interacts with a measuring device decoherence is responsible
for the rapid appearance of a deﬁnite outcome. Some people have advocated
decoherence theory as a solution to the measurement problem in itself, but
the difﬁculty with this is that nothing in decoherence theory sufﬁces to explain
why there should be a single outcome of a measurement of a particle that
exists in a superposition of two quantum states with respect to the observable
being measured. ⁸¹ The other complaint about decoherence is that although it
shows that the entangled system will very quickly evolve into a state that is
for all practical purposes indistinguishable from a proper mixture rather than a
superposition, nonetheless the interference terms are still there, albeit very small.
This means that in principle it is possible to conduct an interference experiment
on the composite system and detect their effects. Neither of these problems are
faced by an advocate of the Everett interpretation like Saunders or Wallace who
will concede both that there is no single outcome for a measurement where a
system starts off in a superposition with respect to the observable in question,
and that in principle interference never goes away.
The issue that Wallace addresses is whether an approximate basis in which
macroscopic systems take on the appearance of deﬁnite states is sufﬁcient to
recover both the appearances, and the objectivity of discourse and theorizing
about our everyday ontology. His claim is that it is a fallacy to demand
an exact basis for the recovery of everyday objects and the distinct branches
or worlds of the universal wave function that is presumed to describe the
whole universe. Furthermore, Wallace argues that strict criteria of identity over
time for worlds and indeed people are also neither available nor necessary.
His account of what it is for higher-order objects to exist is in terms of the
emergence of patterns or structures (2003a, 91). He also points out that some
entities in physics, for example, quasi-particles, are not posits of fundamental
physics but rather they are real patterns whose existence consists in their
explanatory and predictive utility. Wallace also explicitly adopts functionalism
in the philosophy of mind, so mental states, such as the conscious experience
of observing a certain outcome of a quantum measurement, are themselves
patterns or structures. Hence, indeterminacy about the identity over time of
⁸⁰ The many minds theory has two variants due to Michael Lockwood (1989) and Albert and
Loewer (1988). For discussion of all aspects of the Everet t interpretation see Barrett (1999) and the
symposium in The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science (1996), 47.
⁸¹ See Adler (2003).

--- Page 191 ---

178 Ontic Structural Realism
macroscopic branches carries over to indeterminacy about the identity over time
of people.⁸²
One question that Wallace doesn’t answer is whether he is proposing a two-
tier ontology in terms of fundamental physics on the one hand, and emergent
approximate structures on the other, or whether he is happy with the idea that
it is real patterns all the way down. On the face of it he seems to be offering
a traditional realist view of the wave function, and then to be offering the real
patterns account for higher-order ontology. For example, he says: ‘A tiger … is
to be understood as a pattern or structure in the physical state’ (2003a, 92). On
the other hand, he points out that quantum particles are themselves emergent
patterns or structures of the quantum ﬁeld, and he is clearly aware of the
possibility that there is no underlying stuff.
This raises the issue addressed by Jonathan Schaffer (2003), namely whether
or not there is a ‘fundamental level’ to reality (recall the discussion of 1.6).
Schaffer argues that there are no good empirical grounds for believing that there
is a fundamental level, and good philosophical grounds for denying it. Arguably
we have inductive grounds for denying that there is a fundamental level since
every time one has been posited, it has turned out not to be fundamental
after all. Call ‘fundamentalism’ the view that there is a fundamental level to
reality. Ned Markosian (2005) defends ‘ontological fundamentalism’, the view
that the entities at the most fundamental level are the only real ones (or at least
are more real than any others). ⁸³ This is a familiar idea which can be captured
by Reichenbach’s (1957) distinction between illata and abstracta. The former
are the things that exist at the fundamental level, the latter are those things that
only exist because we conceptualize mereological sums of the illata as if they were
genuine objects for pragmatic purposes. We will argue in the next chapter that
the illata/abstracta distinction ought to be denied. The tentative metaphysical
hypothesis of this book, which is open to empirical falsiﬁcation, is that there is
no fundamental level, that the real patterns criterion of reality is the last word
in ontology, and there is nothing more to the existence of a structure than what
it takes for it to be a real pattern. Hence, particles or spacetime points are just
patterns that behave like particles or spacetime points respectively, just as ‘A tiger
⁸² Saunders (1993b) showed that observers understood as information-processing systems will
pick out a particular consistent history space because they must have memories, and memories
encoded in states that are not diagonal in the decoherence basis do not persist. Recently, Jim
Hartle (2004) has argued that the emergence of a local now for observers is due to their
information-processing properties.
⁸³ Recall from 1.2.3, that Markosian himself believes that there is a fundamental level consisting
of simple objects, and that all other objec ts are mereologically composed of simples. He denies
that this gives us grounds for denying the existence of higher-order objects. Note also that Schaffer
seems to assume that mereological atomism and fundamentalism amount to the same thing,
but this is not so since there could be a fundamental level which consists of one indivisible
entity.

--- Page 192 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 179
is any pattern which behaves as a tiger’ (Wallace 2003a, 93). ⁸⁴As Saunders puts
it: ‘I see no reason to suppose that there are ultimate constituents of the world,
which are not themselves to be understood in structural terms. So far as I am
concerned it’s turtles all the way down’ (2003d, 129).
One reason why we believe this is that we reject any grounds other than
explanatory and predictive utility for admitting something into our ontology.
However, we also have a more basic problem with the idea of a fundamental
level, namely, its presupposition that reality is structured into levels in the ﬁrst
place. The standard way in which these levels are distinguished is according
to size. So, for example, the domains of different special sciences are identiﬁed
with different scales, the atomic for physics, the molecular for chemistry, the
cellular for biology, and so on. A moment’s reﬂection makes the limitations
of this obvious since economics can be applied to an ant colony or the world
economy, and evolutionary theory can be applied to entities of any size (even,
according to Smolin (2000), to the whole universe). Furthermore, in accordance
with physics, we regard the structure of space and the metric used to measure
length as themselves emergent structures. Hence we can hardly treat them as
a fundamental framework within which to describe the levels against which
everything else exists.
Wallace’s citation of Ladyman (1998) recognizes the accord between his views
and OSR, while structuralism has been at the heart of Saunders’s work since at
least his (1993a and 1993b). Two important questions remain however:
(i) How does the idea of modal structure ﬁgure in the context of the Everett
interpretation?
(ii) Is the metaphysical view of this book committed to the Everett interpretation?
On the Everett interpretation, what we would normally regard as a non-realized
and non-actual possibility, such as an electron being found to be up in the
x-direction when we found it to be down in the x-direction, is realized (and
hence indexically actual just as in a Lewisian possible world) in another branch
of the universal wave function. Hence, there is a sense in which some of what are
from the everyday perspective possible but non-actual events are realized after all.
For the Everettian, more of the modal structure of the world than we ordinarily
think is realized. Note too, however, that many non-actual possibilities will not
be compatible with the wave function; for example the electron being in a deﬁnite
state of up in the z-direction given that it is up in the x-direction. Yet there is a
sense in which the electron could have been up in the z-direction; for example,
⁸⁴ Recall that the most plausible interpretation of GR has it that spacetime points cannot be
identiﬁed as real objects independently of the physic al properties associated with them, and the
most plausible view of quantum particles is that their individuality is conferred on them by the
relations into which they enter.

--- Page 193 ---

180 Ontic Structural Realism
if we had chosen to measure z-spin instead. In general it seems that lots of the
counterfactual possibilities that we quantify over in the special sciences will not
have counterparts in other branches, because they will not be compatible with the
universal wave function. So although on the Everett interpretation, there is more
to reality than the actuality that meets the eye, it is still the case that the actual (in
the non-indexical sense) universal wave function rules out some possibilities, and
hence that not all the modal structure of the world is realized. Furthermore, it is
also the case that the higher-order modal structure tracked by the special sciences,
for example, as embodied in the second law of thermodynamics or Newton’s law
of gravitation, is an objective feature of the world, and hence we take it that an
Everettian must still admit the idea of the modal structure of reality in order to
understand laws and (the appearance o f ) dynamics, even if they ultimately think
in terms of a timeless block universe without collapse.
T h eq u e s t i o nt h a tr e m a i n sf o ru si s( i i )a n dt h i sb r i n g su st ot h eh a r d e s tc h a l l e n g e
for our project, just because it is the hardest challenge for the philosophy of
physics. As Saunders (2003a and 2003b) says, one can only pronounce on the
ontology of quantum theories up to a point before one must have something to
say about the measurement problem.
3.7.4 Remarks on the measurement problem
The measurement problem is neatly posed as a trilemma:
(1) All measurements have unique outcomes.
(2) The quantum mechanical description of reality is complete.
(3) The only time evolution for quantum systems is in accordance with the
Schrödinger equation.
The problem is that QM often attributes to quantum objects superpositions
with respect to properties that we can measure. In such a case, say a particle in a
superposition of spin in the x-direction, QM does not attribute a deﬁnite state of
the property in question to the quantum system. But Schrödinger time evolution
is linear implying that if:
(a) system in state ‘up’ coupled to apparatus in ready state will evolve to system
in state ‘up’ and apparatus in state ‘reads up’
and
(b) system in state ‘down’ coupled to apparatus in ready state will evolve to
system in state ‘down’ and apparatus in state ‘reads down’
then,
(c) system in a superposition of state ‘up’ and ‘down’ and apparatus in ready state
will evolve to a superposition of system in state ‘up’ and apparatus in state
‘reads up’, and system in state ‘down’ and apparatus in state ‘reads down’.

--- Page 194 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 181
We don’t seem to observe superpositions of macroscopic objects like measurement
devices contradicting (1), and so we have a problem if we continue to assume that
the particle and the apparatus really don’t have deﬁnite states in accordance with
(2), and that the time evolution is always in accordance with (3). Everettians deny
(1), Bohmians and advocates of moda l interpretations deny (2), and dynamical
collapse theorists deny (3).
It is often claimed by philosophers that Bohm theory offers the best prospects
for realism about the quantum world. Bohm theory is a relatively straightforward
modiﬁcation of QM such that all particles have well-deﬁned trajectories at all
times (and indeed deﬁnite possessed values for all observables at all times),
and such that the evolution of all quantum systems is entirely deterministic
and causal, albeit subject to a non-local potential. However, philosophers and
physicists have often rejected Bohm theory because of its alleged ad hocness, lack
of simplicity relative to the standard formalism, and also because of its manifest
non-locality and hence incompatibility with relativity theory. ⁸⁵ On the other
hand, modal interpretations work by postulating that some property of quantum
systems is always deﬁnite and ﬁnding one for any given case so that macroscopic
measurements end up being deﬁnite. These interpretations seem to be largely
ignored by physicists. In general, the denial of (2) is scientiﬁcally unmotivated and
ad hoc, and only motivated by philosophical rather than physical considerations.
It also seems to result in theories that are empirically indistinguishable from
regular QM and which are extremely difﬁcult to turn into adequate ﬁeld theories.
This response to the measurement problem seems to be the most problematic to
us, falling foul of the PNC.
With respect to (3), we have already mentioned that it may be incompatible
with relativity theory. However, given that physical models that may give rise
to new empirical predictions are proposed for dynamical collapse, it does not
seem to be as much of a purely philosophical response as (2). We think it is an
open question whether collapse is a genuine physical process and it is one that
we as philosophers of science are not qualiﬁed to pronounce upon. If physics
comes to recognize collapse as real then we would not be prepared to gainsay that
decision despite our suspicion that collapse models are also ad hoc and physically
unmotivated. It seems that some form of Everettian QM is the most natural for
us to adopt, and indeed we regard it as a genuinely open question whether (1) is
in fact false. However, we do have some grounds for not embracing the Everett
interpretation.
First, and most importantly from the point of view of our naturalism, no
quantum theory is yet globally empirically adequate theory and so we have
no reason to regard any interpretation of it as the last word in metaphysics.
It might be objected that lack of a globally empirically adequate theory has
⁸⁵ Everettians also often argue that Bohm theory features all the ontology of the Everett
interpretation while adding particles into some branches. See Brown and Wallace (forthcoming).

--- Page 195 ---

182 Ontic Structural Realism
not prevented us from drawing metaphysical conclusions about the status of
individuals in fundamental physics. ⁸⁶However, there is an important difference
since in that case we found a consilience between quantum theories and GR
in favour of rejecting self-subsistent individuals in favour of relational structure.
That consilience is extended by Wallace and Saunders since they advocate a
structuralist Everett metaphysics; however, we are not yet convinced that an
Everettian plurality is the most consilient way of looking at contemporary
physics. We agree that it might be, but so far the main evidence for the Everettian
position comes only from quantum theories. The Everett interpretation has
important cognate offspring in cosmology and quantum gravity research, but
as yet there is no way of knowing whether its radical metaphysical plurality of
macroworlds will be posited by future physics. Second, given that we don’t know
the wave function of the actual universe, nor precisely how to recover the states of
macroscopic objects, it seems to be an open question whether the true complete
wave function will give rise to more than one complete macroworld. Multiple
branches might be an artefact of incomplete descriptions and of the use of QM
to represent the states of macroscopic objects.
Note that the way we set up the measurement problem relies on the idea that
the state of an apparatus for measuring, say, spin in the x-direction, is a quantum
state that can be represented in the usual way by a ket vector | reads ‘up’>.T h e
usual rationale for treating this as a quantum state is that the apparatus is supposed
to be made of a very large number of quantum particles, but nonetheless is still
essentially the same kind of thing as the electron it is measuring. However, on
the view of higher-order ontology sketched above (and explained in detail in the
next chapter), there is no reason to regard the measuring device as something that
exists at all from a microscopic perspective. We have also made clear our hostility
to the idea that macroscopic objects are fundamentally made of microscopic
ones. Hence, the application of the quantum formalism to macroscopic objects
is not necessarily justiﬁed, especially if those objects are importantly different
from microscopic objects, as indeed they are, in not being carefully isolated from
the environment. From the point of view of the PNC, the representation of
macroscopic objects using quantum states can only be justiﬁed on the basis of its
explanatory and predictive power and it has neither. In fact, QM is explanatory
and predictively inaccurate at this scale since it entails that there ought to be
superpositions that are not in fact observed. The predictive success of QM in this
context consists in the successful application of the Born rule, and that is bought
at the cost of a pragmatic splitting of the world into system and apparatus.
In sum, then, we deny that measurement devices are the mereological sums of
quantum particles. Rather, they are real patterns and their states are legitimate
posits of science in so far as they enable us to keep track of the phenomena. They
do not enable us to do this if we regard them as quantum states, and therefore
⁸⁶ We are grateful to David Wallace for pressing us on this point.

--- Page 196 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 183
so regarding them is not warranted. It may turn out that the correct theory of
quantum gravity is one that requires the Everett interpretation, or it may be even
more relational as is suggested by Rovelli, whose view we shall mention below.
( This is also the prediction of Smolin 2001.) However, at the moment it must
be regarded as an open question whether there is more than one macroworld.
3.7.5 Quantum information theory
Extravagant claims have been made about information because the concept is
now apparently indispensable in so many ﬁelds of inquiry. For example, statistical
mechanics and thermodynamic entropy is often explained in information theo-
retic terms (Jaynes 1957a, b, and Brillouin 1956), genes are often characterized
as entities that code for particular proteins, and mathematical logic can be under-
stood in terms of information-processing (Chaitin 1987). Some have claimed
that most if not all of the important laws of physics can be derived by information
theoretic reasoning (Frieden 1998). In the next chapter we explain why we are
sceptical about the ‘grand synthesis’ of science in information theory. However,
recently the emergence of quantum information theory has led to information
theoretic characterizations and interpretations of QM, and in this section we
explore the relationship between OSR and some of these developments. We offer
a far from comprehensive discussion of a rich and fascinating new area of physics
that is ripe for systematic philosophical investigation, and seek only to draw
attention to points of consilience with OSR and the themes of this book. ⁸⁷
In classical information theory the Shannon entropy, H(x), is a measure of
the amount of information in a signal. H(x) quantiﬁes the minimum number of
sequences that need to be distinguished for the transfer of information from a
certain source, x. The content of both sources and channels can be measured. ⁸⁸
Quantum information theory (QIT ) is largely concerned with features of many-
particle QM that arise because of entanglement. ⁸⁹ The origins of QIT go
back to discussions about the production of entropy in measurement and von
Neumann’s use of an information theoretic quantity for the thermodynamic
entropy of a quantum system. One of the most important aspects of quantum
information is that there is a kind of conservation principle applicable to it that
states that the degree of entanglement in a quantum system cannot be increased
by local operations and classical communication (see Nielsen and Chuang 2000,
section 12.5). QIT has been operationalized to the extent that there are measures
of quantum information that are based on the amount of noise applied locally
⁸⁷ The essentials of quantum information theory are explained in Nielsen and Chuang (2000).
A superb investigation of many of the int eresting philosophical and foundational issues raised by
quantum information theory is Timpson (2004).
⁸⁸ See Shannon and Weaver (1949). A good introduction is Pierce (1980).
⁸⁹ Note that it is possible to have entanglement without non-locality and non-locality without
entanglement.

--- Page 197 ---

184 Ontic Structural Realism
to a subsystem to destroy correlation with the other subsystem(s). The main aim
of QIT is to determine exactly how entanglement can be used as a resource for
information processing, coding, and communication. Some authors argue that
the notion of information is ineliminable in explanations of otherwise puzzling
quantum phenomena. For example, fullerene (a molecule of sixty carbon atoms)
in the two-slit experiment will produce an interference pattern. However, as the
temperature of the molecules is increased, the interference pattern breaks down.
This may be explained by pointing out that at higher temperatures there is an
enhanced probability for the emission of thermal photons that carry ‘which-path’
information, and this makes the latter lose its wavelike properties in accordance
with the uncertainty relation (Hackermüller et al. 2004).
There are various views about the status of QIT:
(1) Quantum information is something completely new in physics ( Jozsa 1998).
(Bub 2004, 262 also claims that information is a new physical entity.)
(2) Quantum information is just classical information stored in quantum
systems (Duwell 2003).⁹⁰
(3) Quantum information is just subjective degrees of belief (Fuchs and Peres
2000).
According to (3) the quantum state of a system is just a probability distribution
in disguise. This is an instrumentalist approach that is metaphysically unhelpful.
(For a critique see Hagar 2005.) The conﬂict between inﬂationary (1) and
deﬂationary (2) approaches to the ontology of information is what concerns us
here.
The Clifton–Bub–Halvorson theorem (CBH) (2003) (see also Halvorson
2004) purports to show that information-theoretic constraints are sufﬁcient to
recover the essential algebraic structure of QM (usually identiﬁed with the algebra
of bounded operators on a Hilbert space). ⁹¹ The constraints are as follows:
(i) Superluminal information transfer via measurement is impossible;
(ii) perfectly broadcasting the information contained in an unknown physical
state is impossible;
(iii) no bit commitment. ⁹²
Developing the ideas in Clifton et al. (2003), Bub (2004) argues that in the
light of this we should think of QM as a theory about the possibilities and
impossibilities of information transfer rather than a theory about the mechanics
⁹⁰ Duwell no longer argues that quantum information does not exist.
⁹¹ The general framework that they used is that of C* algebra, the technicalities of which we ignore.
Sufﬁce it to say that this is a general framework within which all existing theories of classical and quan-
tum physics can be represented. That notwithstanding it is possible to question whether the C* alge-
braic framework is overly restrictive (see Timpson 2004, section 6.2.2, and Halvorson 2004, 292).
⁹² This is a cryptographic protocol that we do not explain here.

--- Page 198 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 185
of waves or particles. Interestingly from our point of view, Bub argues that the
information-theoretic interpretation of QM that h e defends demands that state
preparation and measurement devices be understood as black boxes from the
point of view of QM. He argues that no account of measurement interactions in
terms of QM can be acceptable because it would allow the information-theoretic
constraints above to be violated (section 3.4). QM on this view is a theory about
the statistical relationships between preparation devices and measurement devices.
Timpson (2004, 218) criticizes this approach for failing to provide an
interpretation of QM in the sense of an account of the ‘nature’ of the world that
explains why the statistics come out as they do. (We return to the idea of brute
statistical regularities below.) Yet from the point of view of the theory developed
in this book, attempts to inquire into the ‘deep nature’ of the world over and
above the attempt to characterize its modal structure are not strictly speaking
meaningless, but they are nonetheless scientiﬁcally worthless. We therefore note
with approval that Bub rejects the search for such natures and argues that
quantum theories are not about the mechanics of some imagined microworld at
all, and that he defends the claim that the measurement problem is a pseudo-
problem (262) precisely because he rejects the demand that QM be applicable to
state preparation and measurement devices (just as we argue in 3.7.4).
All this notwithstanding, there is arguably a lot more to quantum physics
than the bits of the formalism recovered in axiomatizations such as that of CBH.
Furthermore, the standard response to claims that everything is information is
an insistence that information must be encoded in the physical properties of
the world and that therefore there must be physical systems and properties for
there to be any information. Furthermore, Duwell (2003) argues that there is
an important difference between classical and QIT, namely that a quantum
source produces a physical sequence of quantum systems, whereas a Shannon
source doesn’t produce a physical system. He argues that the criterion of suc-
cess for the transfer of quantum information is property transfer, and hence
that quantum information is the intrinsic and relational properties of a quan-
tum system understood as dispositions for measurement behaviour. Similarly
Timpson (2006, 588) argues that ‘Information is an abstract (mass) noun and
does not refer to a spatio-temporal particular, to an entity or a substance.’ ⁹³
Timpson attempts to diffuse debates about ‘where the information travels’ in
protocols like quantum teleportation, and claims that it is not matter that is
transported but the quantum state. ⁹⁴He argues that talk of information moving
is based on hypostatization. He points out that other physical entities, such as
⁹³ Timpson (2004 and 2006) considers the implications for ‘information transfer’ of a variety
of interpretations of QM. Valentini ( 2002) shows that if Bohm theory is correct superluminal
signalling is possible in principle with a collection of partic les that is not distributed in accordance
with the modulus squared of the wave function.
⁹⁴ However, he concedes that if what grounds individuality is form, then it is fair to say that
objects are transported (see his n. 5, and Vaidman 1994).

--- Page 199 ---

186 Ontic Structural Realism
energy or heat, that might be argued to be similarly abstract, are subject to local
conservation laws.
However, from our perspective worries about the insubstantial nature of
information are moot because we reject the dichotomy between the abstract and
the concrete, and between the substantival and the structural, in the ﬁrst place.
Some uses of information theory are indeed purely formal. However, as Collier
(1990, 1996) has argued, the sciences of dynamical systems make continuous and
irreducible reference to what he calls ‘bound’ information, that is, information
that is realized directly in what everyone regards as physical systems. Here we go
a bit further still in our arguments: there are no entities in the material mode
according to us, merely the world and its real patterns. In the next chapter we
will use informational concepts to deﬁne these real patterns. In doing this, we
do not intend to be casting a bet that John Wheeler (1990) is right to think
that information theory will become the over-arching conceptual framework for
fundamental physics; this is partly becau se, for reasons we will present in 4.3,
when Wheeler suggests this he is clearly doing philosophy rather than physics,
and we suspect the philosophy in question is naïve. However, we think there is at
present no rival to information theory as a conceptual apparatus for generalizing
a family of notions, including especially causation and inductive projection, in
ways that unify these notions with concepts in fundamental physics. This is fully
explained in the next chapter. For now, we note only that using information
theory to express metaphysical hypotheses is PNC-compatible because, as we will
see, Bub echoes many serious physicists in suggesting that information will come
to be regarded as a primitive in physics. Yet more physicists we cite in Chapter 4
who do not go this far nevertheless regard informational properties as genuine
physical properties, applicable not merely in thermodynamics (which might be
a special science; see 4.3), but in quantum physics. Hence, information may in
some sense be all there is at the scale where we describe most generally the modal
structure of the world.
Modality plays an important role in the foundations of QM. For example,
it is possible to prove a Bell inequality from the assumptions of locality and
counterfactual deﬁniteness, which states that the result that would have been
obtained in a given measurement had it been performed is determinate (Redhead
1987). Henry Stapp (1987) also proved that the simultaneous or conjunctive
satisfaction of locality conditions across different possible worlds, deﬁned with
respect to alternative and incompatible measurements that could be performed
on a pair of systems in the singlet state, is enough to derive a contrary empirical
prediction to that of QM. Again, Bell’s theorem is remarkable because it is not
really a theorem about QM at all, but rather it places constraints on any viable
successor of QM. Even van Fraassen (1991) concedes that it restricts the ‘way the
world could be’, given that QM is empirically adequate in its domain. He argues
that it shows that no causal account of the correlations between entangled systems
is possible. Note that this is a modal claim, albeit a negative one. Hence, even

--- Page 200 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 187
van Fraassen concedes that Bell’s theorem reveals something about the modal
structure of the world. He concludes that we must accept that some correlations
between physical systems are brute and not explicable in terms of either a direct
causal link or a common cause. These claims are challenged by Cartwright
(1989), who argues that we should relax the requirements we place on causation
rather than abandoning causal explanation. Nonetheless, others have similarly
argued that the correlations among entangled systems are brute, including Arthur
Fine (1987) who like van Fraassen thinks of this as a deﬂationary and antirealist
move. On the contrary we claim that the acceptance of such brute correlations,
properly understood, entails a metaphysical commitment to the objective modal
structure of the world, because the correlations in question are probabilistic and
hence modal and not merely occurrent.⁹⁵Arguably, what is really novel about the
conceptual structure of QM is that it seems to make use of probabilities irreducibly
and not (merely) epistemically. ⁹⁶Information theory makes irreducible use of
probabilities too. Codes must have strong probabilistic features. ⁹⁷
If we ask what information is, one common answer is that it is correlation. To
say that A carries information about B, is to say that there is a correlation between
the state of A and the state of B such that the probability of A being in a certain
state is not equal to the probability of it being so conditional on the state of B. This
leads some to replace talk of information in the interpretation of QM with talk of
correlation. Consider David Mermin’s ‘Ithaca’ interpretation of QM, according
to which: ‘Correlations have physical reality; that which they correlate does not’
(1998, 2). Mermin argues that the physical reality of a system consists in:
(a) the (internal) correlations among its subsystems;
(b) its (external) correlations with other systems, viewed together with itself as
subsystems of a larger system
Non-separable or entangled states ha ve the following feature: only the joint
state of the whole system completely determines the probabilities of state-
dependent properties and correlations among them. It is possible to write down
a probabilistic state of a subsystem (the reduced density matrix), but it will fail
to encode information about the subsystem’s correlations with other subsystems.
The state does not factorize, as it is usually put . Pure states are those states that
describe systems with no external correlations, whereas mixed states describe
states with external correlations. The singlet state is a pure state and expresses the
⁹⁵ There is one proviso needed of course. If, contrary to the argument of 3.7.4, there are multiple
macroworlds, then the probabilistic structure is occurrent after all.
⁹⁶ Lucien Hardy (2003) derives much of the algebraic structure of QM by adding one new
axiom to a classical probability theory of measurement. Note that van Fraassen (1980) accepts that
probability is an ineliminable modality in science.
⁹⁷ Dan Hausman (1998, 64–5, and 251–2) also thinks that the connections between outcomes
of measurements on entangled states are modal but not causal. He refers to them as nomic
(N) connections. Hausman’s N-connections are modal relations.

--- Page 201 ---

188 Ontic Structural Realism
information about subsystem correlations that is not stored in an arbitrarily small
spacetime region. In this sense, quantum information is not instantiated locally.
It is a remarkable fact that the subsystem correlations (for any one resolution of
a quantum system into subsystems) are sufﬁcient to completely determine the
quantum state of the whole system. ⁹⁸Hence, Mermin argues there is nothing
more to quantum states than correlations. ⁹⁹
Mermin cites the example of the electromagnetic ﬁeld that was widely but
falsely believed to be a substance (the ether), and suggests that similarly we
should abandon the search for a substratum for quantum information in physics.
However, he thinks there is a reality of qualia not described by physics. Thus
his is a Kantian or epistemic form of structural realism, because there is more to
reality than physical reality an d an unknowable nature to correlata. ¹⁰⁰While we
reject this aspect of his account, we note the consilience between Mermin’s idea
of correlations ‘all the way down’, and OSR as defended by us and Saunders.
That a practising physicist entertains the idea of modal structure ungrounded
in substances or natures of fundamental entities is further PNC-compatible
evidence that OSR should be taken seriously despite its incompatibility with the
intuitions fostered in philosophers by the combination of the parochial demands
placed on our cognition during our evolution, and an education in the classical
texts of the metaphysical tradition.
Without committing ourselves to any particular interpretation of QM, we
claim that it describes the modal structure of the world, and not merely its
occurrent structure.¹⁰¹ Information is apt for characterizing QM because it is a
modal concept. Tim Maudlin shows that information is modal by arguing that
information can be transmitted without any energy or matter being transmitted
(2002a). The point is easily established by the following example: Bob tells Alice
that if he gets spin up he will phone her at 6pm, and if he gets spin down then
he won’t. If Bob doesn’t call then Alice gets information about the measurement
without any energy or matter being transmitted. As Maudlin says, in such a case
‘information is transmitted only because of the modal structure of the situation’
⁹⁸ Note that whether and to what extent a system is entangled depends not only on the division of
the system into subsystems, but also on the frame of reference with respect to which it is considered.
⁹⁹ Carlo Rovelli (2004, section 5.6) also defends the idea that QM is about information but
with a radical twist. He claims that the information i n question is that which systems have about
each other, but that different systems may attribut e incompatible states to the same target system
and there is no fact of the matter about which one is correct. This is a more radical relative state
theory than Everett’s because even the universe itself lacks a deﬁnite state. This is related to Smolin’s
suggestion that it is impossible to describe the whole universe at once, not because of epistemological
difﬁculties but because there is no fact of the matter about its state. Hence, this approach seems to
require intuitionistic logic. We do not endorse this view or reject it, but we note that it is compatible
with OSR while going further.
¹⁰⁰ Cf. Wheeler (1990) which is discussed in 4.3, and t he discussion of Lewis et al. in 3.4. In 4.4
we explain why we reject qualia.
¹⁰¹ Note that Esfeld (2004) and Mermin (1998) explicitly commit themselves to objective
probabilities.

--- Page 202 ---

James Ladyman and Don Ross 189
(2002a, 163, his emphasis). Alice only knows the result of the measurement
because of what would have happened had the result been otherwise. ¹⁰²
3.8 CONCLUSION
Fundamental physics suggests that the world is not composed of an aggregate
of self-subsistent individual objects. The PNC and the PPC suggest that lessons
can be drawn for the special sciences from this, and we will argue in the next
chapter that the special sciences should not be founded upon an individualist
metaphysics either. As we saw in Chapter 1, some philosophers argue that there
are no self-subsistent individuals described by the special sciences because such
individuals as there may be are made of atoms. Of course, we deny this and think
it is only defended by those oblivious to the implications of our best physics.
There is no single account of what individuals there are because, we argue, the
special sciences may disagree about the bounds and status of individuals since
they describe the world at different scales. According to the view developed in
what follows, real patterns determine what kinds of individuals are legitimate
book-keeping devices of the various special sciences.
Once we have considered the complications arising from relations between
fundamental physics and special sciences, we return to the claim that the world
is made of information and distinguish between two interpretations:
(i) The world is made of a new substance or substantive particular called
information (‘infostuff ’).
(ii) The world is not made of anything and information is a fundamental concept
for understanding the objective modality of the world, for example, laws,
causation, and kinds.
We reject (i) as a further example of domesticating metaphysics, but we have a
lot to say about (ii) in the rest of this book. We may entertain the endorsement of
information-theoretic fundamentalism in the following deﬂationary sense: ‘it is
impossible to distinguish operationally in any way reality and information … the
notion of the two being distinct should be abandoned’ (Zeilinger 2004, 219).
¹⁰² Landauer’s Principle has recently been defended by Ladyman et al. (2007) in a way that
depends on explicating what it means for a physical pr ocess to implement a logical process in modal
terms. For example, to implement the logical operation AND in a physical system, it is not enough
that the input states 1 and 0 give the output state 0, it must also be true that had 1 and 1 been the
input states, 1 would have been the output state. Information-processing, like information, is modal.

--- Page 203 ---

4
Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier
4.1 SPECIAL SCIENCES AND DISUNITY HYPOTHESES
We begin this chapter by consolidating the constraints on metaphysics as
uniﬁcation of science that we have articulated up to this point.
First, we require that a metaphysical hypothesis respect the constraint of the
PNC. Floridi (2003) criticizes what he calls the ‘eliminativist’ interpretation
of OSR, the view that self-subsistent individuals do not exist, on the grounds
that it lets the tail of the quantum-theoretic problems over entanglement wag
the dog of our general world-view. But we endorse the Primacy of Physics
Constraint (PPC), according to which failure of an interpretation of special-
science generalizations to respect negative implications of physical theory is
grounds for rejecting such generalizations.¹ Thus Floridi’s modus tollens is for us
a modus ponens: if the best current interpretation of fundamental physics says
there are no self-subsistent individuals, then special sciences had better admit, for
the sake of uniﬁcation, of an ontologica l interpretation that is compatible with a
non-atomistic metaphysics.²
The PNC can be invoked again, independently, here. The increasingly
widespread use of dynamical systems theory in the behavioural and life sciences
has sparked a lively new debate among behavioural and life scientists over
¹ We do not mean by this that special scientis ts are expected to enumerate all such implications
and then check to make sure that their conclusio ns accord with them. Strictly speaking, the negative
implications of a theory are inﬁnite. Rather, what we mean is that when a conﬂict is actually found
between what fundamental physics says there isn’t and a special science says there is, revisionary
work is in order for the special science in question.
² Unless the context makes it clear that we mean otherwise, all references to physics in the rest of
this chapter are to understood as referring to fundamental (or putatively fundamental) physics (in
the sense explained in 1.4, and further elaborated in 4.5).

--- Page 204 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 191
individualistic explanation. (See Ross 2005 for a polemical review of these
debates; see also Kincaid 1997. Our view of the relationship between dynamical
systems and individuals is made clear later in this chapter and in Chapter 5.)
We philosophers thus do not need to ask behavioural and life scientists to pause
in their work and pay attention to our remarks about their disciplines just
because we think they ought to give special attention at the moment to issues
of uniﬁability with physics. Similar remarks can be made about chemistry and
chemists (Ponce 2003; Needham 2002).
The following worry now arises. It is easier to give up on self-subsistent
individuals in physics than it is in the special sciences because the latter, but
not the former, express many (or most) crucial generalizations in terms of
transmissions of causal inﬂuence from one (relatively) encapsulated system to
another (Kincaid 2004). The thrust of methodological individualism in the
special sciences can be glossed as follows: isolate the properties of systems that
behave in vivo just as they behave in situ . This is self-subsistence. It is of
course controversial to deny that physics identiﬁes and describes causal relations
among such systems, but this proposal has at least often been taken seriously;
Russell (1913) vigorously defended the claim, and it has recently been revived
by Redhead (1990) and Norton (2003), among others. OSR, as defended in the
previous chapter, comports naturally with it. In Chapter 5, sections 1–4, we offer
a new interpretation of the Russell–Redhead thesis that we reach by applying
insights on the metaphysics of the special sciences back to physics. (Although
according to the PPC special sciences do not constrain physics, this does not
imply that we can’t use metaphysical insights derived from special sciences for
attempts at uniﬁcation, so long as all such insights also have some independent
PNC-compatible motivations arising from within physics.) Suppose we agree for
the sake of argument that physical theory doesn’t require or suggest irreducible
causal relations amongst encapsulated systems. That still leaves a serious problem
for OSR if special sciences do crucially trafﬁc in such relations. Unless the black
boxes represented by the encapsulated systems in question all look (from the
perspective of current special sciences) as if they’re being progressively unpacked
in a way that reduces away the causal relations, then these systems are effectively
self-subsistent individuals for all practical purposes and we haven’t really achieved
uniﬁcation on the terms we’ve defended.
Another way of approaching the family of issues here is by reference to
the literature on ‘causal exclusion’. Kim (1998) argues that unless functionally
individuated psychological properties are ‘functionalized’ ³ re-descriptions of
physical properties with which they are metaphysically identical, then either local
supervenience of the mental on the physical must fail (in Kim’s terms, a version of
dualism must hold), or mental properties must be epiphenomenal, or one and the
same event must have two determining causes, a mental one and a physical one.
³ This is a special term of art deﬁned by Kim. See Kim (1998, 99–101), for the details.

--- Page 205 ---

192 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
( The latter possibility is referred to as ‘causal overdetermination’.) Kim claims
that this argument does not generalize to other special sciences that trafﬁc in
functionally individuated kinds (ibid. 77–80). However, this claim has persuaded
few critical commentators, and we think Marras (2000) decisively refutes it. (See
also Bontly 2001.) Now, it follows from the generalization of causal exclusion
that when special sciences offer generalizations about functionally individuated
kinds, if these kinds are taken to supervene locally on physically heterogeneous
tokens (for example, pain-in-a-person an d pain-in-a-rabbit, or two monetary
transactions where one involves someone handing someone else a dollar and the
other involves someone performing an electronic transfer) then the generalizations
in question cannot be strictly true (in the sense of supporting the counterfactuals
to which they’re literally committed). Kim is clear that to the extent that
one takes the objects of such generalizations seriously in metaphysics, one is
ontologically confused. Ross and Spurrett (2004) then argue as follows. The
overwhelming majority of special-science generalizations concern functionally
individuated types that do not have physically homogeneous supervenience bases
(if, for purposes of argument, one grants that all properties locally supervene on
physical properties). It then follows from Kim’s argument, if Marras is right,
that all special sciences express ontological confusion in their basic assumptions
(assuming we take the special sciences ontologically seriously).
As we indicated in Chapter 1, the naturalist must regard this consequence of
Kim’s argument as a reductio; PNC-compatible metaphysics cannot ‘discover’
that most scientiﬁc activity expresses basic ontological confusion. However, this
doesn’t tell us which of Kim’s premises is mistaken; as Ross and Spurrett concede,
Kim’s argument raises a genuine issue which a sound metaphysical theory must
solve, not simply wave away. The premise that Ross and Spurrett argue should
be rejected is that which asserts that all functionally individuated kinds, events
and properties locally supervene on (respectively) physical kinds, events, and
properties. Of course, it is much easier to say that local supervenience doesn’t
generally hold than to explain how it could fail in a PPC-compatible world. One
premise of Kim’s we endorsed above is that special sciences generally explain
by citing causal relations. If these causal relations do transmit inﬂuence from,
and only from, one physically constituted object or event to another, then how
can the special sciences not be ontologically confused? If, on the other hand,
some causal inﬂuences propagate among non-physically constituted objects and
events, how could this not amount to dualism? If dualism were true then the
PPC would be inappropriate and the naturalistic world-view as we described it
in Chapter 1 would be in serious trouble.
This way of approaching the problem is directly connected to the issues
around ontological reductionism and its denial. The kind of dualism to which
Kim thinks one is forced if his version of reductionism is denied is characterized
by him as ‘emergentism’. In Kim (1999, 19–21) he identiﬁes it with ﬁve ‘central
doctrines’ as follows:

--- Page 206 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 193
(1) Emergence of complex higher-level entities: systems with a higher level of
complexity emerge from the coming together of lower-level entities in new
structural conﬁgurations.
(2) Emergence of higher-level properties: all properties of higher-level entities arise
out of the properties and relations that characterize their constituent parts.
Some properties of these higher, complex systems are ‘emergent’ and the rest
merely ‘resultant’.
(3) The unpredictability of emergent properties: emergent properties are not
predictable from exhaustive information concerning their ‘basal conditions’.
In contrast, resultant properties are predictable from lower-level information.
(4) The unexplainability/irreducibility of emergent properties:emergent properties,
unlike those that are merely resultant, are neither explainable nor reducible
in terms of their basal conditions.
(5) The causal efﬁcacy of the emergents: emergent properties have causal powers
of their own—novel causal powers irreducible to the causal powers of their
basal constituents.
As Batterman (2002) observes, doctrines (1) and (2) express commitment to a
world that decomposes uniquely into non-overlapping components, and to a view
of the world as dividing naturally into levels related at each step by a composition
relation—commitments, we argue, that current physics does not support.
Batterman does not quarrel with these commitments, but joins us in doubting
the importance of doctrines (1) and (2) for understanding scientiﬁc—especially
physical—explanation. Batterman also doubts the relevance of doctrine (5), for
reasons we discuss and endorse in 5.5. He defends what Kim would regard as
a weaker form of emergentism characterized just by doctrines (3) and (4). We
substantially agree with Batterman about this, but prefer a different label—‘scale
relativity of ontology’—for the position, because ‘emergent’ and all its semantic
kin have come to stand for a hopeless jumble of different ideas in different
literatures, including popular ones. We discuss this in 4.2.
For now, the key point is that commitment to a world of levels strictly
composed out of deep-down little things has played an essential role in leading
neo-scholastic metaphysicians to cast doubt on the ontological seriousness of all
the special sciences. This is very far-reaching anti-naturalism.
If the basic little elements of reality whose assumption helps to drive these
sweeping conclusions actually existed, then surely it would have to be physics
that studied them (and their ‘causal powers’). We spent the previous chapter
arguing that physics rejects them. (In Chapter 5, we argue that physics does not
assign ‘causal powers’ to fundamental aspects of reality either.) But, again, since
special sciences do seem generally to be about kinds of things and their causal
powers, our basis for rejecting neo-scholasticism leaves their metaphysical status
mysterious. Kim and those who share his puzzles about ‘higher-level’ inquiries

--- Page 207 ---

194 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
need to be answered, rather than just brushed off, by an adequate naturalistic
metaphysics.
This sets the agenda for the chapter. We need to articulate a metaphysics for
the special sciences that (i) respects the PNC by being motivated by problems that
matter to special scientists, (ii) keeps the PPC in view by spelling out links to the
conclusions about physics arrived at in Chapter 3, and (iii) allows us to explain
the ubiquitous appeal to causal relations amongst encapsulated systems in special
sciences, in a way that doesn’t leave either the causal relations or the apparent
encapsulated systems sitting undischarged in the metaphysical principles that do
the unifying work.
Before we launch this task, we should re-emphasize that the demand to unify
the special sciences with physics is, according to us, the motivation for having any
metaphysics at all. In this context, the fact that inquiry into the nature of the world
is organized into a multiplicity of distinct disciplines takes on special importance.
A naïve naturalism might simply read ontological disunity directly from the insti-
tutional disunity, producing a picture like the one promoted by Dupré (1993).
This amounts to abandonment of the metaphysical ambition for a coherent gen-
eral view of the world, and is the obverse of neo-scholastic metaphysics, according
to which whatever cannot be forced into the procrustean bed of a neat, compo-
sitionally structured hierarchy should be denied ‘real’ existence. Neo-scholastics
accord a priori metaphysical argument too much weight, and advocates of
ontological disunity accord a posteriori metaphysical argument too little.
Our respective grounds for resisting these two extreme attitudes towards
the role of metaphysics aren’t exactly symmetrical. So far as neo-scholasticism
is concerned, we can allow that the world might have been compositionally
simple. This cuts no ice according to the PNC, which requires positive scientiﬁc
motivations for taking metaphysical hypotheses seriously; and we have argued
that the empirical evidence tells against mereological versions of reductionistic
uniﬁcation. With respect to naïve ontological disunity hypotheses, however,
the problem is yet deeper: we are not convinced of their coherence. Is the
thesis supposed to be that we inhabit multiple, separate universes at once? We
do not understand this hypothesis if, as in Dupré’s case, it is intended as a
variety of realism. On the other hand, according to the PNC coherence under
intuitions doesn’t count as metaphysical evidence, so if the PNC motivated both
realism and disunity we would just have to adjust our intuitions. Alternatively,
perhaps the thesis amounts, Dupré’s disavowals notwithstanding, to a version of
idealism: the only worlds that exist are anthropocentric ones, and participation by
observers constructs multiple, separate ones. ⁴ Everett’s relative state formulation
of QM might be used to motivate a PNC-compatible version of Dupré’s view. ⁵
⁴ Nelson Goodman (1978) advocat es this picture.
⁵ We do not think that many physicists take idealist or dualist interpretations of Everettian QM
(like that of Albert and Loewer 1988) to be a serious scientiﬁc hypothesis. But the PNC just says

--- Page 208 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 195
However, this would do nothing to explain the disunity that arises amongst
the special sciences; the idealistic interpretation of Everettian QM is equally
compatible with a multiplicity of mereologically uniﬁed individual realities ⁶
(where the mereological relations hold among observer-generated effects rather
than traditional little things). Of course, if we’re right that the evidence suggests
that the world isn’t uniﬁed by the composition relation, then if idealistic
Everettian QM were also well motivated we’d have grounds for believing in two
independent senses of disunity.
We discussed the relationship between Everettian QM and our metaphysical
thesis in 3.7.3 and 3.7.4. Here, we just note that the disunity of idealistic
Everettian QM and disunity of the Dupré type are entirely independent. The
burden thus falls on us to provide PNC-compatible motivations for denial of
Dupré-type disunity, since by the PNC the institutional multiplicity of science
makes our view, rather than the disunity view, the one faced with the burden of
argument.
One further point of preliminary clariﬁcation is necessary before we proceed.
In much of the literature it is customary to use ‘special sciences’ to refer to
all sciences other than physics. This seems to us to be a sloppy habit, since it
suggests the obviously false idea that every generalization of physics is intended
to govern everything in the universe. The version of uniﬁcation that we defend
in this chapter provides the basis for a non-reductionistic distinction between
fundamental and non-fundamental science that does not cut neatly across the
divide between physics and other sciences (though no empirical sciences that are
not part of physics are fundamental). Thus some branches of physics, for example,
acoustics, count as special sciences, according to us. Let us operationalize the
concept of a special science as follows: a science is special iff it aims at
generalizations such that measurements taken only from restricted areas of the
universe, and/or at restricted scales are potential sources of conﬁrmation and/or
falsiﬁcation of those generalizations. For example, only measurements taken in
parts of the universe where agents compete for scarce resources are relevant to the
generalizations of economics, and no measurements taken in the centre of the
Earth are relevant to psychology. According to our view, there are only special
sciences and fundamental physics. Thus the overwhelming preponderance of
scientiﬁc activity is special-scientiﬁc activity.
The foregoing discussion has been heavily dialectical, so a recap is in order.
Special sciences seem more clearly committed to self-subsistent individuals, and
to causal relations holding among them, than do the fundamental theories of
that a metaphysical hypothesis needs to be mot ivated by a scientiﬁc one. So if a philosopher defends
a form of idealism by reference to Everettian QM, her procedure is PNC-compatible. We do not
mean to suggest that it would necessarily have any other merits.
⁶ By this we mean a world in which nothing exists that isn’t a strict part of something else, except
whole universes. Compositional uniﬁcation would be a strong version of this in which everything
except a whole universe is a component of something else.

--- Page 209 ---

196 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
physics. If fundamental relationships in physics are described by symmetric
mathematical relations (as they may or may not be), the same surely cannot
be said of the most important generalizations in biology or economics. Even if
quantum entanglement is thought to u ndermine individualism in fundamental
physics, it is generally thought not to ‘percolate upwards’ into the domains of
the special sciences, where this organism is distinct from that one, a selfsame
rock can be freely transported from context to context without its integrity
being threatened, and two consumers are necessarily separate if either their
utility functions or their consumption histories differ to any degree. Denying
individualism in fundamental physics while holding on to it as a metaphysics of
the special sciences leaves just two options with respect to one’s more general
metaphysical theory. Either one must be an instrumentalist about the special
sciences and deny the literal truth of their generalizations—the reductionist,
neo-scholastic option—or one must abandon the project of uniﬁcation. Both
of these options are currently popular among philosophers. But the ﬁrst asserts
philosophical authority to legislate the status of sciences and the second surrenders
the metaphysical ambition altogether. Denial o f naturalism and denial of the
possibility of philosophy have arguably been a recurring Scylla and Charybdis of
the twentieth century. We can try to steer between them only by ﬁnding a way
to deny individualism as an interpretation of the special sciences that doesn’t
rule out any currently empirically signiﬁcant special-science hypotheses. Ideally
(though, by the PPC, this isn’t required) we should try to do this in a way
that is second-order PNC-compatible, that is, partly motivated by special-science
hypotheses themselves and not just by considerations from physics.
So here goes.
4.2 DENNETT ON REAL PATTERNS
The previous paragraph’s Scylla is reductionism (since that is the view that
interprets science in terms of an a priori non-naturalistic metaphysics), and
Charybdis is instrumentalism about the special sciences (since instrumentalism
amounts to giving up on the possibility of metaphysics in our sense). ⁷ At this
point, Scylla is easier to avoid. We will therefore deal with it ﬁrst before turning
to the harder work of steering past Charybdis.
We noted above that reductionism is enjoying a period of popularity among
some of the philosophers we have referred to as neo-scholastics. These are
individualistic reductionists whose programme depends on the idea that at the
level of physics everything comes down to microbanging relationships amongst
⁷ Dupré calls himself a realist, but only because he acknowledges the existence of a mind-
independent world. Thus the contrast with his realism is idealism. But in denying that special
sciences produce generalizations over classiﬁcations independent of speciﬁc human purposes, he is
an instrumentalist about the special sciences.

--- Page 210 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 197
little things. As we showed in Chapter 3, this kind of generalized individualistic
reductionism is simply refuted by contemporary physics. In addition, as we
argued in the previous section, it doesn’t even succeed in successfully avoiding
instrumentalism with respect to current special sciences, since most of them indi-
viduate the kinds over which they generalize functionally, but reductionism tends
to ‘sunder’ functional kinds metaphysically (Kim 1998, Marras 2000, Bontly
2001, Ross and Spurrett 2004). Thus generalized individualistic reductionism is
forlorn.
We used the adjective ‘generalized’ above to mark the distinction between a
view according to which all kinds reduce to physical kinds from the view that
some kinds reduce, either to physical kinds, or to other kinds viewed as ‘below’
them in the traditional model of ontological levels. For example, Bickle (1998)
has recently produced a well-received model of mental processes according to
which mental kinds reduce to neurophysiological kinds. For reasons that will
soon be obvious, we don’t agree with Bickle. However, what we want to stress for
now is that this is of tangential importance, because as discussed in Chapter 1,
nothing in our position entails denial of the possibility of local intertheoretic
reductions in the Nagelian sense.
Given the state of play in physics as described in Chapter 3, the only
sort of generalized reductionism that would avoid instrumentalism about the
generalizations of the special sciences would be a non-individualist variety.
Therefore, it would have to be a view according to which all special-science
generalizations are special cases of physical generalizations, or combinations of
them (where, of course, the physical generalizations do not involve commitment
to self-subsistent individuals). One could defend such a view in a PNC-compatible
way only by illustrating or producing a sample of derivations of special-science
generalizations from fundamental physical ones, and giving reasons for thinking
that they were the leading edge of a wave. That is, one would need to
provide something like a non-individualist, non-mereological counterpart to
the Oppenheim–Putnam argument discussed in Chapter 1. However, far from
this looking like the current trend across the sciences, the increasing attention
being given to ‘complexity’ in many special sciences represents precisely the
opposite development. Few of the faddish advertisements for ‘emergence’ (see,
for example, Johnson 2001) carry serious burdens of metaphysical argument, but
the most interesting and detailed of them are based on the highly plausible idea
that derivation of many projectible ‘macro-level’ generalizations from ‘micro-
level’ ones is computationally intractable. This is a version of Kim’s emergentist
doctrine (3) from 4.1. We say more about this doctrine below. For now our point
is the straightforward one that there is no recent serious defence of generalized
non-individualistic reductionism that is motivated by detailed attention to
current science. ⁸ This doesn’t entitle us to promote anti-reductionism prior
⁸ Melnyk (2003) is a possible exception here. See 1.5.

--- Page 211 ---

198 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
to working out a PNC-compatible version of it. But we needn’t also work to
overthrow a thesis that has no scientiﬁc support.
As we will see, issues related to complexity are among the second-order PNC-
compatible⁹motivations for our positive theory of metaphysical uniﬁcation. But
these should be understood in the logical context of the attempt to ward off the
instrumentalism about special sciences that seems to threaten when we accept
the structuralist interpretation of physics defended in Chapter 3, plus the PPC.
Thus we turn to avoiding Charybdis.
Instrumentalism is a slightly elusive target. It arises in two main contexts:
radical pragmatism (as defended by, for example, Rorty 1993), which disavows
the very idea of objective ontological commitment; and common-sense realism,
which allows the objective reality of various kinds of everyday manifest objects,
but denies this status to kinds of objects postulated by theories constructed to
explain manifest phenomena. (On a b road construal of instrumentalism, van
Fraassen’s constructive empiricism is perhaps a third variation, which afﬁrms the
reality of observable objects according to a quite liberal notion of ‘observability’,
and promotes agnosticism rather than scepticism about the reality of theoretical
objects. But the difference between agnosticism and scepticism is plausibly only
rhetorical, in which case constructive empiricism is just a particular elaboration
of common-sense realism.) We will take instrumentalism in all its possible senses
as the contrast class with the realism we mean to afﬁrm. Let us therefore note that
we endorse a version of instrumentalism about all propositions referring to self-
subsistent individual objects, chairs and electrons alike. But we will be at pains
to show that our instrumentalism about propositions referring to self-subsistent
individuals in no way implies instrumentalism about theories—which is the
sort of instrumentalism that matters, and what we will have in mind whenever
we refer to ‘instrumentalism’ without qualiﬁca tion. Our contrasting realism is
realism about the domain of scientiﬁc description and generalization.
We may also distinguish global from local instrumentalism. The former has
been debated mainly in the philosophy of science literature. A number of
thinkers, however, have defended instrumentalism only with respect to particular
special sciences or clusters of them—especially the so-called ‘intentional sciences’
that generalize over kinds of propositional-attitude states. The economist Mil-
ton Friedman (1953), for example, argues that ﬁrms and consumers and other
common-sense economic objects are perfectly real, but not the esoteric types of
objects economists use to construct theories about them, such as utility and dis-
count functions (see Mäki 1992). Among philosophers, Alex Rosenberg defends
instrumentalism about intentional sciences (1992) and biology (1994), but not
physics. Such local instrumentalisms have persuaded far more philosophers over
the years than has global instrumentalism. Since our main topic in this chapter is
special science, it is thus doubly appropriate that in considering instrumentalism
⁹ That is, motivated by the contents of special sciences as well as by physics.

--- Page 212 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 199
we should focus on its local manifestations—especially on its neighbourhood of
greatest prevalence and inﬂuence, the philosophy of intentionality.
For many years, a lightning-rod ﬁgure in debates over instrumentalism about
intentional sciences has been Daniel Dennett. He has often been read as an
instrumentalist on the following basis. According to him (on this reading), minds
are just inferred theoretical ﬁctions, instances of an organizing principle for an
inter-deﬁned set of instruments we use in taking ‘the intentional stance’ to some
of the things that the bodies of organisms and some artefacts do. On this reading
of Dennett, he shows us that the mind–body puzzle is an artefact of not being
thoroughly instrumentalistic, and of taking minds to be common-sense objects,
like tables, when they are in fact just elements of predictive models, like quarks.
The puzzle results from the assumption of a particular (Cartesian) metaphysical
theory, and one dissolves it by dropping the metaphysics altogether rather than
by adopting a better metaphysical account.
Dennett (1993, 2000, personal correspondence) says unequivocally that he
has never intended to avow general instrumentalism about theoretical kinds (for
example, quarks). His early view, in the 1970s and 1980s, seems to have been
that intentional attitudes are sui generis, and that his ‘stance’ stance concerning
them had no particular implications for the general metaphysics or epistemology
of science. However, in a now-classic paper ‘Real Patterns’ (RP; Dennett 1991a),
he emerged from this neutrality to frame his view of mind in the context of what
Haugeland (1993) rightly regards as a distinctive metaphysical thesis. According
to RP, the utility of the intentional stance is a special case of the utility of
scale-relative perspectives in general in science, and expresses a fact about the
way in which reality is organized—that is to say, a metaphysical fact. The fact in
question is what we (but not Dennett) call the scale relativity of ontology.
We take it that scale relativity of epistemology isn’t controversial. To borrow
an example from Wallace (2001), if you want to predict what a hungry tiger will
do when confronted with a deer, you should study whole behavioural patterns of
whole tigers, not individual tiger cells or molecules. It is clearly motivated by any
thesis to the effect that models of complex systems are scientiﬁcally useful. It entails
Kim’s emergentist doctrine (3), and also his doctrine (4), if by a property’s being
‘explainable’ we mean that its speciﬁc instantiations, and not just its possibility
of being instantiated somewhere, are explained by ‘lower-level’ theories. This
kind of scale relativity is pragmatic, makes no metaphysical hypotheses, and so
is consistent with instrumentalism, or with mereological reductionism, or with
the denial of reductionism. It is, however, useful for quickly saying what scale
relativity in general (that is, applied either to epistemology or ontology) is:i ti s
the idea that which terms of description and principles of individuation we use
to track the world vary with the scale at which the world is measured. We gave
some examples of this in Chapter 3. Here are some more: at the quantum scale
there are no cats; at scales appropriate for astrophysics there are no mountains;
and there are no cross-elasticities of demand in a two-person economy.

--- Page 213 ---

200 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
Scale relativity of ontology is the more daring hypothesis that claims about
what (really, mind-independently) exists should be relativized to (real, mind-
independent) scales at which nature is measurable. As we saw in 3.7, Wallace and
Saunders endorse something very close to it as their way of handling the mea-
surement problem in QM. Saying that some—typically, macroscopic—objects
exist only at certain scales can easily slide into being a tendentious way of saying
that the objects in question aren’t real at all (as we will see in detail in a moment).
However, there is a point to it if one can motivate two principled distinctions:
ﬁrst, between scale-relative objects whose identiﬁcation contributes to descrip-
tions of real structures and purely ﬁctitious or constructed objects; and, second,
between structures observable (by any physically possible observer) at (and only
at) some restricted-scale parameters an d structures that merely are, in point of
fact, tracked by particular observers at particular scales. These distinctions are
implicitly motivated by Wallace, as we saw, and are explicitly motivated in our
account. Wallace draws his version of scale relativity of ontology directly from
Dennett’s RP.
Though, as noted above, Dennett denies that he is an instrumentalist, in RP
he wafﬂes inconsistently between scale relativity of ontology and of epistemology,
and at one point goes so far as to explicitly associate his view with Arthur Fine’s
(1984a, 1986) desperately inconclusive ‘Natural Ontological Attitude’. ¹⁰ Ross
(2000) draws attention to this, and argues that Dennett’s (1991a) argument
can only be made to work consistently against both of its main targets, classical
computational reductionism and eliminative materialism about mind, if it is read
as promoting an ontological interpretation of scale relativity. ¹¹ Dennett (2000,
359–62), replying directly to Ross, seems to go along with this, and has not since
said anything in press that is inconsistent with it. Therefore, let us here cut through
issues about Dennett’s self-interpretation, and move straight to an account of his
application of scale relativity of ontology to the case of dynamic patterns.
Let us begin with an example. Consider a large community of people, most
of whom don’t interact directly with one another, but who face a collective
¹⁰ We ﬁnd it impossible to determine from Fine’s various formulations of the NOA whether it
is intended as a version of realism or instrumentalism. It may be that, like Rorty, Fine means to
deny the sense of metaphysical questions altoget her, in which case his position is instrumentalist by
o u rl i g h t s .O nt h eo t h e rh a n d ,h em a yi n t e n do n l yt h ew e a k e rv i e w — o n ew es h a r e — t h a tt h e r e
are no speciﬁcally philosophical arguments for re alism that should be taken seriously on naturalist
grounds, but that many scientiﬁc realists mistakenly think there are. (We owe this point to Harold
Kincaid.) One belief of Fine’s we don’t accept is that any variety of realism commits its adherent to
taking Einstein’s side in the debate over hidden variables in QM. This leads Fine to what seems best
described as an easy-going realism about both common-sense objects and theoretical kinds, minus
belief in hidden variables. This amounts to philosophical quietism about the issues that interest us
here.
¹¹ The ‘wafﬂing’ just referred to consists in the fact that Dennett responds to computationalist
reductionism with arguments appropriate to a scientiﬁc realist, but responds to eliminative
materialism strictly by reference to what is practical given human epistemic limitations —which is
an instrumentalist strategy. See below, but especially Ross (2000), for further details.

--- Page 214 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 201
decision—say, a national election. Their behaviour might be inﬂuenced by a
set of national focal points tracked by public information media that try to
summarize the dynamics of their opinions, where these focal points themselves
organize and stabilize the dynamics in a feedback relationship. Attending to
these focal points may be essential for predicting and explaining the election
result. However, they are of little predictive efﬁcacy with respect to any particular
person’s opinions at any particular time, and they may not be perturbable by shifts
in view among even relatively large subsets of the population. Such phenomena
will often be invisible to an observer who looks for them at a measurement scale
that is too ﬁne, because they cannot be inferred by any systematic aggregation
procedure over individuals’ opinions, and the boundaries of their extensions at
micro-scales will tend to be indeterminate. Kelso (1995) provides further and
more detailed examples of many such phenomena from a diverse range of scales.
Following his (and widely accepted) usage, we will refer to them as ‘dynamic
patterns’.
There is a large recent philosophical literature on dynamic patterns. A good
deal of this concerns itself with puzzles about whether and how such patterns
can have causal efﬁcacy over and above the aggregated interactions of the causal
capacities of whatever the patterns are ‘made of ’. Consider Dennett’s own leading
example, John Conway’s ‘Game of Life’ (Poundstone 1985). ¹² This is based on
a simple implementation of cellular automata that makes a particular range of
stable dynamic attractors highly salient to people. A person using the system
naturally book-keeps its state sequences by reference to a typology of ‘emergent’
objects—‘gliders’, ‘eaters’, ‘spaceships’, etc.—that have only virtual persistence.
( That is, two successive instances of ‘the same’ glider share only structure, and
common participation in structures larger than themselves. A glider is clearly
mereologically composed of a small number of illuminated cells. However, its
successive instances are composed of different cells, and successive instances a
few steps apart have no cells in common.) Once this descriptive stance is adopted
towards Life, almost all users spontaneously track the dynamics in terms of causal
interactions among instances of these types—for example, a glider will be caused
to disappear through interacting with an eater. That is, Life users naturally begin
logging causal generalizations about the types of virtual objects, and thereby seem
to commit themselves to their objective existence.
¹² One should be cautious in using the Game of Life as a metaphysical model of the universe. It is
useful for the purposes to which Dennett puts it, because it shows how patterns can emerge at grains
of analysis coarser than the grain at which what is analogous to the fundamental microphysical level
is studied, even when all causal processes governing the latter are non-complex, known, measurable,
and deterministic. Life is thus a good antido te to romantic interpretations of emergence. However,
because in Life there is an unambiguous fundamental level composed of the aggregation of a ﬁnite
number of ‘little things’, and because no higher-level object types cross-classify the dimensions
of any models of the game relative to classiﬁcations in terms of cells, Life differs greatly from
the universe with respect to the kinds of reductio nism sustainable in it. Life admits of complete
decomposition; the universe does not.

--- Page 215 ---

202 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
Conservative metaphysicians regard this spontaneous response, if it is taken
as anything more than a practical heuristic, as a philosophical mistake. In
the example of the generalization just given, they would complain, the eater
is a redundant causal factor, since the program underlying Life, which in its
declarative representation quantiﬁes only over cells, is strictly deterministic. We
are reminded that an eater or a glider is, at any given time, ‘made of ’ cells and
nothing else. Then we are invited to agree that a thing cannot have causal efﬁcacy
over and above the summed causal capacities of the parts with which it is allegedly
identical. The result is supposed to be reductionism, and instrumentalism about
gliders and eaters.
In our view this whole debate is poorly motivated, because both sides in it
presuppose that questions about ontology must be parsed as questions about
which individuals are the ‘real’ ones: gliders and eaters (etc.) plus cells, or
just cells? We argue below that a main contributor to the confusion is a pre-
scientiﬁc conceptualization of causation that is undermined by PNC-inspired
considerations. We work up to this diagnosis by ﬁrst discussing Dennett’s
liberating though incomplete insight concerning the debate, on which our view
will then be an elaboration informed by OSR. What we mean by calling Dennett’s
insight ‘incomplete’ is that the argument of RP sometimes relies on claims about
the independent causal efﬁcacy of dynamic patterns, and thereby mistakenly
accepts the false terms of argument established by the conservative critics.
However, in other respects the paper breaks through this shopworn dialectic.
That is, it succeeds in ﬁnding a means of abstracting from rival philosophies of
causation that are themselves less secure than the phenomena they are used to
analyse.¹³
Dennett recognizes that there is a class of observer-independent facts of the
matter about dynamic patterns that is directly related to questions about pattern-
individuation, rather than just indirectly related by way of issues around causal
efﬁcacy. In particular, there are facts derivable from computation theory about
which patterns can and cannot be generated by compressible algorithms. These
facts permit us to address questions about pattern reality that do not reduce
to the questions allowed by instrumentalists about which patterns are useful
to anthropocentric predictive projects. A ‘real’ pattern, Dennett argues, must
admit of capture using a smaller number of bits of information than the bit-map
transcription of the data from which the pattern could be computed. Thus,
to refer to our earlier election example, we would not be locating one of the
electorate’s focal points if we speciﬁed a region in ‘opinion-space’ that could
only be identiﬁed based on a conjunction of descriptions of each voter. The
crucial point about Dennett’s version of this requirement is that he does not
relativize what ‘could’ be computed to any special reference class of computers.
Instead, he says, ‘a pattern exists in some data—is real—if there is a description
¹³ For evidence that Dennett at least ﬂeetingly recognizes this, see n. 22 of RP.

--- Page 216 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 203
of the data that is more efﬁcient than the bit map, whether or not anyone can
concoct it’ (1991a, 34). Thus there are (presumably) real patterns in lifeless parts
of the universe that no actual observer will ever reach, and further real patterns
whose data points are before our eyes right now, but which no computer we can
instantiate or design will ever marshal the energy to compact. This is emphatically
not instrumentalism.
Nor, obviously, is it reductionism. Dennett is clear in committing himself
to the idea that order at a given scale need not depend on any particular
basis for order at any ﬁner scale from which the cruder-scale order could be
inferred.¹⁴ Thus, for example, it is a fact that natural selection sculpts the
dynamics of populations even though no individual animal was ever brought
into being or killed by natural selection, or by anything that is a vector-
component of natural selection conceived as a quasi-mechanical causal force
(see Godfrey-Smith 2001; Ross 2005, ch. 8). Natural selection will thus be
invisible to an observer who doesn’t ascend to a different scale from that on
which individual animal biographies are tracked. (Such scale ascendance was
Darwin’s greatest intellectual achievement, as just before him a similar kind
of re-scaling of a special science was Lyell’s great contribution.) Invisibility, of
course, doesn’t imply non-existence, but the former may be diagnostic of the
latter. The natural selection example is a case in point: in histories of lineages
at small enough temporal scales there is no natural selection, because natural
selection requires a substantial minimum number of reproductive events. By
similar logic, countries only have GDPs over scales of time substantial enough to
produce tradable products (Hoover 2001). Furthermore, Dennett stresses that
there may often be multiple patterns in the same data as measured on ﬁner
scales, and yet we may not deﬁnitively pronounce for one of these patterns
as superior to another merely because the former predicts the future value of
some micro-scale data-point that the latter gets wrong (47–8). Dennett here
anticipates Hüttemann’s point, discussed in Chapter 1, about the failure of
general microgovernance.
The signiﬁcance of Dennett’s contribution to anti-reductionist metaphysics
has been appreciated by a number of philosophers who have recently been
working on that project. The reader is referred to Wallace (2001, 2004), Shalizi
and Moore (2003), Shalizi (2004) and Floridi (2003). It should be emphasized
that none of these authors is motivated by concerns about intentionality or by
problems in the philosophy of mind more generally. Floridi is interested in
general metaphysical questions, while Wallace, Shalizi, and Moore are explicitly
focused on the foundations of physics. All maintain that Dennett’s version
of scale relativity helps us make sense of the ontology of physical nature as
physicists currently model it—that is, as incorporating observer-independent
and theory-independent properties tracked by the concepts of superposition
¹⁴ Note, with reference to n. 8 above, that this idea does not apply to the Game of Life.

--- Page 217 ---

204 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
and entanglement. (See 3.7.) Nottale (1993), though not citing Dennett, takes
elaboration of scale relativity to be the basic preferred strategy for understanding
the relationship between GR and microphysics. Since Shalizi, Moore, and Nottale
are all physicists who use the scale relativity of ontology in constructing speciﬁc
physical hypotheses, the proposition that the existence of the objects described
by current physics is relative to speciﬁc scales is thus well motivated within the
constraints of our PNC.
Recent work by Batterman (2002) is also of direct interest here. Though
he does not couch his position in terms of either scale relativity or real pat-
terns, he can be seen as providing further PNC-compatible motivation for these
ideas. According to Batterman, physics explains why many systems undergo
phase transitions at the singular limits of certain system parameters. By means
of detailed attention to speciﬁc physical theories—not A-level chemistry—he
shows that these explanations do not proceed by reference to decompositions
of the systems in question into parts that undergo changed relations at critical
points; the explanations in question are given in terms of global properties of
the whole systems. Speciﬁcally, the explanations show why particular universal-
ities apply to the systems in question—that is, why they obey phase-transition
laws that are independent of their microstructural details. ¹⁵ Batterman argues
that the properties and kinds picked out by universality classes (for example,
renormalization groups in mechanics) are ‘emergent’, despite the fact that Kim’s
emergentist doctrines (1), (2), and (5) do not apply to them. The existence of
the physical explanations for the universal ities must, for a naturalist, block any
temptation to try to reduce away the emergent kinds and properties through
the introduction of ‘metaphysical hidden variables’. Thus, by Batterman’s argu-
ment universalities are real patterns and his emergentism is ontological rather
than merely epistemological. Now, the universalities on which he focuses would
be invisible to inquirers who conﬁned their attention to the scale on which
microproperties (relative to them) are measured. Thus Batterman’s ‘emergen-
tism’—which we endorse, while considering its label semantically unwise—is
a special case of scale relativity of ontology. We take Batterman’s argument
as establishing that scale relativity of ontology is PNC-compatible. He also
argues that we should expect this to be the basis on which to account for
the autonomy of the special sciences in a world where (in our terms) the
PPC holds.
Batterman (2002, 134) doubts that we’ll often be able to explain rigorously
special-science universalities in the way we explain physical ones, because ‘the
¹⁵ See Belot (2005b), and Redhead (2004) for a critique and Batterman (2005) for a response.
The crux of the disagreement between them is that Belot and Redhead think that Batterman
underestimates the extent to which the mathematics of the less fundamental theory is recoverable
from the more fundamental theory, whereas Batterman thinks that they neglect the fact that the
boundary conditions that must be used to do this are only motivated by considerations from the
less fundamental theory.

--- Page 218 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 205
upper level theories of the special sciences are, in general, not yet sufﬁciently
formalized (or formalizable) in an appropriate mathematical language.’ We are
more optimistic. There are ongoing efforts both to discover and to explain
universalities in the most formalized of the social sciences, economics. Ball
(2004) provides a popular survey of the considerable scientiﬁc literature that has
recently sprung up here.
Having defended its PNC-compatibility, let us now return to Dennett’s
account of real patterns. There are, as noted above, problems with it. Though
it offers the major achievement of the compressibility requirement—that a real
pattern cannot be a bit-map of its elements—as a necessary condition on real-
pattern-hood, Dennett never provides an explicit analysis of sufﬁcient conditions.
(Obviously compressibility isn’t sufﬁcient, or every redescription of anything
would conjure a new real pattern into being.) Thus he only gestures at an
implicit background metaphysic without actually providing one. This leads to
some backsliding in the direction of instrumentalism towards the end of his
paper, when he imagines arguments among some actual (as opposed to possible)
observers over how many patterns there are in a given series of data. Each observer,
in Dennett’s discussion, is allowed to determine her own idiosyncratic answer
based on her preferred level of tolerance for noise in producing predictions.
If this were a basis for adjudicating the reality of patterns, rather than just
indicating the grounds on which someone might defend a pattern’s practical
signiﬁcance, then the principle would self-evidently generate an inﬁnity of real
patterns, since there are as many possible preference proﬁles over tolerable levels
of noise as there are ratios of noise to signals, and only pure randomness is
always predictively useless. ‘Everything that is not randomly organized exists’
is not a potentially helpful basis for unifying science; treated as an ontological
principle, it is an invitation to embrace disunity to a degree that would make
Dupré look conservative.
Dennett identiﬁes ‘common-sense’ patterns as being those that are products of
pragmatic trade-offs in favour of high compression with high error levels, whereas
‘scientiﬁc’ patterns tolerate less noise. This is unobjectionable in itself—indeed,
it is surely right. But then, in the case where the scientist’s pattern predicts
everything that the common-sense pattern does and more besides—though at
the cost of more computing—a realist should regard the common-sense pattern
as ontologically redundant. Dennett wanders away from this clear consequence
of the scientiﬁc realism manifest through most of his paper because, toward
the close of it, he is anxious to see off eliminative materialism about the mind,
but recognizes that whether intentional psychology is a redundant pattern in
light of other ones that science may hit upon is a strictly empirical matter. He
should therefore be content to simply say that intentional psychology is certainly
practically useful, and that we don’t presently have good reasons for thinking
it is in fact redundant. He does say exactly this at the very end; muddles in a
few penultimate paragraphs arise from his ﬁrst trying to get eliminativism into

--- Page 219 ---

206 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
a deeper level of purely philosophical trouble than his own naturalism really
allows.¹⁶
The origins of these problems lie in RP’s roots in Dennett’s earlier defences
of his theory of the ‘intentional stance’ in the philosophy of mind. In one of
his founding presentations of that idea (Dennett 1971), he argued that one can
usefully assume the intentional stance towards a house thermostat (for example, ‘It
prefers the room to be 68 degrees and believes it’s now 64 degrees, so it decides to
turn on the furnace’), but that onemust take the intentional stance towards a fancy
chess-playing computer if one wants to maximize predictive leverage with respect
to it. The reading of Dennett as an instrumentalist that has prevailed over the years
under-emphasizes the distinction he has always drawn between these two cases.
In the case of the thermostat, use of the intentional stance is purely pragmatic
and optional, because the physical st ance is potentially available given more
effort, and throws away no information the intentional stance tracks. By contrast,
where the artiﬁcial chess-player is concerned, failure to reference its structural
dispositions to the reasons furnished by its problem space—chess—will cause
one to miss some true counterfactual generalizations about its behavioural
tendencies. This is due to facts about the world: the chess-player can adapt its
behaviour to environmental contingencies that no physically possible computer
could exhaustively specify (because writing out the game tree for chess would
require more energy than exists in the universe), whereas the thermostat cannot.
We said that Dennett’s crucial insight in RP consists in his identiﬁcation of
a necessary condition on the reality of a pattern. The condition in question is
just that which makes the intentional stance non-optional without sacriﬁce of
information: that the pattern cannot be compressed by any physically possible
computer. However, we also noted that Dennett fails to specify sufﬁcient
conditions on a pattern’s reality consistently, suggesting at one point that any
non-compressible pattern that any observer of some data ﬁnds useful relative
to a given level of epistemic laziness—that is, tolerance for error—should be
regarded as real. This also replicates slack left in Dennett’s earlier discussions
of the intentional stance. In these papers, there is as yet no sign that he is
thinking of ‘information’ in a rigorous or generalizable way. Thus his ‘could not’
in the formulation of non-optional intentional stances was originally relativized
to a sui generis enterprise of predicting rational behaviour. The insight of
¹⁶ We can express the distinction in the terms we have set up in this book as follows. A
metaphysical thesis like eliminative materialism is not ready for scientiﬁc acceptance if it is
motivated within the constraints of the PNC but the balance of present empirical considerations
don’t favour it. This is how we think the s ituation stands for eliminativism, and that is also what
Dennett says (in other terms) at the very end of ‘Real Patterns’. The hypothesis would be in
one of two kinds of philosophical trouble if it were (i) motivated according to the PNC but not
uniﬁable with hypotheses from other domains, or (ii) not motivated according to the PNC. The
parts of Dennett’s discussion we are calling ‘muddled’ arise from his ﬂirting with the suggestion
that eliminativism is in one of these kinds of philosophical trouble. His discussion doesn’t allow us
to tell which kind he’s imagining; we suspect he doesn’t anticipate the distinction.

--- Page 220 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 207
RP, by contrast, precisely consists in the recognition that which patterns are
compressible by physically possible processes is something about which there
are non-instrumental facts of the matter; but then Dennett confuses himself by
hoping (at least for a few paragraphs, before coming back to his consistently
naturalistic attitude at the end) that the existence of patterns of rational behaviour
is something in which we can have a priori conﬁdence, so that we can reject
eliminativism about mental and rational patterns from a purely philosophical
vantage point. However, this is inconsistent with naturalism; and if Dennett has
any ﬂag of ﬁrst allegiance it is, as with us, naturalism. We indeed believe that
there are patterns of rational behaviour, but not because we found this out while
sitting in our armchairs. It is a potentially revisable belief for which we think
there is good empirical evidence.
Ross (2000) argues that Dennett’s equivocation as just discussed expresses
itself in a second way in RP in the form of a poorly motivated distinction
between two different kinds of patterns. Dennett refers to these kinds, following
Reichenbach, as ‘illata’ and ‘abstracta’ . This distinction is based on one way of
trying to preserve the unity of physics with the special sciences: one maintains
that physics describes some structures that are independent of interpretation, the
illata, and then interpreters perform re-classiﬁcations of the elements of these
patterns for special purposes, giving rise to abstracta. (In RP patterns in rational
behaviour are the main examples of abstracta, while physical patterns are held
to be illata.) Reichenbach had not assumed that the distinction speaks to any
ﬁrst-order ontological facts, since for conventionalists like Reichenbach there are
no such facts we have any serious business trying to talk about. However, Ross
argues that Dennett derives his interpretation of the illata/abstracta distinction
from Quine (1953), for whom it is based on our adopting, for pragmatic reasons,
‘Democritean faith’ that we will someday be able to decompose everything over
which we want to quantify into elementary particles and relations between them.
Like Oppenheim and Putnam at around the same time Quine believed, for
broadly PNC-compatible reasons, that the science of his day motivated this
‘faith’—which in this case is just an extremely unfortunate word for what we
have been meaning by a unifying metaphysic.
We have of course been arguing for two chapters now that science no
longer motivates this metaphysic; and it is nearly the opposite of the non-
reductionist metaphysic that is otherwise promoted in RP. The source of
Dennett’s incompatible mixture of assumptions here is fairly obvious, we submit.
On the one hand, he is trying to defend the real, non-reducible existence
of intentional patterns. On the other hand, he doesn’t want to risk dualism
by letting the intentional patterns ﬂoat altogether free of the physical. The
problem is that he doesn’t have a clear or consistent eye on what naturalistic
ontological uniﬁcation requires and doesn’t require. The idea that intentional
patterns are re-classiﬁcations of the ‘basic’ patterns—that is, abstracta on physical
illata—won’t work, because this idea only has coherent content if we suppose

--- Page 221 ---

208 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
the reverse of what Dennett mainly argues, viz, that what is necessary for making
some abstractum real is that it can’t be computed from all the facts about the
illata. Dennett is a veriﬁcationist in the sense we defended in Chapter 1, so he
can’t suppose that it makes sense to talk about re-classiﬁcations that no possibly
observable system could compute.
These reﬂections help to show us what is needed for a consistent account.
First, we need some empirically motivated story about how the physical patterns
constrain the intentional patterns without, even just in principle, reducing
them. Furthermore, if this is not to come out as instrumentalism about the
intentional patterns after all, the failure of implication can’t be relativized to the
inferential capacities of some arbitrarily distinguished computers in arbitrarily
restricted observational circumstances (like groups of humans doing philosophy
of psychology in 1991).
A number of special sciences trafﬁc in intentional concepts, but let us for the
moment concentrate on intentionality’s ‘home’ domain, psychology. We will
stipulate that ‘psychology’ here refers to a province of the sciences that study
evolved living systems. Its generalizations thus need not answer to counterfactuals
about hypothetical computers that share no common ancestors with organisms.
One does not discover facts about native human inferential capacities by attending
to the capacities of, for example, quantum computers. ¹⁷Such limits on the scope
of psychological generalizations must be identiﬁed from outside psychology. But
this does not entail that we have to identify them directly from the domain of
metaphysics. Psychologists do not believe that humans can bend distant spoons
just by concentrating. They believe this, in the ﬁrst place at least, not on the basis
of attending to what brains ( qua brains) can and cannot do, but on the basis
of attending to physics, which tells us, in general, what sorts of channels can
carry what sorts of information and what sorts cannot. Thus physics constrains
psychology.
Now, physics also constrains the domain of the computable. Computation is
a kind of ﬂow of information, in at least the most general sense of the latter
idea: any computation takes as input some distribution of possibilities in a state
space and determines, by physical processes, some other distribution consistent
with that input. Physics can tell us about lower bounds on the energy required to
effect a given computation, and since it also sets limits on where, when, and how
physical work can be done, it can show us that various hypothetical computations
are (physically) impossible.¹⁸
We will have more to say about the details of this constraining relation between
physics and computation later in this chapter, but for the moment let us keep
our eye ﬁxed on the broader metaphysical picture. What makes a given special
¹⁷ Litt et al. (forthcoming) argue that there are no grounds for supposing that the brain is a
quantum computer.
¹⁸ As mentioned in 3.7, Landauer’s Principle is a constraint of the kind to which this paragraph
refers (see Ladyman et al. 2007).

--- Page 222 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 209
science, like psychology, the particular special science that it is, is its scope. By
‘scope’ we refer to limits around the classes of counterfactual generalizations it is
responsible for supporting. Thus if some psychologists say that unaided animal
brains cannot perform a certain class of computations, one does not furnish
an objection to their generalization by showing that a quantum computer, or
a supercomputer, or a language-equipped person embedded in a culture, could
perform some member of that class. This relationship between psychology and
computer science is not symmetrical. If one shows that no physically possible
machine could perform a given inference, then one thereby shows that brains
cannot perform it (nor quantum computers nor supercomputers nor enculturated
people either). We do not know about this asymmetric constraint relationship
on the basis of a priori reﬂection. If Cartesian dualism had turned out to be a
fruitful research hypothesis then this might (or might not) have amounted to
the empirical discovery that, inter alia, the relevant constraint in one direction
didn’t hold. But dualism has been an utter failure as a research programme,
so psychologists are professionally obliged to believe that brains process the
information they do by means o f physical state transformations.
Thus we have learned empirically that computer science has wider scope than
psychology. ( This does not imply that thinking reduces to computation, but only
the weaker claim that what cannot be computed cannot be thought. ¹⁹)A g a i n ,
this means that computer science generalizations are responsible for supporting
counterfactuals that apply across a wider set of conditions. The limits on the
scope of computer science must come from somewhere other than computer
science itself, and as it happens those that don’t come from mathematics come
directly from physics (that is, not by way of a further mediating special science).
Only a mathematical or a physical generalization can tell you what can’t be
computed anywhere or anytime in the universe by any process.
This fully explains why we should believe, just as Dennett says, that there
are real patterns no people have discovered, and still other patterns that no
people will ever discover. Our evidence to date tells us that there is computable
information out there that we can’t compute (and that none of our artefacts will
ever compute). Much of this information is just spatio-temporally too distant
from us and/or so dispersed as to be practically inaccessible. Other physically
possible computations require more input of energy than we’ll ever be able to
muster.²⁰Our evidence doesn’t, of course, tell us what these inaccessible patterns
¹⁹ Some readers might interpret this as endorsing old-fashioned computational internalism about
thought. We intend no such endorsement. A person whose thought extends through processes
occurring outside her body, as in the kinds of cases made salient by Clark (1997) and Rowlands
(1999), participates in a computat ional process performed by a coupled organism-environment
system.
²⁰ It is in this light that our extension of our information-processing capacities through recent
and continuing massive increases in machine number-crunching power is every bit as portentous
for the future of science (and for the p hilosophy of science) as Humphreys (2004) argues in a recent
book.

--- Page 223 ---

210 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
are. But we violate no veriﬁcationist principle in supposing that they’re out there;
this just follows from what we’ve empirically learned about the relationship
between computers in general and speciﬁc classes of computing machines.
This all says something—far from the whole story, of course—about how we
can say that physics constrains psychology in a way that is not instrumentalist
or reductionist but that does not require us to invoke a metaphysical principle
incompatible with the PNC. Some might think that the third part of this
achievement is so far trivial, on the grounds that we haven’t yet made any
metaphysical moves at all: we’ve merely described some working assumptions of
current science. But this isn’t in fact true, according to the understanding of
metaphysics we’ve promoted. One goes a bit beyond psychology and computer
science, respectively, in pronouncing on their scopes. To comment on the scope
of a special science from the domain of another special science with which the
scope of the ﬁrst is asymmetrically related is to engage in uniﬁcation, and that is
what metaphysics is about, according to us.
4.3 CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION IN PHYSICS
AND METAPHYSICS
Our only example so far of a practical belief disallowed to psychologists by
the constraining hand of physics—brains can’t bend spoons at distances—isn’t
interesting by the lights of the PNC. If the kind of uniﬁcation at which we
aim isn’t to be trivial, the constraining relation had better be given enough
additional content to do more substantial work. We will develop this further
content by continuing to exploit Dennett’s insight about the importance of an
objective concept of information. This will lead us to something nascent but not
realized in RP: an explicit theory of ontology, which is about as strong a device
for metaphysical uniﬁcation as one can request. A full section of digression is
necessary before we proceed directly to this, however. The reason is that the
central concept in our theory of ontology, ‘information’, has multiple scientiﬁc
interpretations (and goodness knows how many philosophical ones). We cannot
do any clear work with this concept until we have reviewed these uses with a
view to regimentation for the purposes ahead of us.
Fortunately, in the context of the main topic of the present chapter, the
discussion to come is not entirely a digression. As we noted at the top of the
chapter, special sciences are incorrigibly committed to dynamic propagation of
temporally asymmetric inﬂuences—or, a stronger version of this idea endorsed
by many philosophers, to real causal processes. Reference to transfer of some
(in principle) quantitatively measurabl e information is a highly general way of
describing any process. More speciﬁcally, it is more general than describing
something as a causal process or as an instantiation of a lawlike one: if there are
causal processes, then each such process must involve the transfer of information

--- Page 224 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 211
between cause and effect (Reichenbach 1956, Salmon 1984, Collier 1999); and
if there are lawlike processes, then each such process must involve the transfer
of information between instantiations of the types of processes governed by the
law. Much of the next chapter will be devoted to ﬂeshing out each of these
ideas. However, we must avoid commitment to the idea that causal processes
are fundamental, since we must leave room for our promised variation of the
Russell–Redhead thesis about the role of causation in physics. (As noted earlier,
that thesis is motivated in a PNC-compatible way, which doesn’t show it to
be true but disallows us from rejecting it on the basis of its implications for
the metaphysics of special sciences.) And if causal processes are taken to require
actualization of effects after actua lization of their causes, then there may be an
important sense in which nothing is a causal process at the level of abstraction
suitable for metaphysical uniﬁcat ion, since physics motivates the hypothesis that
we may live in a block universe (as we argued in Chapter 3), and then an
acceptable metaphysics will have to be set within such a universe. For now, in
conditions where some serious physical models seem to imply a block universe
and others seem to imply irreducibly tensed processes, we will need to ﬁnd a
way of talking about information transfer—if we think that is metaphysically
useful—in a way that makes sense in either sort of universe. ²¹ Evidently, this
objective is more challenging in the context of the block, since talk of information
transfer seems to imply process on its face. Accommodating special sciences to
a block universe in a way that doesn’t imply instrumentalism about them thus
requires some work.
Some accounts of physics embrace exactly the sort of radical dynamicism
that has become fashionable in the philosophy of the life sciences. There is a
substantial literature in physics and around its fringes (for example, in complex
systems theory of the sort associated with the Santa Fe Institute) that in different
ways substantivalizes information ‘ﬂow’. (See, for a highly representative sample,
the papers in Zurek 1990a.) Workers in this tradition typically conceptualize
information as ‘order’, and thus as the complement of entropy (or, in terminology
due to Schrödinger 1944, as ‘negentropy’). So long as the whole universe isn’t
disordered, so that boundaries between ‘systems’ can be distinguished, energy
input to a system can then be viewed as ordering it, and thereby carrying
information. The Second Law of Thermodynamics is often interpreted as
implying that systems cannot endogenously self-organize except by exchanging
information from outside for entropy. In that case, it is sometimes said, all
information found anywhere must have ‘ﬂowed’ to where it is from somewhere
else. It is natural to turn at this point to cosmology. If all information everywhere
has ﬂowed there from elsewhere, and if information can only ﬂow from states that
are out of thermodynamic equilibrium (another common interpretation of the
²¹ Henceforth, talk of processes in the con text of fundamental physics is to be understood as
referring to irreducibly tensed features of reality.

--- Page 225 ---

212 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
implications of the Second Law), then it might be supposed that all information
in the universe must ultimately ﬂow from the Big Bang. A host of very strong
philosophical interpretations of physics thus lurks around this literature: we seem
to have a generalization of traditional causation, with an emphasis on temporal
asymmetries as fundamental. Everything is process according to this account,
and the block universe appears to be excluded.
By the lights of the PNC, we as philosophers must take these ideas just as
seriously as some physicists do, but no more than that. That is to say, we mustn’t
rule out Santa Fe-inspired metaphysics, but we also must not exceed our station
and take a process perspective for granted while rival conceptions—including
conceptions suggesting the block universe—remain on physicists’ tables. In
Chapter 3, we discussed some grounds for concern about reconstructions of
physics in terms of information theory: sometimes it incorporates philosophical
idealism and sometimes it doesn’t, but in both cases on the basis of little that
a philosopher would regard as a serious argument. To convey some idea of how
far this sort of thing can go, let us provide a quotation from no less a ﬁgure than
J. A. Wheeler: ‘Every item of the physical world has at bottom—at a very deep
bottom, in most instances—an immaterial source and explanation; that which
we call reality arises in the last analysis from the posing of yes–no questions and
the registering of equipment-invoked responses; in short, … all things physical
are information-theoretic in origin and this is a participatory universe’ (1990, 5).
A philosopher might be inclined to tremble at the boldness of this, but for the
fact that it can be interpreted to suit any taste along the spectrum of metaphysical
attitudes from conservative to radical. As we said above, the root of the problem
is that the concepts of ‘information’ and ‘entropy’ as we ﬁnd them used across
physics are highly ﬂexible. Let us brieﬂy canvass some of the disagreements.
On the one hand, one ﬁnds in the literature some forthright statements to
the effect that there is ultimately one concept of information to which all others
reduce because (i) information is negentropy and (ii) all concepts of entropy
likewise univocally collapse to one—so information, on any reading, is just the
complement of that. For example, the physicist Asher Peres (1990) defends this
view. What seems to be necessary to the position is the idea that thermodynamics
is as fundamental a part of physics as GR and QM. ²² Peres also asserts that all
three members of this triad rely on a ‘primitive’ idea of time-ordering:
In thermodynamics, high-grade ordered energy can spontaneously degrade into a dis-
ordered form of energy called heat. The time-reversed process never occurs. More
²² Some philosophers will boggle immediately at this bec ause stock discussions in the philosoph-
ical literature on intertheoretic reduction have told them since primeval times that thermodynamics
reduces to statistical mechanics. However, this is an instance of ‘philosophy of A-level chemistry’.
Classical statistical mechanics could only conceivably be a part of fundamentalclassical physics, and in
any case the reduction of thermodynamics to classical statistical mechanics has not been achieved (see
Sklar 1993). The contemporary version of the reducibility question concerns the relationship between
thermodynamics and QM. That issue features prominently in the literature we discuss below.

--- Page 226 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 213
technically, the total entropy of a closed physical system cannot decrease. In relativity,
information is collected from the past light cone and propagates into the future light
cone. And in quantum theory, probabilities c an be computed for the outcomes of tests
which follow speciﬁed preparations, not those which precede them. (1990, 346)
This strong metaphysical hypothesis allows Peres to construct a three-part
argument. First, he provides a formalization of physical entropy, as deﬁned for
application to quantum theory by vo n Neumann, on which it is syntactically
identical to Shannon and Weaver’s (1949) entropy of communication channels.
He then argues that the concept expressed by this formalization reduces the
traditional thermodynamic notion of entropy. On the basis of this conclusion
he ﬁnally argues that if Copenhagen-interpreted QM is tampered with (if non-
orthogonal quantum states are distinguished, or if non-linear ‘corrections’ are
allowed in Schrödinger’s equation) then the Second Law is violated. This is
intended to defend the Copenhagen interpretation by reductio.²³
We are not very interested in this as an argument for avoiding hidden-variables
models in QM, since the overwhelming majority of physicists is persuaded of this
conclusion anyway on other grounds. Rather, we have described Peres’s argument
in order to offer it as an exhibit of physical reasoning within a framework that
relies on strong metaphysical dynamicism. We say ‘metaphysical’ here to indicate
that the view that thermodynamics is as fundamental as quantum theory and
GR is not an empirical result. However, in the context of Peres’s argument
it is also more than an intuition or prejudice. It is pragmatically motivated:
if it is supposed, then some formal similarities between thermodynamics and
information theory can be regarded as non-coincidental, and strong constraints
on physical hypotheses can be derived. Thus Peres’s assumption is metaphysical
but its justiﬁcation is not appeasement of metaphysical curiosity.
The eminent physicist Wojciech Zurek (1990b) agrees with Peres in identifying
so-called ‘physical entropy’, the capacity to extract useful work from a system,
with a more abstract entropy concept—in this case, the idea that entropy
is the complement of algorithmic compressibility, as formalized by Chaitin
(1966).²⁴ Zurek also regards the formal similarity of von Neumann entropy and
Shannon–Weaver entropy as reﬂecting physical reality, so in his treatment we
g e tf o r m a lr e i ﬁ c a t i o no fthree entropy/order contrasts. Let us refer to this as ‘the
grand reiﬁcation’. Zurek expresses the physical entropy of a system as the sum of
two parameters that sets a limit on the compressibility of a set of measurement
outcomes on the system. These are the average size of the measurement record
and the decreased statistical entropy of the measured system. He then argues
²³ We noted in 3.7.1 that Peres’s claim about the temporal irreversibility of QM is highly con-
tentious. Note also that the assimilation of the von Neumann entropy in QM to the thermodynamic
entropy has recently been questioned by Shenker (1999), and defended by Henderson (2003).
²⁴ This is the same idea of compressibility as Dennett appeals to. Many writers (for example,
Seife 2006) defend the idea that patternhood is the complement of entropy.

--- Page 227 ---

214 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
that if the latter is allowed to be grea ter than the former, we get violation
of the Second Law. In regarding this as a constraint on fundamental physical
hypotheses, Zurek thus implicitly follows Peres in treating thermodynamics as
logically fundamental relative to other parts of physical theory.
We have referred to concepts of information and entropy from communica-
tions and computational theory as ‘abstract ’ because they measure uncertainty
about the contents of a signal given a code. Zurek substantivalizes this idea
precisely by applying it to the uncertainties yielded in physical measurements
and then following standard QM in interpreting these uncertainties as objective
physical facts. However, biologist Jeffrey Wicken (1988) contests the appropri-
ateness of this kind of interpretation. ²⁵ Following Brillouin (1956, 161) and
Collier (1986), Wicken (1988, 143) points out that Shannon entropy does not
generalize thermodynamic entropy because the former does not rest on objective
microstate/macrostate relations, whereas the latter does. Entropy, Wicken argues,
doesn’t measure ‘disorder’ in any general sense, but only a system’s thermody-
namic microstate indeterminateness. He claim s that it increases in the forward
direction in time in irreversible processes, but that this cannot be presumed for
‘disorder’ in general. ‘Everything that bears the stamp
H =− kσP
i log P′
i ’
says Wicken, ‘does not have the property of increasing in time. Irreversibility must
be independently demonstrated’ (144). He argues that algorithmic complexity as
formalized by Chaitin is the proper target concept at which Shannon and Weaver
aimed when they introduced their version of ‘entropy’.²⁶W i c k e n ’ sg e n e r a lv i e wi s
that both thermodynamic information and w hat he calls ‘structural’ information
(as in Chaitin) are relevant to the d ynamics of biological systems (as leading
instances of ‘self-organizing’ systems), but that they are essentially different
concepts that play sharply distinct roles in the generalization of the facts. ²⁷
Notice that Wicken’s argument depends for its force on not taking for
granted that physics incorporates irreversible processes, since if it did then one
would not need to ‘independently demonstrate irreversibility’ in particular cases.
²⁵ Note that the argument isn’t directly over the possibility of substantivalizing Shannon–Weaver
information in any context. Rather, it concerns the appropriateness of trying to do so at the level
of macrosystem description . Thus Wicken’s objections to be canvassed raise no issues for quantum
information theory.
²⁶ This point is entirely independent of the linkage between thermodynamic and computational
reversibility embodied in Landauer’s Principle.
²⁷ The curious reader will want to know what he thinks these roles are. He says: ‘As remote-
from-equilibrium systems, organisms have thermodynamic information content; maintaining their
non-equilibrium states requires structurally informed autocatalytic processes. In evolution, the
dissipation of thermodynamic information drives the generation of molecular complexity from
which the structural information can be select ively honed’ (ibid. 148). Collier (1986, 18) makes the
same point. See also (Layzer 1990).

--- Page 228 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 215
Irreversibility and governance by the Second Law are strictly independent of
each other. But this ceases to be true if the Second Law is interpreted by way of
the grand reiﬁcation. Wicken thus implicitly questions the framework in which
Zurek treats the Second Law as fundamental. Since Wicken is a biologist, it is
perhaps unsurprising that the ubiquitous grip of the Second Law doesn’t strike
him as the ﬁrst premise to pull down from the shelf in trying to understand
complexity. But the physicists work with different background principles for
individuating systems than do the special scientists (a point to which we soon
return at length). In any case, as metaphysicians interested in uniﬁcation of
science, and upholders of the PPC, we cannot just help ourselves to background
assumptions about ‘emergence’ and thereby wave aside the possible generality of
the Second Law. If Peres and Zurek are mistaken, this must be shown within
the context of physics. At the same time, Wicken’s view concerning appropriate
assumptions in biology needs to be explained by any unifying metaphysics,
and must not depend on demonstrating that Zurek and Peres are wrong (lest
metaphysics devolve into speculative physics). Again, given the current state of
play in science, the PNC obliges us to account for incorrigibly dynamic special
sciences given either a fundamentally tensed universe or a block one.
Note that it is possible to support the grand reiﬁcation without taking
thermodynamics to be fundamental physics. Physical astronomer David Layzer
(1982, 1988) furnishes an example. He argues that the physical information is the
difference between the system’s potential entropy and its actual entropy, where
‘potential entropy’ refers to the largest possible value the entropy can assume
without the system’s boundary conditions becoming ill-deﬁned. ²⁸ Thus Layzer
produces one of the plethora of functional equivalence conditions on information
and entropy that we ﬁnd in the literature: H + I = H
max = Imax ≡ J ,w h e r eH
denotes actual entropy, I denotes information, and J denotes potential entropy
(Layzer 1988, 26). On this basis, Layzer rejects the common claim that the
growth of thermodynamic entropy in the universe drives the growth of order in
self-organizing systems, on the grounds that nothing rules out J increasing faster
than H as the universe develops, in which case, by his deﬁnitions, information is
generated. (See also Collier 1986 for a more general account of the same point.)
The relevance of this argument depends in turn on Layzer’s general view that
the Second Law is not fundamental because it holds only given speciﬁc initial or
boundary conditions. He defends a very strong symmetry principle as essential to
a law’s being fundamental. This is the ‘Strong Cosmological Principle’, according
to which ‘in a complete description of the physical universe all points in space,
and all spatial directions at a given point, are indistinguishable’ (Layzer 1982,
243). From this he derives the conclusion that a complete quantum-mechanical
²⁸ This value is guaranteed to be uniquely deﬁned for any system, since it is a basic theorem of
thermodynamics that the order of removal of constraints does not affect the value of state variables
at equilibrium.

--- Page 229 ---

216 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
description of the universe cannot give a complete description of individual
physical systems (since this would imply preferred positions in space). While this
is again an argument based in speculative physics, it offers a more general form
of the view discussed in Chapter 3 of the place of theories of dynamic systems in
a block universe.
The foregoing tour of a few perspectives is intended to show how apparent
conceptual anarchy around ideas of information and entropy mainly arises from
divergence of topic emphases among different theorists. Some are mainly con-
cerned with applications to physics, others with problems in communication and
computation theory, and still others with explaining growth in biological and
ecological order. It is neither Zurek’s nor Wicken’s ‘job’ to unify the sciences,
and one will misread both of them—and therefore misdiagnose their disagree-
ment—if one reads them as trying to do this job. This draws our attention to the
potential scientiﬁc value of metaphysics as we have defended it. Working in their
separate problem areas, different scientists have developed a range of interpreta-
tions of concepts that might be identical but might alternatively just be analogous
in some respects. When, as in applications of the Second Law and its implications
to biology, the PPC plays a direct role in evaluation of the plausibility of speciﬁc
research hypotheses, the result is considerable conceptual uncertainty. Here is
where metaphysics can help—but only s tringently naturalistic metaphysics that
is done for the sake of its contribution to the larger scientiﬁc project. ²⁹
Uniﬁcation, the goal of the metaphysician, does not in this context require
defending the grand reiﬁcation. Though it is not our proper station as philoso-
phers to advance our hunches as evidence one way or another for such empirical
questions, we are sceptical about the basis of the reiﬁcation. Is the syntactic iden-
tity of von Neumann and Shannon–Weaver entropy really evidence of anything
physical? In both cases the topic is reduction of uncertainty. How surprising
is it that this would be addressed in both cases by a logarithmic function? We
think people should ﬁnd it worrying that from one Santa Fe application of
information theory to another, one ﬁnds little commonality of state variables. It
is thus difﬁcult to investigate research programmes in complex systems theory
by attention to the kinds of structures that, according to OSR, furnish the basis
and evidence for scientiﬁc progress. Rather, uniﬁcation depends on showing how
special scientists can pursue their explanatory aims without tripping over the
PPC, as Wicken implicitly does by, in effect, presupposing that Zurek and Peres
are wrong for reasons not motivated from within physics.
One of us, Collier, has over the years had illustrative adventures as a philoso-
pher in these information-theoretic conceptual pathways that run between
physics, computation theory, and biology. Collier has on several occasions (for
example, Collier 1990, 1996) defended views that casual readers might ﬁnd
²⁹ That is, we do not think that analysis of the concept of information just for its own sake is a
worthwhile kind of inquiry, because the enterprise lacks stable success criteria.

--- Page 230 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 217
hard to distinguish from Zurek’s. However, Collier’s aim in this work is not
to follow Zurek in doing speculative physics, but to construct a conceptual
fusion of material information (‘bound information’, in Collier’s terminology)
and abstract information that he can use to make sense of the contested issues
in theoretical biology that concern Wicken and Layzer. On other occasions
(for example Collier 1990, 2000; Collier and Burch 1998), where he discusses
implications of information theory for the Maxwell’s Demon thought exper-
iment, his topic is computation theory rather than fundamental physics. We
will digress a bit more on the topic of Collier’s motivations, not for the sake
of autobiography but to draw some lessons for the business of philosophical
uniﬁcation.
As described earlier, a basic idea in ‘biological thermodynamics’ is that self-
organizing systems exchange entropy for information (conceived as negentropy).
In direct contrast to Wicken’s stance, this takes governance of the Second Law
at all scales for granted. Collier’s work on biology is likewise representative in
this way. However, he has not had to take sides on the question of whether
fundamental physics includes thermodynamics. His position is open to easy
misunderstanding in this respect, because his leading interest has been in
philosophical uniﬁcation of Brooks and Wiley’s (1986) project in theoretical
biology³⁰ with wider domains of functional explanation, and Brooks and Wiley
do assert that the physical world is fundamentally time-asymmetric. Thus a casual
reader might assume that Collier is stuck with the same assumption—which
violates the PPC. However, careful reading of Collier’s (1986, 2003) defence
of Brooks and Wiley shows that his way of reifying the information and
entropy concepts is speciﬁcally restricted to contexts in which both reproductive
dynamics and hierarchical structures—exactly as govern the biological domain,
but not that of physics—yield physically instantiated, objective codes, and thus
justify particular interpretations of abstract Shannon–Weaver information in
that context as bound. This has no direct implications at all for the parallel
reiﬁcation in physics (for example, Zurek’s).
Hopf (1988) in effect scolds all parties to this tangle except Collier when he
reminds them that ‘Thermodynamic entropy does not compel irreversibility.
Irreversibility arises from kinetics. Kinetic processes must be reversible on
microscopic scales. Otherwise the kinetic description would erroneously predict
a ﬁnal state in thermodynamic equilibrium that differs from the state of maximum
³⁰ We apologize for here having to mention a theory the reader may not have heard of, but
which we will not pause to explain. The Brooks–Wiley theory concerns issues too deep inside the
philosophy of biology for treatment in a book about metaphysics. All that is relevant here is that
Brooks and Wiley were intensely crit icized (for example, by Bookstein 1983, Lovtrup 1983, and
Morowitz 1986) for, in effect, being confused about physics. Thus battle was joined along the seam
of interdisciplinary uniﬁcation, the territory for metaphysics as we understand it. Then, as we will
see, a very high-level gloss of Collier’s defence of Brooks and Wiley consists in saying that he shows
how to read them as, despite themselves, saying nothing with implications for physics after all.

--- Page 231 ---

218 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
entropy’ (265). Hopf goes on to diagnose the argument between Layzer and
others over whether applications of dynamic systems theory require distinctions
between ‘initial’ and ‘boundary’ conditions as ‘pointless’ (266). ‘Kinetic systems
have constraints’, Hopf says; ‘one wants to know what the consequences of those
constraints are—end of story.’ We gratefully concur with this PNC-friendly
puncturing of a metaphysical bubble. Collier’s defence (with corrections) of
Brooks and Wiley in the philosophy of biology is independent of basic questions
in the foundations of physics.
Collier has also applied his ideas on information and entropy to attempt
resolutions of some problems in the foundations of computability theory (Collier
and Hooker 1999, Collier 2001). This constitutes speculative physics only if one
insists on viewing the universe as a kind of computer, which seems to imply denial
of block universe hypotheses. ³¹ It is possible to discuss formal relations between
thermodynamic and structural information as topics in computation theory in
ways that involve no presumptions about fundamental physics (including the
presumption that thermodynamics is part of fundamental physics). Caves (1990)
provides a clear example. Landauer’s (1961) seminal work furnishes another as we
have mentioned before. That Collier does not confuse applications of information
theory to (respectively) physics, computation theory, and biology with one
another is indicated by the following observation. In his work on computation, he
emphasizes logical depth (a measure of computational complexity) as the criterion
for object individuation, rather than thermodynamic depth (the minimum amount
of entropy that must be produced during a state’s evolution). He appeals to
the latter only as an individuation criterion for biological objects (and then, by
extension, other ‘special’ objects), not (what we will call) fundamental physical
ones. We of course doubt that there are fundamental individual physical objects
at all; but we will need to show how to recover, in our metaphysical uniﬁcation,
the apparent commitment to self-subsistent individuals that is ubiquitous in
biology and other special sciences (including non-fundamental physics). Thus
we can (and will) maintain Collier’s practice of adverting to thermodynamic
depth in discussions of special systems, while reconstructing Dennett’s idea of
Real Patterns in terms of logical depth. Sketching possible empirical relationships
between the domains of these two ideas, without presupposing their reiﬁcation,
is how we respect the PPC in this instance.
We can simultaneously show that we respect the PNC here, since we can cite
instances of leading physicists who motivate our metaphysical approach from
strictly physical considerations. First, Zeh (1990) shows that if macroscopic
descriptions of the physical world describe real processes in time—including,
when macroscopic instruments take quantum measurements, real collapses of
³¹ That pragmatically isolated aspects of the universe can instantiate computers is obvious.
Quantum information theory and quantum computing depend only on this non-controversial
truth—not on any metaphysical identiﬁcation of physical structure with computational structure.

--- Page 232 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 219
real wave packets—then a consistent quantum re-description of these processes
must yield irreversible processes, and, therefore a ‘quantum arrow of time’ and a
failure of determinism in the forward direction. Alternatively, if we opt for the
Everett interpretation (which Zeh interprets as being based on assuming that
all time evolution is in accordance with the Schrödinger equation with a time-
independent Hamiltonian), the physical facts all become ﬁxed and indeterminism
transfers to identities of observers and relative states of universal wave functions
correlated with them. Then all the usual notions of entropy (information-
theoretic and thermodynamic) become observer-relative. Finally, Zeh considers
how the account he gives for the Everettian universe can be extended to the
universe as described by a version of canonical quantum gravity where the
Wheeler–DeWitt equation seems to eliminate time. Thus Zeh shows us how
to understand the relationship between irreversibility and entropy-increasing
measurement in both a universe with collapse as a physical (tensed) process,
and a block universe; so we can theorize about variations in both logical and
thermodynamic depth without presupposing either the tensed or the block
universe.³²
As a second case, consider Gell-Mann and Hartle (1990). They are interested in
explaining the existence of measurement domains in which observers can gather
information by making crude approximate measurements of a density matrix
and a Hamiltonian, and then applying QM to (just) the decohering variables
that appear in the resulting models. Their account is quantum-cosmological,
and appeals to the time-asymmetric adaptiveness of such observation. For
such observers, the grand reiﬁcation of information concepts is natural (and
useful) at their scale of observation. They will thus model the universe, at
this scale, as time-asymmetric. However, Gell-Mann and Hartle are careful
to note that this does not require them to model it as fundamentally time-
asymmetric (though it might be, and the authors perhaps guess that it is). All
that is required in the quantum-mechanical formalism is a knowable Heisenberg
density matrix, concerning which ‘it is by convention that we think of it as
an ‘‘initial condition’’, with the predictions in increasing time order [readable
from the syntax of the equations describing it]’ (439). They go on to note
that when we physically interpret the formalism we render the physical universe
‘time’-asymmetric, but they are careful to formulate this in conventionalist
tones (440) of a kind that would have pleased Reichenbach. Once again, then,
we are shown a way—in the context of physics, not philosophy—of using
³² Leggett (1995) and Stamp (1995) consider ‘reversible measurements’ by which they mean
the coupling of macroscopic and microscopic systems without decoherence thereby producing
macroscopic quantum behaviour. Leggett claims that time asymmetry in QM ‘is in some sense
only a special case of the more general problem of the so-called thermodynamic arrow of time’
(99). Stamp agrees and thinks that, in the light of contemporary thinking about decoherence, ‘the
irreversibility in ‘‘quantum measurements’’ becomes no more fundamental, and no less subjective,
than in any other thermodynamic process’ (108).

--- Page 233 ---

220 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
concepts of information and entropy without presupposing a fundamentally
tensed universe.³³
None of this yet shows that when we set out to unify the special sciences
with a physics interpreted following OSR (and thus devoid of little things and
microbangings), we can achieve a non-instrumentalistic interpretation of the
former in the context of a block universe. The discussion in this section may be
summarized as motivating two more limited points. First, even accounts of special
sciences that are most strongly dynamicist on their face need not presume tensed
physics. Second, in our positive account to come our caution about speculating
on physics will be reﬂected in our observation of the distinction between logical
and thermodynamic depth. (Both concepts will be explicitly deﬁned before we
put them to work.) If future physics ratiﬁes the grand reiﬁcation in information
theory (and if our scepticism about the prospects of this turns out to have been
misplaced), then perhaps there really is just one notion of ‘informational depth’
to which the distinct concepts reduce. In the meantime, the required institutional
modesty of the philosopher entails keeping them apart.
4.4 RAINFOREST REALISM
We now offer our theory of ontology—that is, a theory which makes explicit the
metaphysical claim made by saying of some x, in a context where metaphysics
governs the intended contrast class, ‘ x exists’—which makes explicit and con-
sistent the scientiﬁc realist aspect of Dennett’s reasoning in RP. The theory is
stated in terms of four concepts that need special interpretation: information,
compressibility, projectibility, and perspective. We provide our interpretations
of these concepts before stating the theory.
On the basis of the discussion in the previous section we can now stipulate that
the relevant sense of information as it appears in our theory of ontology is the
Shannon–Weaver notion from communication theory. However, Shannon and
Weaver provide only a theory of the capacities of channels for transmitting infor-
mation in which the quantitative measureis relativized to initial uncertainty in the
receiver about the source. To obtain an objective measure of informational con-
tent in the abstract (that is, non-thermodynamic) sense, one must appeal to facts
about algorithmic compressibility as studied by computer science. The important
measure for our purposes will be logical depth. This is a property of structural
models of real patterns. It is a normalized quantitative index of the execution
time required to generate the model of the real pattern in question ‘by a near-
incompressible universal computer program, that is, one not itself computable
as the output of a signiﬁcantly more concise program’ (Bennett 1990, 142).
³³ Recall that we mentioned in 3.7.2 how Saunders and Hartle attempt to reconstruct the arrow
of time for observers by considering t hem as information-processing systems.

--- Page 234 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 221
In Chapter 3 we understood the modal structure of the world as manifest in
regularities. We say more later about why regularities are the basis for something
ﬁt to be called modal structure. For now, however, let us connect our talk of
regularities with Dennett’s account of patterns by endorsing the spirit—but
not quite the letter—of Paul Davies’s (1990, 63) remark that ‘The existence
of regularities may be expressed by saying that the world is algorithmically
compressible.’ Davies glosses this by explaining that ‘Given some data set,
the job of the scientist is to ﬁnd a suitable compression, which expresses the
causal linkages involved’ (ibid.). As we will discuss extensively in Chapter 5,
reference to ‘causal links’ at the level of fundamental metaphysics presupposes a
time-asymmetric universe instead of just leaving that possibility open. We will
therefore substitute ‘information-carrying’ for ‘causal’. Note that Davies’s own
immediately following example in fact makes no appeal, not even implicitly,
to causal structure: ‘The positions of the planets in the solar system over
some interval constitute a compressible data set, because Newton’s laws may
be used to link these positions at all times to the positions (and velocities) at
some initial time. In this case Newton’s laws supply the necessary algorithm
to achieve the compression’ (ibid.). Those regularities that Newtonian theory
correctly identiﬁed, stated as they are relative to just one allowable foliation of
spacetime, are themselves further compressible by SR, which is similarly still
further compressible by GR.
As scientiﬁc realists we understand the foregoing as referring to compressibility
by any physically possible observer/computer—that is to say, given our veriﬁca-
tionism, compressible period, rather than compressibility by people.W ee x p l a i n
our restriction to ‘physical’, as opposed to logical or mathematical, possibility
later in this chapter.
Now we introduce projection and projectibility.W ew i l lm a k eu s eh e r eo fo u r
previously introduced concept of locating (see 2.3.4). Consider a mathematical
structure S that is used to model some aspect of the world. As soon as S is
minimally physically interpreted by a function that maps some of its elements
onto real patterns then those elements of S are locators. Recall that we claimed
that such a locating function will have a dimensionality.
The notion of dimensionality here is not in general that of the dimensionality
of a vector space, nor of a differential manifold, although these are paradigm
examples of structures that are used to locate real patterns. What both these
kinds of dimensionality have in common is that they pertain to the number of
parameters that must be speciﬁed to pick out an element of the structure in
question, by specifying the weights attached to a set of basis vectors in a linear
combination of them, or by specifying the values of coordinates respectively.
When a real pattern is located relat ive to some structure that models patterns of
the relevant kinds, enough parameters must be speciﬁed to distinguish it from
other real patterns in the same domain. As we mentioned in 2.3.4, in practice it is
a pragmatic matter how precisely such distinctions must be made. Precision may

--- Page 235 ---

222 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
merely be a matter of resolution, or it may be a matter of how ﬁne-grained the
distinctions between patterns are required to be. The former case is exempliﬁed
by grid references on maps that only resolve locations to (say) the nearest hectare.
The latter case is exempliﬁed by the case of the locater ‘eagle’ in contexts where
the ambiguity of the locator with respect to eagle species is not signiﬁcant, even
though the more precise distinctions among such patterns could be made in the
same structure.³⁴ In general, the dimensionality of a locating function for some
structure is the maximum number of parameters needed to make the distinctions
necessary in the most precise contexts in which real patterns are studied using
the structure.
We will provide two examples, one involving locators that are precisely
speciﬁed in a formal theory, the other regimented only by practical experience.
Consider, ﬁrst, the ‘normal form’ (matrix) representation of a so-called ‘inspection
game’ as deﬁned by classical game theory and used to model a variety of social
situations (monitoring of workers, discouraging athletes from using steroids,
reducing drunk driving, etc.³⁵). Picking this game out from all the other games in
‘normal-form-game space’ requires specifying parameters along three dimensions:
a deﬁnite number of players, a deﬁnite set of available strategies for each player,
and a set of payoffs (one per player) at each possible combination of strategies.
Now suppose I want to consider the extensive (tree) form of the inspection
game. This object lives in a space of higher dimensionality since now two new
ranges of parameters must be speciﬁed: the order of play and the distribution
of information among the players about the game’s structure. Thus we say that
the locating function for extensive form games has higher dimensionality than
the locating function for normal form games. In addition, since a normal form
game will generally map onto an equivalence class of different extensive form
games, modelling the world in terms of the latter involves examining it on
a ﬁner grain of resolution. (In general, we can only talk meaningfully about
comparative grains of resolution in cases where there are mapping relations of
this kind.)
Our second example will illustrate other aspects of the locating function and
its dimensionality. Both biologists (Wheeler and Meier 2000) and philosophers
³⁴ It is not pragmatic what patterns are real. ‘Eagle’ is a real pattern and so is ‘golden eagle’.
The former is not redundant because there are projectible generalizations about eagles that are
not captured by the conjunction of all the generalizations about particular species of eagles. For
example, most eagles have feathers on their feet, hence we can predict that were some new species
of eagle discovered its members would probably have feathers on their feet; but this is not predicted
by the conjunction of the generalizations about each of the known eagle species because the crucial
information on which the generalization is based is that both they, and the new species, are all
eagles —that is, a class over which there’s independent biological reason to project inferences to new
members.
³⁵ A social situation instantiates an inspection game wherever the behaviour of an agent X in a
set of n agents, n ≥ 1, will conform to the preferences of another agent Y whenever X is sure that Y
will monitor X ’s behaviour, but will conform to Y ’s preferences with a probability p < 1w h e n e v e r
X ’s estimate of the probability of being monitored by Y is also <1.

--- Page 236 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 223
(Wilson 1999) have repeatedly drawn attention to the plethora of species concepts
(phylogenetic, ecological, morphological, with alternative partitioning schemes
available within each of these principles). Suppose we call a species concept ‘well
deﬁned’ if there is some pre-speciﬁed range of information I associated with
the concept such that, whenever scientists have I with respect to any set of
organisms, the concept will partition the set into species. Then I will in each
case be a function that maps sets of organisms onto an n-dimensional ‘species
space’. This is a locating function. n will have different values for different
species concepts. The higher the value of n the larger the number of species
there will be into which sets of organisms may be partitioned. Suppose that two
biologists differ over whether two similar songbirds are members of the same
or of different but closely related species. If they have the same genetic and
morphological data, and are using the same species concept and agree on its
dimensionality, then this implies that they disagree concerning some putative
fact in the history of evolution. However, they might instead be applying locators
of different dimensionality. ³⁶ As we develop our analysis of real patterns below,
we will suggest a basis for resolving such disputes, where they are amenable
to rational resolution. In general, we may distinguish two kinds of cases of
comparative relationships among species concepts. There are cases in which
one scheme of larger n is a resolution of another scheme of smaller n,b u tt h e
schemes do not cross-classify any sets of organisms relative to one another. There
are other cases in which two species concepts (whether of same or different
n) cross-classify some sets of organisms relative to one another. Then pluralism
about species (as defended by Dupré 1999 and many others) is true just in case
at least two cross-classifying schemes locate real patterns. (Masses of empirical
evidence suggest that pluralism is true.) The general points illustrated here are
that the dimensionality of locators is motivated by the empirically determined
complexity of the spaces in which systematic discriminations serve scientiﬁc
purposes (about which we will be more speciﬁc in a moment); and that attending
to the dimensions of locators allows us to compare the ontological implications
of their successful use without commitment to general reductionism or even
supervenience.
Let us understand the idea of projection on S as requiring computation of the
value of one or more measurable properties of an element y
L located at a point on
S speciﬁed in terms of dimensionality D, given input of a measurement taken by a
physical computer M of another element x L located on S under D. Computation
is necessary but not sufﬁcient for projection. Projection requires not only that
³⁶ In cladistics, disagreements are usually about relative parsimonies of alternative phylogenetic
trees. Sometimes disputants assign different conditional probabilities to relationships between priors
and predictions based on rival conceptions of how evolution generally works. But other arguments
that look very similar or identical on the surface are really about the appropriate dimensions of
analysis for discrimination, and these different judgements are encapsulated in competing software
packages for generating trees from data.

--- Page 237 ---

224 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
the value of a parameter of y L be output given measurement of x L, but also that
the probability of that value being correct within a scale of resolution R (on
D) given the measurement of x L be greater than the probability that the value
M would give as output in the absence of the measurement would be correct
within R.L e tx
L → yL denote a projection from xL to yL, where projection refers
to any effected computation that yields y L as output given x L as input. Then
we will say that x L → yL is projectible if (i) there is a physically possible M
that could perform the projection x L → yL given some R and (ii) there is at
least one other projection x L → zL that M can perform without changing its
program. (Condition (ii) is necessary to avoid trivialization of projectibility by
reference to an M that simply implements the one-step inference rule ‘Given
input xL,o u t p u tyL’. Projectibility, unlike projection, is a modal notion and so
has stronger conditions for applicability.) Intuitively, then, projectibility is just
better-than-chance estimatability by a physically possible computer running a
non-trivial program. Estimatability should be understood as estimatability in the
actual world that science aims to describe, not as estimatability in some class of
merely possible worlds.
Our notion of projection is compatible with that discussed by Barwise and
Seligman (1997, 47). ³⁷ Projection is a particular kind of ‘information ﬂow’, in
their terms. However, their primary concern is with properties of computers that
make them possible mediators of (more or less efﬁcient) information ﬂow. Here,
we are interested instead in properties of information structures that warrant
inference to real patterns. ‘Projectibility’ is the concept of information-carrying
possibility—applied now not to channels but to models of real patterns and
ultimately to real patterns themselves—that we will use.
Projection is related to counterfactual-supporting generalization by means of
a special concept of perspective. Consider an observation point X from which x
L
is located by M. The model of X may be either coincident with a region on
S, or may be external to S and so referenced from somewhere else in S p,t h e
superset of all structures endorsed by current physics. ³⁸ ( The reader is advised
not to take the idea of locations in spacetime as her exemplar of what we
mean by ‘a region on S’ despite the fact that most regions on S that will be
referred to in theoretical generalizations in science are spacetime locations. An
example of a region on S that is not a region of spacetime is the vantage point
from which a historian considers Napoleon. This will include the historian’s
spatio-temporal relation to Napoleon since such speciﬁcation will be relevant to
which information about Napoleon the historian cannot access. However, it will
also include facts about Napoleon that are included simply because this historian
³⁷ Speciﬁcally: ‘projection’ in our terms denotes the extensional equivalent of the class of
transformations for which Barwise and Seligman give intensional conditions.
³⁸ Sp is the maximally consistent conjunction of all theories currently endorsed by physics. A
way of expressing the PPC in the context of the concepts now being developed is to say that no
science, except physics, concerns itself with perspectives that lie outside of S
p.

--- Page 238 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 225
happens to know them, and they therefore enter into inferences about Napoleon
that the historian may make given new information she receives.) We will refer
to such points of observation as ‘perspectives’. By ‘what is located from X by M’
understand now ‘whatever is measured at X by M as input to some computation
going on or initiated at X by M’. A ‘computation’ need not involve a mind,
where by mind we mean a non-optional intentional-stance characterization of
patterns of behaviour. Any physical system that a mind could use for processing
information, if there were any minds around, is to count as a computer. X
is distinguished, in the ﬁrst place, by reference to the projections that can be
performed from it by M when M is a universal computer running a program
that asymptotically approaches incompressibility. Thus X given a coarse-grained
R on S
p will be an equivalence class of perspectives {X′
1,…X ′
n} indexed relative
to a ﬁner-grained R on S. Necessarily, the upper bound on the logical depth
of patterns projectible from X will be lower than the upper bound of patterns
projectible from each of the X ′
1,…X ′
n. ³⁹ (‘Coarse graining’ and ‘ﬁne graining’
will always be relative to physical interpretations that it is the job of physics, not
metaphysics, to justify. For the relevant physical sense of differential ‘graining’
see Gell-Mann and Hartle 1990, 432.) This captures Dennett’s version of scale
relativity of ontology. Then projectibility implies counterfactual generalization
as follows. Suppose there is an x
L such that M can simulate xL by modelling S
under R from the perspective of X. ( That is, M need not ‘go to’ X physically. It
need merely enter as input some parameters that it would transduce if it were
at X.⁴⁰)T h e ni fxL → yL is projectible, any simulated input of an estimation of
xL to M implies simulated output of an estimation of y L with higher probability
than obtains when x L is not simulated. If there are exceptionless laws of nature,
these will be the special cases of counterfactual-supporting generalizations in
which the probability of the output estimation given the input estimation is 1;
this then also holds in simulation. ⁴¹(We will consider more general issues about
laws in 5.5.)
Note carefully that this last conditional about exceptionless laws isn’t a theorem
we imagine deriving from some model of M. It is an analytic stipulation that
incorporates an aspect of our version of veriﬁcationism. We are asserting that
what it is to say that something is a counterfactual-supporting generalization is
that it is projectible by the maximally efﬁcient computer that is physically capable
³⁹ If this doesn’t hold in some particular case, then the X ′
1,…X ′
n are redundant and should be
reduced to the model of X. We will justify this claim later in the chapter.
⁴⁰ Given what we have just said X is, the reader may well wonder how to distinguish physical from
virtual occupancy of X by M. The answer is that virtual X is a model of physical X, suppressing some
of the information available at physical X. We int end the initially counterintuitive consequence of
this: a perfect simulation of a perspective (namely one that has all the same information content as
the target) thereby just is that perspective and physics should not be expected to distinguish them.
⁴¹ M might or might not ‘know’ that this is so. In general, M might not ‘know’ that it ‘knows’
anything. But, more speciﬁcally, if it does ‘know’ that it ‘knows’ some things, it might ‘know’ a law
without ‘knowing’ that what it ‘knows’ is a law.

--- Page 239 ---

226 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
of performing the projection in question (given the actual physical limitations
on computers). The motivation for this stipulation will be obvious in a moment,
when we put it to work.
Now we have introduced the special concepts we will need for our theory of
pattern-reality. Its ﬁrst, crude, version was given by Ross (2000). Here is the
original statement:
To be is to be a real pattern; and a pattern is real iff ⁴²
(i) it is projectible under at least one physically possible perspective; and
(ii) it encodes information about at least one structure of events or entities S
where that encoding is more efﬁcient, in information-theoretic terms, than
the bit-map encoding of S, and where for at least one of the physically
possible perspectives under which the pattern is projectible, there exists an
aspect of S that cannot be tracked unless the encoding is recovered from the
perspective in question.
We will now formulate this theory more precisely in light of the technical notions
we introduced in the present section.
First, with respect to what precedes the biconditional. Recall from Chapter 2
that x
L is a mapping from the formal to the material. x denotes the relevant
material-mode entity here; and now our theory says that x must be a real pattern.
If the whole universe were just ( per impossible given the capacity of anyone
in such a universe to theorize about this) one black box, we would be in the
Kantian situation with respect to the one real pattern: all we’d be able to do is
locate it. ⁴³ In the actual case, we understand the ‘ x in itself ’ (if you like—but
see n. 43) recursively, by reference to x
L → yL.S o x → y is the schema for an
‘epistemically basic’ real pattern. ⁴⁴Now: let the models of all x and y in the
schema x → y be instantiable by any sentences of ﬁrst-order logic. Suppose that
reality is closed under transitivity of the projectibility relation among models of
it,⁴⁵so that if x → y and y → z satisfy clause (i) above for pattern-reality, then so
does x → z. Then without loss of generalization we may modify what precedes
⁴² In the original formulation in Ross (2000), the conditions stated only necessary, rather
than necessary and sufﬁcient, conditions on pattern-reality—just as we complained is the case in
Dennett’s account. We will not go into details here about why we think that Ross’s earlier caution
was unwarranted, except to say that Ross then had non-veriﬁcationist scruples about in-principle
undiscoverable mathematical structures that he has since got over.
⁴³ Then, perhaps, Kantian idealism would be in order and we should drop talk of real patterns
altogether. Well, perhaps. But this enters th e territory of precisely the sort of philosophy against
w h i c hw ei n v e i g h e di nC h a p t e r1 .W ei n t r o d u c e dt h ei d e ao ft h eu n i v e r s ea so n eb l a c kb o xt o
motivate the syntax of our model pedagogically, and that’s all. We cannot usefully think, in a
PNC-compatible way (hence, cannot usefully think period), of a world in which all that exists is
one black box and yet somebody has a philosophical theory about it.
⁴⁴ We use ‘basic’ in this book only to designate epistemic status; so the reader should not conﬂate
this with our use of ‘fundamental’ as in ‘fundamental physics’, which reﬂects ontology.
⁴⁵ If it isn’t, we have disunity àl a Cartwright (1999) and/or Dupré (1993).

--- Page 240 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 227
the biconditional to read ‘To be is to be a real pattern; and a pattern x → y is
real iff …’
Next, the deﬁnition of projectibility allows clause (i) to be simpliﬁed. Both
projectibility and perspectives were deﬁned above in terms of physically possible
projectors. We have yet to address the philosophical warrant or implications
of this. However, modulo this coming explanation, clause (i) is evidently now
phrased redundantly, and should be modiﬁed to read simply ‘it is projectible’.
The original formulation of clause (ii) is clearly insufﬁciently explicit. It
remains useful, we believe, as an intuitive gloss of what the theory of ontology
aims to do. However, we must now try to state it more transparently.
First, what can it mean to say that a real pattern ‘encodes information’
about a structure? In one sense this formulation is indeed backwards given the
new battery of concepts we’ve introduced here. From the point of view of
someone working with a scientiﬁc theory, it’s the structure (formal mode) that
‘encodes’ information about a real pattern (material mode).⁴⁶However, we don’t
want therefore to surrender the idea that real patterns bear Collier’s ‘bound’
information. For the reasons canvassed in 4.3, they might do so in the sense
supposed by Peres and Zurek (which might in turn be the sense intended by
Wheeler, for all we can tell), but we don’t want to presuppose this. Nevertheless,
if someone claims to have no warrant for regarding real patterns as bearing
bound information in any sense, then they deny minimal realism. That is, they
deny that the projectibility of x
L → yL is based on any sort of transduction of
properties of x; for if transduction isn’t itself a form of projection then no one
who isn’t a follower of Berkeley has the slightest idea what it might be. ⁴⁷(And
Berkeleians need an alternative idea, viz. the mind of God, that the PNC excludes
straightaway.) Fortunately, we have PNC-compatible reasons for thinking that
some real patterns might carry bound information directly: quantum information
theory is often so interpreted, with some justiﬁcation as we noted in 3.7.5. Thus
we have PNC-compatible motivations for this very minimal level of realism.
(Notice that it’s even minimal enough for van Fraassen to allow, since without it
he’d have no reason to be epistemically impressed by observation as he surely is
even if he resists the idea that empiricism be deﬁned as the claim that ‘experience
is our sole source of information about the world’ (2002).)
Thus we want, in the new formulation of clause (ii), to go on saying something
like what that clause now says about the information ‘in’ real patterns. But
‘encode’ is surely misleading; and since we have now adopted ‘structure’ in
its technical guise from OSR, we must no longer say that real patterns carry
information about structures. So what does a real pattern carry information
about? The answer can only be: about other real patterns. As discussed in 4.2, the
⁴⁶ Unless S models the whole fundamental universe, in which case we should talk of real patterns.
⁴⁷ Note, for completeness, that an occasionalist like Malebranche has the same idea of transduc-
tion as everyone else, but denies that it actually goes on.

--- Page 241 ---

228 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
core intuition we have extracted from Dennett is that, his own wayward remarks
notwithstanding, the distinction between illata and abstracta has no scientiﬁc
basis. This just means, to put matters as simply and crudely as possible: it’s real
patterns all the way down. ⁴⁸
This slogan could summarize the whole conclusion of this book, so we can’t
ask the reader even to understand it immediately, let alone believe it. For the
moment we are mainly concerned with formulating part of our view, but this
effort can’t be separated from explicating its point. Let us thus pause in our
technical reconstruction for some motivating meditations.
Self-evidently, a statement of the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions on the
reality of patternhood cannot make ﬁ rst-order reference to real patterns. It can,
however, make reference to ‘patterns’ simpliciter, because it is as easy as can be
for us to say what a pattern is: it is just any relations among data. ⁴⁹That there
is such a distinction between real patterns and mere patterns (OSR), and how
it is to be drawn (the subject of this section, ‘Rainforest Realism’), and that
nothing else about existence in general should be said (PNC), is the content of
the metaphysical theory defended in this book.
Consider, as an example, the many curves that can be drawn through the
past price data on a stock market. All of these curves, assuming they link
accurate data points, are patterns—that is, records of past values and whatever
mathematical relations hold among them. What the ﬁnancial economist or stock
analyst wants to know, however, is which of these curves can be reliably projected
forward—which ones generalize to the unobserved cases. This is of course a bland
and familiar point. (A standard example of a non-projectible functional relation
is Elliot Sober’s (2001) hypothetical case of reliable covariation between Venetian
sea levels and the price of bread.) But why do we want to associate the distinction
between projectible and non-projectible patterns with the distinction between
what’s real and what isn’t? Is this not just an eccentric semantic preference on
our part?
The semantic preference may indeed be unusual, but we think it well
motivated. The main ontological implication of OSR is that reality is not a
sum of concrete particulars. Rather, individual objects, events, and properties
are devices used by observers (when these observers aren’t making mistakes)
⁴⁸ Ross suggested this slogan to Dennett in correspondence in 1999, and Dennett assented
enthusiastically. Since this exchange wasn’t public , we’re sure that Wallace’s (2003a) promotion of
the slogan is independent. (Although in 3.7.3 we argued that his own view may not be consistent
with it.) In fact, we suggest that someone would have to be poorly educated in twentieth-century
philosophical rhetoric if, after a careful study of RP and the critical discussion of it in Dahlbom
(1993), this slogan did not occur to them. (Cf. similar slogans we quoted from Saunders (3.7.3)
and Stachel (3.4), the idea of ‘dynamics all the way down’ introduced in 3.7.2, and the idea of
‘correlations all the way down’ in 3.7.5.)
⁴⁹ Social scientists often refer to ‘mere correlat ions’. However, this usage is not suitable for
us since we use the notion of ‘correlation’ in C hapter 3 to refer to any circumstance in which
P(A/B)>P(A), where P(.) is a probability and not merely a ﬁnite relative frequency.

--- Page 242 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 229
to keep cognitive books on what science ﬁnds to be sufﬁciently stable to be
worth measuring over time, viz. some but not other patterns. ⁵⁰Some of these
patterns are indeed conceptualized as individuals in some special sciences, while
simultaneously not being so conceptualized by other special sciences making
projections at other scales of resolution. For example, from the point of view of
a behavioural economist measuring choices, a person is an extended pattern over
a run of data, whereas at the scale where ‘common sense’ is most comfortable
but also at which social psychology is done, a person is the paradigm case of
an individual. When we deny that individuals are ‘real’ we do not mean that,
for example, Napoleon is ﬁctitious . Observers tracking him in 1801 could get
lots of highly useful leverage projecting the pattern forward to 1805; so (sure
enough) Napoleon is a real pattern. What OSR denies is that real patterns
resolve ‘at bottom’ into self-subsistent individuals. Furthermore, we must put
‘at bottom’ inside scare-quotes, because we ﬁnd the levels metaphor misleading.
The single most important idea we are promoting in this book is that to take the
conventional philosophical model of an individual as being equivalent to the model
of an existent mistakes practicalconvenience for metaphysical generalization. We can
understand what individuals are by reference to the properties of real patterns.
Attempting to do the opposite—as in most historical (Western) metaphysical
projects—produces profound confusion. (Witness the debates about identity
over time, identity over change in parts, and vagueness, none of which are PNC-
compatibly motivated problems.) Or, at least, it produces such confusion in the
context of scientiﬁc theorizing—which is to say, in precisely the institutional
context in which we achieve objectivity.
Thus, saying that some patterns are real in a way that individuals are not
is intended to express the idea that individuals are resolved out of patterns
rather than vice versa. Now let us return to considering ‘mere’ (non-projectible)
patterns in light of this point. From the ontological point of view, a non-
projectible pattern exactly resembles the traditional philosophical individual.
There it stands, in splendid isolation. One can point at it: lo, there is a curve
drawn through this ﬁnite set of observations. Abolish the rest of the universe,
and it remains as ostended, all its properties intact.
To live as a cognizer is to de-contextualize, to foreground selected elements
from the network of reality and build referential structures around them. Peter
Strawson (1959) brilliantly illuminated the impossibility of practically effective
thought that doesn’t organize experience into individuals. But the moment
we forget that we do this for practical reasons grounded in our teleologi-
cal circumstances, we encourage ourselves to forget that objectivity consists
in ﬁnding reliable generalizations. ‘Reliable’ here means: prediction-licensing
and counterfactual-supporting. Tracking an individual such as Napoleon is
⁵⁰ We recognize that the signiﬁcance of stability requires both further motivation and further
explication. This will come in 4.5.

--- Page 243 ---

230 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
epistemically helpful precisely in so far as doing so supports some predictions and
counterfactual claims about him. The ontological truthmaker for the epistemic
fact is thus that he is a real pattern. But then a non-projectible pattern through
a ﬁnite data set is exactly the paradigm case of a chimera. By exact semantic
symmetry, we ﬁnd it appropriate to say that non-projectible patterns are epis-
temically useless because they are not real. Common-sense usage by no means
always disagrees with ours here. ‘Don’t bet on that trend in the market data,’
your broker might tell you—‘It’s not real.’ The broker of course doesn’t mean
that what the data record didn’t actua lly happen; she means that the pattern in
them isn’t projectible.
Hoping that the reader now has a decently clear idea of what’s at stake, let us
return to a consideration of clause (ii). The ﬁrst part of its formulation is ‘it [the
would-be real pattern] encodes information about at least one structure of events
or entities S’. We have now explained the basis for replacing this by the following:
‘It carries information about at least one pattern P’. Notice that this allows that
the pattern P about which the real pattern carries information might be itself.
Our leaving this loophole open anticipates some issues we will later confront
in connection with fundamental patterns describing the whole universe. It is
not motivated by concessions to philosophers who believe in ‘ineffable’ patterns
tracked by special sciences (that is, ‘qualia’).
Since many or even most philosophers might have jumped to the latter
interpretation of our new formulation had we not explicitly blocked it, we can
illuminate another aspect of our view by explaining the point. Philosophers’
favourite examples of putatively incompressible special-science patterns are so-
called ‘sensory qualia’. Suppose, to give these philosophers as plausible an example
as we can allow without ignoring the PNC, that there is an aroma someone can
reliably re-identify, but which can’t be compressed in a linguistic description
or tagged by correlation with a neural signa ture because its veriﬁcation (as that
odour) requires multi-modal integration of environmentally distributed, multiply
realized information. Then we must ask: does re-identiﬁcation of the odour in
question facilitate inference about anything else or not? If it does (‘Mom baked
here recently!’ or even just ‘I smelled this in the old country’), then the (real)
odour carries (and compresses) information about at least oneother pattern P. If it
doesn’t facilitate any such inference, then our veriﬁcationist instincts are aroused.
How could one justify, just to oneself, one’s conﬁdence that it re-identiﬁes
any more general pattern at all? ‘I could swear I’ve smelled this somewhere
before’ does not constitute evidence of anything, since neither the subject nor
the recipient of the report could tell whether it indicates re-identiﬁcation or
confabulation. This is so in principle by virtue of our stipulation that the aroma
can’t be described or be independently detected by a neuroscientist. (And if we
don’t stipulate that then the example ceases to be interesting for the imagined
purpose.) Distinctions that can’t be marked in principle are of no interest to
science even in the limit, and what is of no interest to science in the limit doesn’t

--- Page 244 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 231
exist. (As Dennett has insisted over and over again—but now putting his point
in our terms—pure metaphysical epiphenomena are not only not real patterns,
they are not even mere patterns.)⁵¹
It isn’t necessary to block epiphenomena in clause (ii) because they’re already
excluded by clause (i): epiphenomena aren’t projectible, even if people mistakenly
try to project them. Again, we allow some real patterns to carry information only
about themselves because we would otherwise disallow physically fundamental
patterns. In particular, the whole universe would be declared not to be real.
The main point of the rest of clause (ii) is to capture Dennett’s insight
from his work on the intentional stance (the insight on which he equivocates
in responding to the eliminative materialist in RP), that to be real a pattern
must be informationally non-redundant, that is, must be required if some
counterfactual-generalization-supporting information is not to be lost. ⁵² Clause
(ii) is thus restrictive, aimed at blocking the implications of Dennett’s ﬂirtation
with instrumentalism that encourages an ontology made anthropocentric by
reference to possible degrees of epistemic laziness, and made inﬁnite by the
inﬁnite number of possible degrees of such laziness. Furthermore, there are
two kinds of redundant pattern we want clause (ii) to exclude: those that are
mere artefacts of crude measurement that bring no informational gain—the
cases Dennett wrongly lets in—but also putative patterns that are just arbitrary
concatenations of other patterns. To borrow an example of the latter from Ross
(2000), the object named by ‘my left nostril and the capital of Namibia and
Miles Davis’s last trumpet solo’ is not a rea l pattern, because identiﬁcation of it
supports no generalizations not supported by identiﬁcation of the three conjuncts
considered separately. All these considerations conspire to show that it is clause
(ii) that is supposed to make our account a variety of realism.
The concept that captures informational non-redundancy was introduced
earlier: logical depth. We respect Occam’s razor with respect to patterns by
regarding as real only those that minimize the overall logical depth we attribute
to the world while nevertheless acknowledging all projectible correlations. We
achieve this by replacing the original wording ‘where that encoding is more
efﬁcient, in information-theoretic terms, than the bit-map encoding of S,a n d
where for at least one of the physically possible perspectives under which the
pattern is projectible, there exists an aspect of S that cannot be tracked unless the
⁵¹ A mere pattern is a locatable address associat ed with no projectible or non-redundant object.
⁵² Notice that we do not refer here to counterfactual-supporting or prediction-supporting
information. The only way in which a pattern could inform non-redundant predictions from a
perspective without supporting non-redundant counterfactuals from that perspective would be by
reference to epistemic limitations of some particular group of predictors. This kind of case is relevant
to philosophy of science, but not to metaphysics. Consider the case of the non-projectible pattern
in past market data. Someone ignorant of the fact that the pattern isn’t real might use it to make
predictions, and might luckily be right. However, the non-reality of the pattern implies that it
doesn’t support counterfactual claims about what would have obtained had some data in the pattern
been different.

--- Page 245 ---

232 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
encoding is recovered from the perspective in question’ by the following: ‘in an
encoding that has logical depth less than the bit-map encoding of P, and where
P is not projectible by a physically possible device computing information about
another real pattern of lower logical depth than [the one at hand, viz.,] x → y’.
Note that the reference to real patterns in this formulation does not refer to the
instance being analysed; therefore this is a case of recursion rather than vicious
circularity as we pointed out above.
The above formulation, like its less precise ancestor, blocks both kinds of
redundant patterns from being taken as rea l. If a pattern is crudely demarcated
and permits of reﬁnement, then the requirement of minimal logical depth
excludes it. Thus, for example if eliminative materialists about intentional
patterns turn out to be right, and all projectible patterns tracked by intentional
psychology along with others it doesn’t track are projected by a mature cognitive-
behavioural neuroscience, then by clause (ii) intentional patterns aren’t real.
The instance of the pattern cobbled together out of three real patterns is not
itself a real pattern because it increases logical depth in exchange for no gain in
projectibility.
Note also that clause (ii) does not exclude traditional so-called ‘high level’
patterns (for example, trafﬁc jams, bird migrations, episodes of price inﬂation,
someone’s belief that Tuesday precedes Wednesday) that arise only on broad
grains of resolution if these pay their way in terms of projectible information.
Only those patterns whose individuation is motivated by nothing other than
epistemic limitations or pragmatically driven epistemic laziness are reﬁned out of
reality as crude approximations.
Finally, note that the clause makes reference (here following Dennett) to ‘the’
bit-map encoding of P. A bit-map encoding is a zero-compression encoding, a
one-to-one mapping from each bit of information in the pre-encoded represen-
tation of P to a distinct bit in the encoding. Thus one can meaningfully talk
of ‘the’ bit-map encoding of P only relative to some background structuring of
P. Such background structures are always presupposed in scientiﬁc descriptions;
they are the locating systems introduced in Chapter 2. For an advocate of
disunity clause (ii) will have no ontological bite, since she supposes that we are
always free to choose new locating systems in describing reality, thus leading to
alternative encodings of P that are all bit-map encodings relative to the different
locating systems. Hence the importance of our reference to ‘regarding as real only
those patterns that minimize the overall logical depth we attribute to the world
while nevertheless acknowledging all projectible correlations’. In the context of
commitment to uniﬁability of science as a regulative norm, the modal force of
‘projectible by a physically possible device’ has teeth. For any given real pattern
x → y, there will be a locating system that attributes just enough logical depth
to the world to allow projection of all data projected by x → y. The claim that
the world is uniﬁed is equivalent, under our veriﬁcationism, to the claim that
there is a unique such efﬁciency-promoting locating system. Of course, we do

--- Page 246 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 233
not know what this is. If we did, and Melnyk’s core-sense reductionism (CR)
holds (see 1.5),⁵³then this would imply that we had a complete and ﬁnal physics;
if we knew it and CR does not hold, then this would imply a complete and ﬁnal
uniﬁed science going beyond a merely complete and ﬁnal physics. However,
our inability to identify de re the target of the regulative ideal against which we
acknowledge existence is not embarrassing to realists.
Just one further tweak is necessary to complete the new statement of the theory.
We explained above why it is a ppropriate to attribute structural information
directly to real patterns, and not just to representations of them. However, in
cases where we are wondering about the reality of a pattern, actual observers
may have access only to a model of the pattern in question. (Consider, for
example, our access to the real pattern that is the interior of the Sun.) We
don’t want to legislate applicability of the analysis as out of reach in such
cases. On the other hand, we also want the analysis to apply potentially to
patterns over which no model has been constructed (though in such cases no
one will typically know that the analysis applies to the case). If we stipulate
as sufﬁcient for real patternhood that the candidate pattern has a model that
carries information about another pattern, and meets the rest of the sufﬁciency
condition as stated immediately above, t hen this satisﬁes both desiderata, since
every pattern is a model of itself. However, the second invocation of logical
depth should apply only to real patterns directly, since here we want to restrict
existence to patterns that are not redundant given the actual universe—we
mustn’t rescue some patterns from exclusion just because their logically shal-
lower surrogates haven’t yet been modelled, on pain of repeating Dennett’s
instrumentalist equivocation.
Thus the more precise statement of our theory of ontology is as follows:
To be is to be a real pattern; and a pattern x → y is real iff
(i) it is projectible; and
(ii) it has a model that carries information about at least one pattern P in
an encoding that has logical depth less than the bit-map encoding of P,
and where P is not projectible by a physically possible device computing
information about another real pattern of lower logical depth than x → y.
Ross (2000) called the original analysis of pattern-reality ‘Rainforest Realism’
(RR). We will continue here to refer to it by that name; and explaining
the motivation for the label will help the reader to place its motivations and
implications in a wider philosophical context. As noted, clause (ii) of the analysis
expresses the principle of Occam’s razor, in restricting ontological commitment
⁵³ ‘All nomic special- and honorary-scientiﬁc facts, and all positive non-nomic special- and
honorary-scientiﬁc facts, have an explanation that appeals only to (i) physical facts and (ii) necessary
(i.e. non-contingent) truths’ (Melnyk 2003, 83).

--- Page 247 ---

234 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
to what is required for a maximally empirically adequate science. The razor has
sometimes been interpreted in a stronger way, as suggesting that ontologies should
be not just restricted but small. Quine frequently expressed this idea by appeal
to metaphors involving a preference for deserts over jungles. Thus at the end of
Word and Object (1960), after the scientist has been assigned sole responsibility
for populating our collective ontology (just as our PNC requires), the philosopher
is depicted as the janitor of the enterprise, coming into the workspace left by the
scientist and ‘smoothing kinks, lopping off vestigial growths, clearing ontological
slums’ (275). Elsewhere, Quine says that ‘cognitive discourse at its most drily
literal’—that is, in his terms, the voice in which quantiﬁcation is intended
with metaphysical force—‘is largely a reﬁnement … characteristic of the neatly
worked inner stretches of science. It is an open space in the tropical jungle,
created by clearing tropes away’ (Quine 1978, 162). As mentioned earlier, Quine
thought that the state of science in the 1950s and 1960s motivated speculative
ontological reductionism and atomism, according to which all that ultimately
exists are physical particles. However, our analysis of projectibility, incorporated
into the theory of ontology, is (following Dennett’s lead) deliberately made
compatible with the scale relativity of ontology. If this speculation is better
motivated by contemporary science than Quine’s now is, as we have argued,
then ontology should exclude many of the things people (including scientists)
talk about for practical purposes, but is substantially larger than what people can
ever be expected to be in a position to specify. Ours is thus a realism of lush and
leafy spaces rather than deserts, with science regularly revealing new thickets of
canopy. Anyone is welcome to go on sharing Quine’s aesthetic appreciation of
deserts, but we think the facts now suggest that we must reconcile ourselves to
life in the rainforest.
Some metaphysicians will complain that our forest isn’t verdant enough. RR
restricts existence to patterns that support informational projection under some
physically —as opposed to logically or mathematically—possible perspective.
This expresses our Peircean veriﬁcationism. No empirical science is responsible
for counterexamples drawn from just anywhere in the possibility space allowed
by currently accepted logic and mathematics. Empirical sciences thereby institu-
tionally incorporate a veriﬁcationist rather than a Platonist conception of reality.
For a Platonist, the boundaries of the real are the limits of what is mathematically
coherent. The veriﬁcationist objects that there is no perspective from which
the limits on possible mathematica l patterns can be identiﬁed. Metaphysical
speculations on such limits (to be distinguished from formal demonstrations of
the limits on what is implied by particular ways of writing out axiomatizations)
are not empirically veriﬁable. This, we suggest, is the most plausible version
of the conviction that some philosophers—for example, positivists—expressed
with the idea that logic and mathematics are not empirical sciences.
Following our usual approach, we deﬁne ‘empirical’ recursively and by
reference to institutional practices of scientists. Empirical sciences are sciences

--- Page 248 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 235
that motivate hypotheses by measurements of contingent magnitudes. (By this we
mean contingent as contrasted with logically necessary; many are not contingent
relative to physics, and perhaps, for all we know now, none are.) No empirical
science explains patterns that are not empirically motivated. The only empirical
science that no other empirical science may contradict, as a matter of institutional
fact, is physics (and the scope of fundamental physics is also deﬁned recursively,
as whatever is measured by those parts of physics that institutionally constrain
every empirical generalization). This of course just re-states the PPC. A pattern
that could not be tracked from any perspective that current physics tells us
is possible is a pattern whose existence cannot be empirically veriﬁed as far
as we now believe. Such patterns are therefore not possibilities that empirical
scientists should take seriously. By the PNC, these are therefore also patterns
that metaphysicians should not take seriously. A non-idle example here would
be the pattern some people try to refer to when they talk about God: this is a
physically uninteresting idea, so it is also metaphysically uninteresting. (It is of
course anthropologically interesting.)
The above reasoning rested on the supposition that limits on mathematical
patterns are not empirically veriﬁable. What is supposed to justify this idea? Did
Gödel, among others, not identify such limits by an entirely non-speculative
procedure? Gödel, like many mathematicians much of the time, did two things
at once. He indeed showed limits on what patterns can be tracked from physical
perspectives that can be (and are) occupied by certain machines. These limits
are contingent, as Hogarth (1992, 1994, 2001, 2004) showed: some functions
that are non-computable by machines that satisfy Gödel’s explicit model in what
appears to be actual spacetime would be computable in alternative hypothetical
spacetimes. Patterns in the input–output behaviour of certain sorts of physical
machines in certain sorts of physical circumstances are indeed real patterns in
our sense. But Gödel’s theorem was not motivated by the failures of particular
computing machines to halt. Being derived from, and thus being about, a
system of formal axioms, it applies in its intended formal domain universally
and independently of any measurements of restricted parts of the world. But
the conviction that a given range of phenomena should be modelled in a given
formalism must always itself be empirically, rather than logically, motivated.
Scientists sometimes—indeed, often—bind their generalizations within certain
formalisms, in the sense of being suspicious of data that can’t be modelled in
those formalisms, because alternative formalisms are not yet available and it is
typically more productive to be precisely wrong than to be imprecisely right. ⁵⁴
But recalcitrant measurements hold trumps in these cases, and motivate efforts
aimed at developing more ﬂexible formal systems.
⁵⁴ This of course reverses a populist slogan often aimed at people who value quantitative over
purely qualitative knowledge. Like populism generally, it is a bad meme so far as human welfare is
concerned.

--- Page 249 ---

236 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
These are all familiar sorts of things for philosophers to say. Our only
innovation here, against the recent climate in metaphysics, consists in expressing
them in the voice of our version of veriﬁcationism. The sole source of veriﬁable
limits on the scope of the formal is our collective mathematical ingenuity to date,
whereas the limits on empirical theories are set by the physical possibilities for
measurement. Non-veriﬁcationists about metaphysics think it is appropriate for
metaphysics to be constrained only in the way that mathematics is constrained,
that is, by nothing more than our collective ingenuity. We have been arguing that
such constraints are too loose; there is nothing in metaphysics that corresponds
to the alternative constraints provided in mathematics by the requirements of
formalization. We think there is much attractiveness in the idea that good
metaphysics can best ensure its liberation from anthropocentric myths by
accepting a requirement for formal articulation, leaving natural language behind.
But if this ambition is in principle achievable, we won’t be trying to rise to
it here. ⁵⁵ If we thus grant that metaphysics can throw off the shackles of
formalization, at least provisionally, then it is all the more essential that it restrain
itself by respecting the PNC, which, given the actual recent history of science,
entails the PPC. This is why we say that a pattern, to be real, must be projectible
from a perspective that physics tells us could be physically occupied.
Let us emphasize that our motivating principle here is not dogmatic empiricism
but a concern for discipline in objective inquiry. That is why we don’t think
that we should worry about the possibility of irresponsible formal logic and
mathematics in the way we worry about actually irresponsible metaphysics. We
are open to alternative interpretations of the ultimate force of RR that emerge
from rival traditions in mathematics. A constructivist about mathematics might
want to urge on us the view that mat hematical generalizations are empirically
veriﬁable after all (in so far as whether or not anyone has actually produced a
constructive proof is an empirical fact), so RR is a complete theory of ontology.
In that case, since physicists certainly live within modelling constraints set
by whatever mathematicians are in consensus about, the PPC should perhaps
be dominated by an analogous P M C. On the other hand, a Platonist about
mathematics might ask us to recognize that RR is a theory of only informal
existence. If all the Platonist thereby wants to make ontological room for are
numbers, and perhaps sets and other mathematical structures, we are happy to be
mere spectators to this enterprise. We will be interested only in PNC-compatible
⁵⁵ It is possible that quantum logicians are right to think that physics demands a more ﬂexible
formal apparatus than the existing fully developed ones. If this is true, then a fully formal metaphysics
is something that is not yet achievable given the state of formal inquiry. We should not give the
impression that we ﬁnd such arguments terribly compelling; we just don’t have a ﬁrm view about
them. In any case, since our metaphysical theses in this book mainly aim to address the uniﬁcation
of the special sciences, and since many special-science generalizations are based ﬁrmly in empirical
measurement but aren’t presently modelled in any accepted formalism, the ambition for a purely
formal metaphysics could at best be a limiting ideal for now. Perhaps it will always be; but such
speculation is not itself motivated within the constraints of the PNC.

--- Page 250 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 237
motivations for Platonism (as for any of its rivals), but those might be defensible
( J. Brown 1999). One distinct, and very interesting, possibility is that as we
become truly used to thinking of the stuff of the physical universe as being
patterns rather than little things, the traditional gulf between Platonistic realism
about mathematics and naturalistic realism about physics will shrink or even
vanish. The new wave of structuralism in the philosophy of mathematics, which
has a number of supporting arguments in common with OSR discussed in 3.6,
adds substance to this speculation.
Meanwhile, however, it is among RR’s distinctive objectives to deny reality to
putative aspects of the informally modelled universe about which physics tells us
no information can be obtained. Suppose, for example, that cosmological models
according to which the Big Bang is a singularity are correct. This is of course
not a settled question, but the speculation that the Big Bang is a singularity is
obviously motivated compatibly with the PNC. In this case it would follow that
there is no physically possible perspective in the universe from which information
about what lies on the other side of the Big Bang could be extracted. RR would
then say that, if this is how physics plays out, no serious metaphysical theory
should try to describe reality in a way that relaxes the boundary conditions
imposed by the Big Bang. Furthermore, although some current physical theories
provide grounds for not asserting that there is a Big Bang singularity, none,
so far as we know, motivates any particular description of any aspects of the
universe that involve positive breaching of singular boundary conditions. By RR,
it would thus not constitute a signiﬁcant objection to a metaphysical theory if a
philosopher dreamed up a counterexample that depended on the suspension of
such boundary conditions. States of the physical universe that are merely logically
possible are not physically interesting. Therefore, they are not metaphysically
interesting either (modulo our caution about mathematics above).
RR, as we explained, allows room for the scale relativity of ontology. It
thus allows for unity of science without reduction. There are various possible
ways in which real patterns at different scales can carry information about one
another without inter-reducing. However, RR does not legislate scale relativity;
according to it all issues about reduction (and ontological elimination) are
empirical. As we have discussed, Oppenheim, Putnam, and Quine in the 1950s
thought that the course of science up to that point suggested a progressive
reduction/elimination of the entities and properties identiﬁed by special sciences.
They thought there would go on being special sciences, but only for reasons
of practical anthropocentric convenience. ( Thus, in terms of the discussion in
4.2, they steered towards Scylla.) By contrast, the widespread turn to dynamic-
systems theories in rigorous special sciences over the past few decades suggests
that information will be lost if we refuse to project patterns that cross-classify data
relative to the classiﬁcations of physics. ( Thus, again with respect to 4.2, over
the past few decades ever more boats, especially those with pilots from the Santa
Fe Institute, have headed for Charybdis.) Batterman (2002) provides examples

--- Page 251 ---

238 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
of physicists explaining phenomena by appeal to singular asymptotic limits,
and on the basis of this argues that reduction (both intertheoretic reduction
and micro-reduction) is blocked within physics. (What Batterman regards as
the non-reducing parts of physics will all be special sciences, in our conceptual
terminology.) These facts about the recent history of science then motivate,
compatibly with the PNC, speculations about what kind of universe we might
live in such that this fact about the need for cross-classiﬁcation—that is, for the
scale relativity of ontology—is true. We will thus offer such speculations, but
insist that each particular one must be motivated by science.
We thus face a double task in the remaining sections of this chapter. In
showing how it is possible that special sciences track real patterns, we have to say
more about the kind of scale relativity we think is currently motivated within the
constraints of the PNC. Another way of expressing this is: we must explain how
to draw the distinction between physics and special science given the conjunction
of OSR and RR. This sub-task must in turn serve the main goal of the chapter,
explaining how some of the patterns identiﬁed by special sciences can be real
even if their dynamical character turns out to have to be reconciled with a physics
that posits a tenseless and even time-symmetric universe.
4.5 FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS AND SPECIAL SCIENCE
From early in the book (1.4), we have distinguished between fundamental
p h y s i c sa n dp a r t so fp h y s i c st h a ta r es p e c i a ls c i e n c e s .T h i si sl i k e l yt ob et h o u g h t
odd for avowed anti-reductionists, particularly as disunity advocates such as
Cartwright have lately stigmatized ‘funda mentalism’ as the most tenacious
residue of ontological reductionism. Disunity theorists can regard every science
as ‘special’ without embarrassment. But this option would undermine the whole
point of our project. In 1.4 we operationalized what we mean by ‘fundamental
physics’ by ﬁat, and have used it in this operationalized sense ever since. But we
have not yet said why, in a world where ontological reductionism appears to fail,
we ﬁnd both fundamental and special sciences.
In fact, we will now argue, a natural interpretation of the distinction between
fundamental and special science falls directly out of the conjunction of OSR and
RR. We will henceforth refer to the latter as ‘Information-Theoretic Structural
Realism’ (ITSR). A crucial basis for thinking that ours is the right interpretation
of the distinction is that it explains the PPC as scientiﬁc practice actually observes
it. Thus our account of the distinction provides additional PNC-compatible
evidence for ITSR itself.
Our distinction must obviously avoid identifying the ‘fundamental’ with the
study of ‘ultimate building blocks’ out of which everything else is composed.
Special sciences seem somehow to focus usefully on distinctive interrelated
subsets of the real patterns that there are. Might there then be some other parts

--- Page 252 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 239
of science—the fundamental parts—that study all the real patterns that there
are, in some sense? Micro-reductionism provides one possible such sense: if all
the real patterns were made out of arrangements of a ﬁnite number of kinds
of atoms, then the science that studied the properties of these atoms would
study everything, even if all the facts about everything couldn’t be discerned
at that ﬁne a grain of resolution. We must, obviously, seek an alternative
sense. But this pursuit, like the micro-reductionist’s one, will have to begin
from the most basic fact about special sciences: that they observe boundaries
on their objects of study. Boundaries seem to imply individuals, or at least
groups of objects that can be objectively arranged under sortals. So far in this
book, we have introduced two concepts to play, respectively, the parts of the
traditional metaphysical role of individuals and the parts of the logical role of
sortals. Locators are representational devices used by observers to ﬁx attention on
addresses in some kind of structured background. Some locators successfully pick
out real patterns, and these are the objects of genuine existential quantiﬁcation.
This all leaves two crucial requirements of the account dark, however. First,
just what is this background? Second, what is the metaphysical basis for the
boundaries between real patterns such that we can regard these as objective
rather than nominal without reintroducing traditional individuals? Notice that
these two questions together just amount, in the context of naturalism, to the
components of the main question of this section: the ﬁrst question concerns the
basis for fundamental science and the second one concerns the basis for special
sciences.
We will begin with the second question. In keeping with the PNC, let us
start with an institutional fact about science. All scientiﬁc disciplines except
mathematics and, arguably, some parts of physics, study temporally and/or
spatially bounded regions of spacetime. By th is we mean that the data relevant
to identifying real patterns are, for most disciplines, found only in some
parts of the universe. Biology draws data only from regions in which natural
selection has operated. Economists study the same region as biologists (Vorbeij
2005, Ross 2005)—since natural selection depends on competition created by
scarcity—but at a different scale of resolution, since only signiﬁcant aggregates of
many biological events are relevant to economic generalization. All psychological
measurement is conﬁned to subregions of those examined by biologists and
economists, namely, locations in the neighbourhoods of central nervous systems.
Anthropologists and other ethologists study a tiny sliver of the universe: speciﬁc
populations of organisms during the very recent history of one planet.
Let us reﬂect on the epistemological and metaphysical implications of this
institutional fact. What accounts for the speciﬁc selection of spacetime regions,
at speciﬁc scales, to which disciplines are dedicated is obviously, to a very great
extent, a function of practical human concerns. Scientiﬁc institutions organized
by dolphins wouldn’t devote more than 40 per cent of their total resources
to studying human-speciﬁc diseases. There is no puzzle as to why far more

--- Page 253 ---

240 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
scientiﬁc attention is lavished on the dry parts of the Earth’s surface than on the
waterlogged parts. To some extent this same consideration explains why more
information is gathered about the Earth than about the Moon.
Self-absorption and convenience, however, account only partly for the distri-
bution of scientiﬁc activity. It is also important, in the third instance above, that
the Earth is a great deal more complex than the Moon. This statement has a
number of interpretations, not all of which matter here. The one that interests
us in the context of RR is the following: there are far more real patterns to be
discovered by isolating speciﬁc spacetime regions, and scales of resolution on
those regions, and treating them as relatively encapsulated from other regions
and scales, on Earth than on the Moon. This was true before life on Earth began,
and is the main part of the explanation for why life did begin on the Earth but
not on the Moon; but the extent to which the ratio of real patterns to possible
physical measurements on Earth has increased relative to that on the Moon has
been made staggeringly great by the progress of ﬁrst biological, and then social
and cultural, evolution. If the Moon were as complex as the Earth then scientists
driven by non-self-interested curiosity would indeed have reason to devote as
much attention to the former as to the latter. But this is a counterfactual.
These claims about complexity are matters of objective fact, not perspecti-
val foregrounding. Though real patterns are deﬁned in terms of logical, not
thermodynamic, depth, a highly general fact manifest across many sciences is
that the kinds of processes fecund with real patterns are those that exchange
thermodynamic entropy for information at high rates. Indeed, the ‘real pattern
production rate’ in a region O of spacetime is a non-linear function of the ther-
modynamic depth measurable at whatever scale of O has greatest depth. ( The
higher the minimum entropy produced by a state’s evolution, the greater is the
thermodynamic depth of that state. On Earth now, perhaps this trench is found
within the highly encapsulated innards of our largest and fastest virtual-reality
producing computers. Or perhaps it’s in human brains.)
Over a series of papers Collier (1988, 2003, 2004, Collier and Muller 1998) has
developed principles for understanding individuation in terms of the production
of thermodynamic depth. The central concept in this work is that of cohesion,
a notion introduced by Wiley (1981) to explain the coherence of species in
phylogeny, but subsequently generalized by Collier. The idea has been developed
in a context that takes the existence of individuals for granted and aims partially
to analyse individuality. Here, we precisely do not want to take the existence of
individuals for granted, since we hold them to be only epistemological book-
keeping devices. We will thus put the cohesion concept to a different sort of
work than it does in Collier’s earlier papers. Rather than thinking of cohesion
as a property that helps to explain what individuals are, we will introduce it
with the aim of saying which kinds of properties of nature make epistemological
book-keeping of real patterns by reference to hypothetical individuals useful for
observers like us.

--- Page 254 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 241
We understand ‘cohesion’ as a notional-world but not folk concept that turns
out to be useful in metaphysics despite not referring to any real pattern identiﬁed
by physics. Before we can say more about cohesion and use it in our account of
the relationship between physics and special sciences, we will need to develop the
idea of a notional-world object and indicate what ontological status these have
in the context of RR.
No observer ever has access to the complete extent of a real pattern. This
obviously applies to real patterns that are represented in models by epistemically
indeterminate sets (from our perspective), like ‘oxygen’ or ‘monetary inﬂation’
or ‘aardvarks’, but the general point becomes obvious only when we recognize
that it applies even to real patterns of the kind that are taken to be paradigmatic
cases of individuals. There is a great deal of information about Napoleon that
none of us considering this passage will ever be able to recover. He had a deﬁnite
number of hairs on his head at the moment when the order for the Old Guard
to advance at Waterloo was given. There are (or were) a number of perspectives
in the universe from which information identifying this number is (or was)
available. But we cannot occupy these perspectives, whether we live in a block
or in a tensed universe. All sorts of inferences about the state of Napoleon’s hair
at other times during his life could be made from the inaccessible information if
we had it, so there are aspects of the real pattern that is Napoleon—projectible,
non-compressible regularities—we are missing and can’t get. Such is the fate of
observers.
This compels us to be pragmatic. We track all sorts of real patterns that we
can approximately locate, but we can’t draw their complete or precise objective
boundaries in so far as they have them. In this circumstance, we fall back on
a second-best epistemological device by focusing on, or aiming to focus on,
diagnostic features of real patterns that we can treat as ‘core’—that is, as very
reliably predicting that our attention is still tracking the same real pattern through
any given operation of observation (and reasoning). These are Locke’s ‘essences
of particulars’. Or, once one recognizes that ‘natural kinds’ are like individuals,
they are the ‘hidden structures’ that Hilary Putnam (1975) imagines we know
we mean to pick out—even when we might not know how to—when we refer
to, for example, ‘tigers’.
It is of course one of the main theses of this book that one makes a metaphysical
mistake if one reiﬁes these essences and imagines that they are the real constituents
from which the world is fashioned. We can illustrate the difference between real
essences and essences as book-keeping devices by way of the following homely
analogy. Imagine you are driving in the south-western USA and you want to
know, at any given time, which state you’re in—this matters with respect to
the speed you drive etc.—but, let us further suppose, you can’t get direct
information about the location of the borders. You might discover that the
following second-best epistemic policy works well: assume that whichever state’s
licence plates appear on the greatest numbers of cars you’ve passed over the past

--- Page 255 ---

242 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
5 kilometres is the state you’re in now. Of course, it would be a philosophical
mistake to think then that you’d stumbled on a fact about the universe to the
effect that dominating 5-kilometre stretches with its licence plates is what it is for
some part of the world to be (for example) Texas. Whether this also represented
a scientiﬁc mistake (that is, a mistake that matters) would depend on whether
the philosophical mistake led you to waste resources on silly experiments, or
caused you to fail to notice some good experiments you could try, where ‘silly’
and ‘good’ are spelled out in terms of which procedures help to ﬁnd and measure
real patterns.⁵⁶
Individual things, then, are constructs built for second-best tracking of real
patterns. They are not necessarily linguistic constructions, since some non-
human animals (especially intelligent social ones) almost certainly cognitively
construct them. However, all questions about the relationship between real
patterns and the individuals that feature in special sciences concern individuals
constructed by people. These constructions are performed communally, and
represent negotiated agreements on applications of a communally controlled
resource for book-keeping, namely, a public language. ⁵⁷Thus individuals that
feature in generalizations of special sciences are community representations.
Many special-science generalizations concern these very representations. Thus,
if special sciences in general track real patterns, and sciences that discover
generalizations about communal representations ar e not specially deviant and
defective as sciences, then the communal representations that have projectible
properties (which might be all representations, communal and otherwise ⁵⁸)a r e
real patterns. As naturalistic philosophical under-labourers to science we must
accept both antecedents in this conditional. So communal representations are
real patterns, which are studied, qua real patterns, by behavioural and cognitive
sciences.
It would be consistent with widespread philosophical usage to refer to such real
patterns as ‘second-order’, with the real patterns that are not, in the ﬁrst place,
representational structures being called ‘ﬁrst-order’. We will use this terminology,
but only after ﬁrst being careful to delimit its metaphysical signiﬁcance. We do
not suggest as a metaphysical claim that there are two kinds of real patterns,
ﬁrst-order ones and second-order ones. To take this view would be to repeat
Dennett’s mistake, which we criticized, of dividing reality into illata and abstracta.
However, one can harmlessly use the ﬁrst-order/second-order distinction to say
⁵⁶ In Chapter 1 we argued that neo-scholastic metaphysics is silly in just this sense.
⁵⁷ Since we think that some non-language-using animals (and pre-linguistic human infants)
construct individuals, we should not be read here as suggesting that individuals can only be
constructed communally. Rather, the point is that we are interested in individuals as these appear
in generalizations of special sciences, and special sciences are necessarily communal constructions
(with essential linguistic aspects).
⁵⁸ This alludes to semantic issues about what to count as representation that we doubt are of
scientiﬁc interest. Thus we will pass over them with the weasel formulation ‘might be’.

--- Page 256 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 243
something about contingent relationships among real patterns: some of them,
those that are representations, depend for their genesis and maintenance on
their utility to observers as devices for tracking other real patterns. Then a real
pattern R2 that exists because it is used to track another real pattern R1 may
be said to be ‘second-order’ just with respect to this special type of genetic
dependence on R1. ‘Being second-order’ is not a property of a real pattern that
makes it ‘less real’; calling a real pattern ‘second-order’ merely says something
about its historical relationship to some other designated real pattern, and so ‘is
second-order’ should always be understood as elliptical for ‘is second-order with
respect to pattern Rx’. Then let us say that a real pattern is ‘extra-representational’
if it is not second-order with respect to any other real pattern. Real patterns that
are not extra-representational will be called ‘representational’. The overwhelming
majority of real patterns that people talk directly about are (we will argue)
representational. This is the not-very-exciting but true point at the heart of the
exciting but false idea that people think only about ‘phenomena’ while what
really exist are ‘noumena’. According to us, people can think and communicate
about extra-representational real patterns but usually don’t try to; scientists often
try and succeed in so thinking and communicating (which doesn’t mean they’re
making philosophical mistakes when they’re being practical communicators and
aren’t trying); and metaphysicians should be trying harder than they usually have.
All individuals, we will argue, are second-order real patterns with respect to
some other real patterns. Some individuals (for example, Tarzan) are second-
order only with respect to other representational real patterns. These are the
‘ﬁctitious’ individuals that form the usual contrast class with those regarded
as ‘real’ in atomistic metaphysics. Such metaphysics treat ‘real’ individuals as
(in our terms) ﬁrst-order real patterns with respect to their representations.
By contrast, according to the view we will articulate, no individuals are extra-
representational real patterns. ( This is a less startling version of our slogan that
‘there are no things’.) However, some real patterns that are targets of ﬁrst-order
property assignments by special sciences are second-order real patterns with
respect to some extra-representational real patterns. Things that are treated
as real individuals by traditional metaphysics are, according to us, so treated
to the extent that they approximate extra-representational real patterns (and
approximate the ‘right’ ones ⁵⁹). This is why we can understand what a standard
individualistic metaphysics is getting at, even if we don’t endorse such positions.
‘Things’ are locators for correlations holding across less than the whole
universe that manage not to fall apart instantly. The last part of this statement
should strike the reader as unusual, and so we pause to emphasize its import.
Correlations too ﬂeeting to be registered from any physically possible perspective
are not real patterns—this is an expression of our basic veriﬁcationism. However,
⁵⁹ Clarifying the meaning of this restriction is the task of a theory of reference, a topic we will
bypass.

--- Page 257 ---

244 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
sound scientiﬁc inference assures us that there are real patterns too ﬂeeting to
be registered by people. People will not construct individuals to try to track
such real patterns. Traditional metap hysics might infer from this that there are
individuals out there whose existence we miss; our view denies this. The limits of
existence are not determined anthropocentrically but the limits of thinghood are,
because ‘thinghood’ denotes no scientiﬁcally motivated extra-representational
real pattern. It is in this sense—and this sense only—that as realists we deny the
existence of individual things.
Each locator constructed around the idea of a thing gives users of the locator a
network of reference points which they can compare from limited perspectives.
Everyday things are at best merely correlated with the extra-representational real
patterns to which they stand in a second-order relationship, rather than being
identical to them, because the everyday ontology is built for many purposes in
addition to, and that partly divert it from the job of, giving true descriptions of
the world.
Things as individuated by reference to the practical purposes for which a
community has constructed them are elements of these communities’ ‘notion-
al worlds’ (Dennett 1991b). A notional world is a network of background
assumptions that permits, but also restricts, projections of objects by reference to
their utility to some set of practical purposes. Following Dennett’s own leading
example, consider the assumptions about Sherlock Holmes’s environment that
a reader of Conan Doyle must make in order to judge that the question ‘Is
Holmes’s small left toe some deﬁnite size?’ has the answer ‘yes’ even though there
is no deﬁnite size the toe is (because Conan Doyle never said, nor did he say any-
thing from which a deﬁnite size can be inferred). Since no extra-representational
pattern that has this sort of logical proﬁle is physically possible, no one who is
not deluded or severely ignorant imagines that Holmes is identical to or even an
approximate description of any extra-representational real pattern. Nevertheless,
construction of the roughly correct notional world is essential if a reader of the
Holmes stories is to make the projections necessary for appreciating their plots.
The actual world (including its representa tional real patterns) constrains
human goals and purposes, and these in turn constrain the notional worlds that
people use. This is obviously compatible with there being generalizations about
the actual world that don’t apply to notional worlds, and vice versa. In addition,
there are constraint relations between notional worlds and representational real
patterns that go in both directions: notional-world construction always includes
representational real patterns among its basic elements, and many representational
real patterns arise just in and for the construction of notional worlds.
These two points give sense to the following questions. Are there facts about
the actual world as described by physics that, together with speciﬁcally epistemic
purposes (that is, purposes relevant to science), constrain the notional world
that must be constructed for building special sciences? And then might we be
able to understand the basis for th e representational real patterns—speciﬁcally

--- Page 258 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 245
including the individual objects—that feature in these sciences by reference to
these constraints? If we can justify positive answers to these questions then we
will understand why special-science objects don’t reduce to extra-representational
real patterns (for example, as described by models in physics); but, so long as
the purposes served by special sciences are genuinely epistemic, and cannot be
performed by physics, we can conclude that the special sciences track real patterns,
necessarily using individuals as constructed epistemic book-keeping devices, but
without identifying the real patterns in question with the individuals.
How might our local actual (physical) circumstances be such that constructing
individuals is necessary for tracking some extra-representational real patterns?
Let us approach this question by trying to imagine counterfactual ways our local
circumstances might be in which these constructs would not be scientiﬁcally
helpful. Suppose that every measurement we took of everything around us,
sampling randomly (as far as we could, from our perspective, tell) in the
measurement space made available by our range of physical probes, was consistent
at all scales of resolution with a ﬁeld model of our data that gave us the same
gradient on every potential. In this circumstance, there would be no beneﬁt to
be had in trying to go beyond mere location and to sort groups of locators into
individuals. The environment would be uniform and homogeneous. Now let
us make the surroundings slightly less boring. Imagine that each measurement
is still consistent with a single ﬁeld representation, but gradients on potentials
varied from location to location. We would now have evidence about some
distinguishable real patterns—‘variable forces’, we might call them—but there
would be no obvious temptation to model these ‘forces’ as individuals with
‘essences’ we might use to track them. We could ﬂesh out the structure of the
ﬁeld as we took more measurements, and that would be that.
Next let us add the following additional structure. Suppose that (i) we
have some independent asymmetric relations with which we can correlate sets
of measurements (we anticipate our hair falling out but never remember it
growing back), and (ii) we have reason to believe that the Second Law of
Thermodynamics governs our region. That is, we believe that, ceteris paribus,t h e
gradients should all tend towards an equilibrium set of values when we compare
suites of measurements that observer X at rest at spatial location L took when
Xw a sh i r s u t ew i t ht h o s eXa tr e s ta tLt o o kw h e nXw a sb a l d — a n dy e t ,f o r
some special parameters clustered in some locations they didn’t. We will want
to explain what is special about these clusters. Note that nothing introduced to
this point requires us to seek our explanation by looking for special properties of
the clusters themselves ; we might instead look for global properties of the whole
local ﬁeld that predicted a statistical distribution of clusters consistent with our
measurements. But we might ﬁnd, if we have limited access to the whole ﬁeld or
to measurements of its global properties, that we could get decent predictive and
explanatory leverage by hypothesizing that some clusters of measurements are
individuals, which work against entropy to maintain their cohesion for lifespans.

--- Page 259 ---

246 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
After enough habituation in thinking of this sort, some might even come to
believe that all of reality is the mereological sum of such individuals.
The situation we have imagined is underspeciﬁed, in all sorts of ways, as a
thought experiment in the philosophy of science, let alone physics, so who knows
what we’d do? But this question isn’t the point of the exercise. The point is
instead just to imagine inverting the metaphysical relation between background
and foreground against which modern science arose. We of course didn’t start
with models of ﬁelds and forces and then build individuals into them; the
conceptual order went the other way around. Once we have constructed things
we can construct other things as parts of them. Then ‘forces’—what binds or
pushes some things together and pulls other things apart—can be correlated with
locators in mathematical ﬁeld representations, and therefore (sometimes) with
ﬁrst-order real patterns (in this case, with gradient potentials in, historically, ﬁrst
Laplaceans and later Hamiltonians). A n aturalist should infer no metaphysical
conclusion from this one way or another (even if natural selection couldn’t, as
may be, design beings that conceptually synthesized ﬁelds and forces before they
conceptually synthesized individuals). We no more think that individual ‘forces’
are PNC-compatible metaphysical entities than are individual little things. But
there is one (scientiﬁcally demonstrable, not conceptually asserted) relevant fact
lurking in this neighbourhood: we can’t get the information we’d need to predict
everything we can measure about the distribution of entropy-resistant clusters
just from global properties of the universe. (Again, this reports a fact about
our perspective of observation, not a ﬁrst-order claim about the real patterns
that physics will ﬁnd.) As we will see shortly, various ideas in fundamental
physics are all consistent (as far as we know now) with this fact. But a fact it
is: our measurements to date tell us that the Second Law governs at least our
local surroundings, and yet different inputs of work systematically delay entropy
increases at different rates in different kinds of applications.
Thus the notional worlds we must construct to track most local real patterns
are irreducibly dynamic and time-asymmetric. By contrast, the actual world
occupied by all observers we know about is either truly tensed, or else merely
seems to us to be so given the measurements we can obtain, but is in fact a block
universe. A PNC-compatible metaphysics should avoid presupposing either side
of this disjunction.
If things and forces are epistemically essential representational real patterns
for some observers—for example, us—then we can understand why cohesion
is a useful idea in the construction of the notional world we use for projecting
them. Collier’s ﬁrst formulations introduced cohesion as the closure of the causal
relations among the dynamical parts of a dynamical particular that determine its
resistance to external and internal ﬂuctuations that might disrupt its integrity.
But ‘cause’ is another notional-world (and folk) idea that has caused no end
of confusion in metaphysics (as we will discuss in the next chapter), so let us
avoid using it for the moment. Collier (2003) offers an alternative metaphorical

--- Page 260 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 247
framework for the relevant notional space in saying that an object coheres
when the balance of intensities of ‘centrifugal’ and ‘centripetal’ forces and ﬂows
acting on it favours the ‘inward’ (‘centripetal’). In fact, we can allow for a
bit more sophistication in the notional world than this, and say that, owing
to ﬂuctuations, it may be enough in a given case if there are propensities of
forces and ﬂows that show statistical distribution in space and time (or along
other dynamical dimensions thought to be relevant to an application) such that
propensities of centripetal forces and ﬂows are favoured over propensities of
centrifugal ones.
Talk about ‘centripetal’ and ‘centrifugal’ forces is obviously and irreducibly
metaphorical if interpreted as proto-physical theory. In this respect, it is exactly
on all fours, according to us, with talk of little things and microbangings by
philosophers when that is intended as proto-physical theory—as indeed the
philosophers we criticized in Chapter 1 intend it. ⁶⁰That individual forces acting
in deﬁnite directions, like individual things with particular essences, ﬁnd no
representations in mathematical physical theory is just what we mean when we
say that they don’t exist. (Similarly, Sherlock Holmes has no representation in
the measured biography of the human genome; he is correlated with no real
pattern that was a human being.) However, as with the example of Napoleon
earlier, it is misleading to think in terms of a simple dichotomy between real
elements of physical reality and purely empty ﬁctions. People can do useful
work with their notional concepts of things because the stability of their kind of
observation platform—relative to the independent stability of the objective world
they’re trying to talk about—provides them with stable (enough) exemplars (like
Napoleon, conceived as an individual). Similar exemplars of centripetal and
centrifugal forces can be offered, for the same general reason. Applied physicists
often talk of ‘energy wells’. Evolutionary theorists say that natural selection plus
the ﬁtness-damaging character of most mutations ‘holds species together’ over
time. Biochemists model ‘proton pumps’ (devices that move hydrogen ions across
membranes) as ‘doing work against potential gradients’ or as altering potentials
so that protons ‘ﬂow differently’. They will then say, without thinking that they
are being poetic, that proton pumps ‘hold organisms together’ by producing
stored energy potentials for use in biochemical processes (such as conversion of
ATP to ADP).
In fact, we do think that description of reality using notional-world back-
ground assumptions is more like poetry than it is like objective modelling, in
a quite precise sense. Exemplars of things and forces, qua things and forces,
⁶⁰ Thus these philosophers should be as willing to invoke centripetal and centrifugal forces in
their metaphysics as they are to talk about ultimate particles and classical hydrogen atoms. They
aren’t; and we can think of no explanation for this asymmetry but the fact that ‘centripetal’ and
‘centrifugal’ smell like scientiﬁc mildew in a way that classical concepts still useful in mechanical
engineering idealizations don’t. This suggests that our opponents implicitly accept our major critical
premises.

--- Page 261 ---

248 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
can’t be identiﬁed with extra-representational real patterns because their status
as exemplars is perspective-dependent. ( This is at least part of the reason why
poetry doesn’t go over without loss into prose.) This doesn’t mean that the
exemplars themselves aren’t real patterns—they indeed always are when scien-
tists take them seriously. Napoleon is a real pattern and so are the processes
modelled by proton pumps. But when we treat Napoleon as an individual, or
say that proton pumps create centripetal forces, we add nothing to the correct
objective description of reality. Instead, we help to keep our audience’s (and
our own) attention focused on a consistent approximate location. That is what
notional-world objects are for. ⁶¹
In this pragmatically governed context, the key conceptual job performed by
cohesion is that it is an equivalence relation that partitions sets of dynamical
particulars into uniﬁed and distinct entities. As Perry (1970) argues, construction
of such a unity relation is a necessary basis for being able to say how some Ga,
H b ,a ,a n dbm i g h ta l lb et h es a m eF ,w h i l eaa n dba r en o tt h es a m eGo rH
where F, G, and H are sortals. ⁶² Cohesion is this unity relation for dynamical
objects and their properties. It does not apply to things that are not taken to be
uniﬁed by internal dynamical relations, for example, rainbows or uncontained
gases. It is invariant under conditions that do not destroy it, so that breaking the
cohesion of a thing is equivalent to destroying its status as a thing. When a star
explodes it ceases to be that star. When a species splits into distinct descendent
species there are no longer any members of the original species. These examples
risk causing readers to think of cohesion as only synchronic when it is also
diachronic. Obviously, it is hard to give examples of direct loss of diachronic
cohesion. But diachronic cohesion can be lost as a result of synchronic changes
elsewhere. The set of male dominance displays would fall apart if, as a result of
ecological and morphological changes, identiﬁcation of a bit of behaviour as a
dominance display ceased to predict or explain anything.
Attention to concepts like cohesion shows the need for a more sophisticated
category space for concepts than the simple binary opposition of ‘scientiﬁc’ and
‘folk’. It would be misleading to call cohesion a folk concept, since it is not clear
that any such concept is needed, or often used, outside the special sciences. In
the binary picture, the temptation to think of cohesion as a folk concept arises
from the fact that it regiments folk concepts of things and forces when these
are extended to apply in the context of dynamical systems. However, the job
the concept performs is a scientiﬁc one: it gives individuation conditions for
dynamical entities, constructed out of measurement data by observers for second-
best keeping of epistemic books. This activity is (at least often) genuine science
⁶¹ So, ‘Sherlock Holmes’ keeps a reader’s attention focused on a region of spacetime where
English-ness and detective-ness and thin-ness and friend-of-Victorian-doctor-ness (etc.) all make
sense together in one model.
⁶² For example, a cub and an alpha male may be the same lion, but they are neither the same
c u bn o rt h es a m ea l p h am a l e .

--- Page 262 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 249
(where ‘genuine’, as always here, is benchmarked by reference to institutional
practices and controls). The cohesion relations that specify the closure conditions
for individuation of a given object might be energetic, kinetic, or organizational
(in cases of so-called ‘self-organizing’ systems). They may be taken to be internal,
or routed through the external environment. Cohesion may occur as a sum
of local effects (as in the case of molecular bonds in a crystal) or else as a
non-localizable property (as in the case of the organizational closure of an
organism or species). Because cohesion determines the appropriate levels for
dynamical analyses, cohesive entities of the kind the folk tend not to recognize
as individuals because they are distributed in space and time (for example, again,
species) are sometimes confused with classiﬁcations. Thus biology texts often
remind students that phylogenetic trees are historical processes, not systematic
classiﬁcations; the former are abstractions and need not be cohesive, while the
latter model particulars and depend on cohesion if the models are to have
biological applications. We emphasize this example because it is an instance
where scientists must correct the (student) folk in the use of a concept for
organizing notional-world objects ⁶³—thus illustrating the inadequacy of the
simple folk/scientiﬁc opposition over concepts.
Where cohesion, like little things and microbangings, will not ﬁgure is in
fundamental science—or, therefore, in ﬁrst-order metaphysics. We are busy
explaining it now because it turns out to be important for the second-order meta-
physical job of accounting for the difference between special and fundamental
science and, thereby, in turn, for explaining the nature of scientiﬁcally driven
metaphysics.
We now offer a generalization about institutional practice in special science
that we claim is empirically motivated by a range of speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypotheses
and contradicted by none. All special sciences stabilize location of the real
patterns they aim to track by constructing particular role-ﬁllers to exemplify the
cohesion relation. This construction activity is often contested. Indeed, it is the
standard happy hunting-ground of methodologists and philosophers of individual
special sciences. For example, philosophers of biology have been preoccupied
for years now with the question of whether natural selection reduces all other
cohesive forces needed in applications of evolutionary theory; this is the so-called
‘adaptationism debate’ (see Orzack and Sober 2001 for a representative sample).
Economic methodologists obsess over how much mileage economists can squeeze
out of individual consistency in choice as the source of both synchronic and
asynchronic cohesion in markets (see Ross 2005). The reason why these debates
are typically resistant to clear resolution is precisely that ‘cohesion’, in general,
refers to no deﬁnite real pattern against which speciﬁc proposals can be rigorously
tested. Cohesion is a locating tool and location is irreducibly pragmatic and
perspective-dependent.
⁶³ This describes most of what goes on in a typical philosophy classroom.

--- Page 263 ---

250 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
Saying that cohesion in general picks out no real pattern is consistent with
invoking objective features of the world to explain why special scientists rely
so heavily on this locating tool. ⁶⁴Special scientists assume, at least implicitly,
that all real patterns they aim to track must be stabilized by something against
entropic dissolution. (So, exactly as per Collier’s use, the phrase ‘cohesive forces’
just gestures at the indeﬁnite class of conceivable ‘somethings’.) By a pattern’s
‘stability’ they understand its probabilistic disposition to resist background
perturbations normally present in its normal kind of environment. In our terms,
‘resistance’ can be interpreted here as referring directly to the extent to which a
pattern supports projectibility by physically possible observers. Continuing thus
to interpret institutional practice in special science by the terms of RR, we can
identify the following general background hunch of the special sciences: as a
pattern’s stability goes asymptotically to zero, it ceases to be real. To the extent
that the world is governed by the Second Law of Thermodynamics, to be (in this
context, to persist) is to resist entropy. ⁶⁵
The qualiﬁcation at the beginning of the previous sentence is crucial. Physics
does not presently tell us that the Second Law is part of fundamental physics,
although some current approaches to grand uniﬁcation, as we saw in Chapter 3
and in 4.3, make the assumption that it is. Others, such as superstring/M theory,
make it derivative, and allow that whether it holds may depend on boundary
conditions. Furthermore, it is especially clear that thermodynamics cannot be
basic in any fundamental physical theory that is time-symmetric (and as we
discussed in Chapter 3, this may be all of them).
It is on this basis that we propose to identify the promised distinction between
fundamental and special science. The explanat ion for the fact that theories and
research programmes in special sciences assume background cohesion relations is
that they conﬁne their attention to what seem to us observers, unable to obtain
information from outside our backward-projecting collective light cone, to be
dynamic patterns. We do not know whether the universe is asymmetrical in a way
that mirrors the epistemic asymmetry we face with respect to (speaking loosely,
just for brevity) ‘the past and the future’. Physics is trying to discover this. It
cannot do so by gathering information from outside our collective light cone,
Instead, it aims to do so by (i) investigating the accessible parts of the universe
at ever larger scales of logical resolution (which often requires measurements at
ever smaller scales of physical resolution) and (ii) betting on extrapolation of a
trend from the history of science to the effect that as we broaden the grain of
⁶⁴ Note carefully that particular cohesion relations discovered by special sciences are themselves
real patterns, since there are physically possible (act ual) perspectives from which they non-
redundantly compress information.
⁶⁵ As is usual with ‘implicit’ and ‘background’ assumptions in science, this hunch will be found
at varying distances from surface presentations in diff erent theoretical exercises. Two cases in which
it is unusually close to the surface are Brooks and Wiley (1986) in biology and Durlauf (1997) in
economics.

--- Page 264 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 251
resolution we converge on ‘universal real patterns’—the modal structure of the
universe.
We have put ‘universal real patterns’ in quotes because this phrase is only
intended to connect our proposal with more traditional philosophical usage.
We will not use it unquoted, because we don’t endorse most of its traditional
associations. Let us thus be immediately explicit about our surrogate idea. The
hypothesis that the universe is uniﬁed rather than dappled amounts, in the
terms presented here, to the suggestion that there are some real patterns for
which measurements are maximally redundant. That is, there are some real
patterns about which measurements taken anywhere in spacetime at any scale
of measurement carry information (in the logical, not thermodynamic, sense).
Fundamental physics is that part of institutional science responsible for trying to
discover maximally redundant real patterns.
We can identify a number of theories that have been intended during the
history of science as fundamental ones. Aristotle’s magniﬁcent generalization
of four-element theory by the hypothetical dynamic mechanism of turning
spheres was perhaps the most fully psychologically satisfying, until extensions of
measurement technology tore it apart. Cartesian mechanism was the next serious
candidate, though much less well worked out in detail. Newtonian mechanics
was of course treated as fundamental physics by many. Here at the beginning
of the twenty-ﬁrst century we ﬁnd ourselves with several proposed fundamental
theories among which evidence cannot yet decide. We reviewed the leading
contenders in 3.7. Any of these theories, to be regarded as adequate, faces the
task of explaining why the Second Law of Thermodynamics governs the regions
of the universe in which we live, at least at all scales of resolution above a certain
threshold, and faces this task regardless of whether they are based on block or
fundamentally tensed foundations. The theories just mentioned are all plausible
candidates now because we can see at least in general how they might provide
such an explanation, along with the explan ations of other measured data they
supply.
Special sciences are, by pragmatic ﬁat, not responsible for ﬁnding generaliza-
tions that support counterfactuals arising outside of their institutionally evolved
and negotiated scope boundaries. By contrast, fundamental physical theory is
(analytically, given the historically supported and contingent PPC) responsible
for supporting counterfactuals across the entire actual universe, whether this is
taken to be inﬁnite (as by some fundamental theories), or ﬁnite and limned by
spacetime singularities (as in other theories). Saying that a measurement from
anywhere in spacetime is a potentially relevant counterexample to fundamental
physics is then the analytic extension of—the philosopher’s logical generalization
of—the institutional PPC. This is in turn just equivalent to the unity hypothesis
in our framework.
OSR is the hypothesis that science provides a uniﬁed account of the world by
modelling structures that modally constrain inferences from measurements. RR

--- Page 265 ---

252 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
is the metaphysical theory of the relationship between these structures and extra-
representational real patterns. ITSR is their conjunction. ITSR then accounts
for the partial appearance—and the appearance is only partial, since the balance
of evidence from the history of science suggests otherwise—of disunity as this
expresses itself in the plurality of special sciences. There is room for special
sciences because ITSR is compatible with the scale relativity of ontology. Indeed,
RR just is a regimentation of the idea of the scale relativity of ontology, and
that is the primary metaphysical explanandum for which recent science furnishes
direct motivation in the spirit of the PNC. Special sciences are free to hypothesize
any real patterns consistent with the measurements they accumulate so long as
these do not contradict what physics agrees on. ( Thus they cannot hypothesize
forced motions or entelechies or instantaneous perceptions across space or acts of
divine intervention.) Were the world fundamentally disuniﬁed, this institutional
norm—the PPC—would be mysterious. The hypothesis that there is a true
fundamental physics explains our observation of the PPC: every measurement
of some real pattern on a scale of resolution appropriate to a special science
that studies real patterns of that type must be consistent with fundamental
physics.
Finally, because all the special sciences take measurements at scales where real
patterns conform to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, all special sciences
trafﬁc in locally dynamic real patterns. Thus it is useful for them to keep
epistemic books by constructing their data into things, local forces, and cohesion
relations. As we will discuss in the next chapter, causation is yet another notional-
world conceptual instrument ubiquitous in special science. The great mistake of
much traditional philosophy has been to try to read the metaphysical structure
of the world directly from the categories of this notional-world book-keeping
tool. The effects of this mistake are often subtle, which no doubt explains
why we have had so much trouble recognizing it as a mistake. The exemplars
of thinghood are precisely those entities that are most stable under tracking
in the terms of the notional world. These are ‘particulars’ such as the table
beside the wall and Napoleon. What explains the stability of the exemplars
is that they are real patterns—in general, just the kinds of real patterns that
native human cognition is well adapted to track. In this context, reductionistic
scientiﬁc realism has the odd consequence of denying their existence—thus we
get Eddington’s dissolution of the table, Kim’s sundering of ‘overdetermining’
higher-level entities, and Merricks’s sweeping elimination of everything except
atoms (and, in his special strange twist, people). According to ITSR, tables
and chairs are real patterns—they just do not have fundamental counterparts.
At the fundamental level, where all proper talk about the entities whose status
fuelled the twentieth-century scientiﬁc realism debate goes on, reliance on the
notional-world idea of cohesive things is just completely misleading.
This last remark is apt to remind readers of Eddington’s famous ruminations
on his two tables:

--- Page 266 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 253
One of them has been familiar to me from earliest years. It is a commonplace object of
that environment which I call the world. How shall I describe it? It has extension; it is
comparatively permanent; it i s coloured; above all it is substantial … Table No. 2 is my
scientiﬁc table. It is a more recent acquaintance and I do not feel so familiar with it. It
does not belong to the world previously mentioned—that world which spontaneously
appears around me when I open my eyes, though how much of it is objective and how
much subjective I do not here consider. It is part of a world which in more devious
ways has forced itself on my attention. My scientiﬁc table is mostly emptiness. Sparsely
scattered in that emptiness are numerous electric charges rushing about with great speed;
but their combined bulk amounts to less than a billionth of the bulk of the table itself.
(Eddington 1928, ix–x)
The question Eddington addresses in these passages is how to reconcile the sci-
entiﬁc and manifest images of the world. Ontological fundamentalism maintains
that the fundamental part of the scientiﬁc ima ge is an accurate portrait of reality
and that common-sense image is an illusion. ⁶⁶Hence, we ﬁnd philosophers such
as Merricks and van Inwagen denying the existence of the everyday table. On
the other hand, for philosophers such as van Fraassen, the manifest image is
epistemologically primary. In this book we have argued that to be is to be a
real pattern, and that science is engaged in describing the modal structure of
the world. It is an advantage of our view that it makes it possible to understand
how both the scientiﬁc image and the common-sense image can capture real
patterns.⁶⁷The everyday table is probably a real pattern. Strictly speaking there
is no scientiﬁc table at all because there is no single candidate aggregate of
real microscopic patterns that is best suited to be the reductive base of the
everyday table. We deny that everyday or special science real patterns must
be mereological compositions of physical real patterns, and we deny the local
supervenience of the table on a real pattern described by physics. Hence, we
reject the dichotomy between reductionism and eliminativism about everyday
objects.
Horgan and Potrc (2000, 2002) are eliminativists about everyday objects
because they regard ontological vagueness as impossible. Since they think that if
there were tables their boundaries would be vague, and since there are too many
candidate sets of particles for their composition, they conclude that there are no
tables. Another problem for reductionism is that composition is not identity.
We are happy to agree that reductionism about everyday objects is hopeless.
However, we are sanguine about ontological vagueness in the sense that (like
Wallace 2003a, 95) we think it makes no sense to ask questions about cats over
very short timescales or about mountains over very short-length scales. There
is no fact of the matter about the exact boundary of Mount Everest because it
⁶⁶ Note that the scientiﬁc and manifest images are not to tally disjoint. Entities like stars, or a
macroscopic sample of a gas, ar e both observable and theoretical.
⁶⁷ In advocating his NOA, Fine (1984a, 1986) recommends that we accept scientiﬁc and homely
truths as on a par, yet he does not explain how they can be compatible despite appearances.

--- Page 267 ---

254 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
is not a real pattern at all length scales. We regard puzzles about where exactly
mountains stop and start, and whether or not the table is the same if we remove a
few particles from it, as pseudo-problems par excellence, of no scientiﬁc or factual
relevance.
We share Horgan’s and Potrc’s suspicion of the idea that there is a direct
correspondence between sentences such as ‘the book is on the table’ and the
world, if what is meant by that is the claim that there are individuals that
act as the referents of the singular terms ‘book’ and ‘table’. So with them we
conclude that we need a different semantics from that of direct reference and
correspondence to explain how everyday utterances can be true despite there
being no self-subsistent individuals. They defend the claim that there is only one
concrete particular, namely the whole universe. We saw in Chapter 3 that there
are research programmes in physics that reject the idea that whole universe can
be considered as a single individual. This leads us to a position even more austere
(in a sense) than that of Horgan and Potrc, since we claim that there is at most
one contingent individual. However, the theory of ontology we have defended
in this chapter means that, unlike Horgan and Potrc, we do not have to deny the
existence of, for example, tables, corporations, or symphonies. On the contrary,
according to RR, there are plenty of such complex real patterns.
Our relationship with common-sense realism is not straightforward. On the
one hand, our ontology makes room for everyday objects and treats them on a
par with the objects of the special sciences. On the other hand, we attribute no
epistemic status to intuitions about ontology derived from common sense, and
in particular we deny that scientiﬁc ontology is answerable to common sense,
while insisting that common-sense ontology is answerable to science. We take
it to be an empirical question for any particular common-sense object whether
it is a genuine real pattern, and so eliminativism about, for example, tables or
mental states, cannot be ruled out a priori. If cognitive science concludes that
mental concepts do not track any real patterns then the theory of mind will have
to go. We do not at present think that behavioural and cognitive sciences are
tending in this direction (though we think that the folk theory of mind is clearly
false in all sorts of important ways), but the issue is not up to philosophers. In
any given instance, it may be that our concepts and intuitions about the real
patterns we are tracking may be widely mistaken, as with intuitions about qualia
and phenomenal conscious states (Dennett 1991b). So, for example, everyday
talk of time and space tracks real features of the universe, but our intuition that
there is absolute simultaneity may be wrong, our everyday talk of tables tracks
real patterns but our concept of tables as individual substances is in error, and
ﬁnally our concept of the self may turn out to track a real pattern, but it may also
attribute properties to selves that the real patterns lack. To build on what was
said in Chapter 1 now that we have more elements of our ontological framework
in place, it is important to distinguish between the question of whether our
concepts and intuitions track anything real, and the question of whether the real

--- Page 268 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 255
patterns they track have all the properties that their intuitively familiar surrogates
appear to have.
According to Rainforest Realism, what grounds the claim that some real
pattern exists is its projectibility. Induction is therefore part of the manifest
and the scientiﬁc images in the sense that we individuate objects in the light of
inductive knowledge of what is relatively invariant. The objects that we identify
are ontologically secondary to the modal structure of the world. In his classic
paper ‘Identity, Ostension and Hypostasis’, Quine (1953, ch. IV) offers a similar
account of how we arrive at our everyday ontology. The idea is that we posit
identity between ostensions as a method of hypostasis. Our hypostases have
survival value because engaging in the pretence that there are enduring objects
makes things much simpler in ‘manifest image’ contexts even though they may
be superﬂuous in ‘scientiﬁc image’ contexts. On his view, there is no fact of
the matter about what things there are: ‘objects’ shrink or expand to their most
convenient size.
Induction is any form of reasoning that proceeds from claims about observed
phenomena to claims about unobserved phenomena. If we think of induction
as simply the generalization from observed cases to a universal claim about
observed and unobserved cases, and then the derivation from that of claims
about unobserved cases, then it may seem entirely without justiﬁcation because
it appears to be merely question-begging. What we are really interested in are the
unobserved cases and we arrive at a conclusion about them by simply assuming
it. Consider the argument
1. All of a large number, n, of observed cases of Fs have been Gs.
2. All Fs are Gs.
3. All as yet unobserved Fs are Gs.
4. The next observed F will be a G.
Even though we may only be interested in the next cases we will observe, we need
to know 3 because we don’t know in advance which of the unobserved cases we
will observe and which we won’t. So we need 2, which is what we are supposed
to infer by induction from 1. But 2 is just the conjunction of 1 and 3. ( This
is a massive idealization of course, but the essential point carries over to more
complex renderings of inductive inference.)
David Armstrong (1983, ch. 4, sect. 5) argues that if that were all there was
to it induction would indeed be irrational. However, like Peirce he thinks that
induction is really grounded in inference to the best explanation. As such it is to
be regarded as genuinely inﬂationary in that it requires the existence of genuine
lawlike or necessary connections among events. Mill thought that the principle
of the uniformity of nature amounted to the same thing as determinism. We
certainly don’t need as much as that; objective potentialities and probabilities
will do.

--- Page 269 ---

256 Rainforest Realism and the Unity of Science
It is supposed to be the existence of things, whether everyday or scientiﬁc, that
explains the phenomena, but what really does the explanatory work is not things
but their stability as part of the world’s modal structure. Tables are particularly
robust real patterns because they allow us to make predictions about many other
real patterns, for example, about light distributions and about mass distributions.
We only know if at all about unobservable objects in virtue of our theories about
them. Since we only understand the entities as we do because of the way they are
supposed to relate to our observations, belief in the unobservables entailed by our
best scientiﬁc theories entails belief that those theories are at least approximately
empirically adequate, in other words that there really are the relations among the
phenomena they attribute to the world. If those relations were merely randomly
correlated to the objects then the claim that the objects exist could not count as
an explanation of what is observed. It is noteworthy that scientiﬁc realists often
invoke thick anti-Humean notions of causation in their attempts to convince us
that unobservables exist. We need not go so far as belief in objects, observable or
not. The history of science undermines not only materialism and classical views
of space and time, but also the claim that science describes the individuals that
lie beyond the phenomena.
So, to reiterate a point made a few pages above, at the fundamental level,
where all proper talk about the entities whose status fuelled the twentieth-century
scientiﬁc realism debate goes on, reliance on the notional-world idea of cohesive
things is just completely misleading.
Such, at any rate, is the most gen eral metaphysical upshot of ITSR. In stating
it now, we have run somewhat beyond what we have established a basis for
saying. That special science objects, along with tables and chairs and Napoleon,
exist as at least representational real patterns should now be clear enough. By RR,
representational real patterns exist. But how does this amount to more than just
saying we metaphysically afﬁrm them? Isn’t second-order real patternhood still,
in all substantive senses, second-order existence—just what we criticized Dennett
for allowing? Are we not, in fact, effectively Kantians where they are concerned,
letting them exist only as constructions set against hypothesized noumenal real
patterns modelled by fundamental structures? We will confront this question
directly at the end of the next chapter.
First, we must elaborate further aspects of our position by considering, at
length, an issue from recent debates in the philosophy of science that is closely
connected with the question just posed. Harold Kincaid (1990, 1996, 2004)
has sought to vindicate special sciences as being metaphysically on all fours
with physics by defending the claim that special sciences regularly discover true
causal laws. John Earman and John Roberts (1999) have directly contested this,
arguing that the need to include ceteris paribus provisos in most special-science
generalizations that otherwise have the logical form of law statements suggests
that most special sciences are at best on the road to ﬁnding laws, but might in
general not be in the business of doing so. Earman and Roberts write that:

--- Page 270 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and John Collier 257
If laws are needed then only laws will do, and ceteris paribus laws will not. The point of
this slogan is not that special sciences cannot be scientiﬁcally legitimate. Rather, the point
is that when only ‘ceteris paribus laws’ are on offer, then whatever scientiﬁc purposes
are being fulﬁlled … do not require laws. Hence there is no need to try to rescue the
special sciences by ﬁnding a way to mini mize the differences between ‘ceteris paribus
laws’ and laws. To do so is to try to stuff all good science into the pigeon hole modelled
on fundamental physics, which … does articulate strict laws of nature. This can only
obscure what is important about the special sciences, as well as what is important about
fundamental physics. (1999, 470)
In the next chapter we show how to arrive at a conclusion complementary to this
in the framework of ITSR. This will in turn lead us to the basis for our explicit
view on the metaphysical status of special-science generalizations (and thus of
the real patterns that special sciences discover). This will come with a twist from
Earman and Roberts’s point of view, however. We will argue that Kincaid is also
right about something crucial in this debate: the idea of causation, as it is used
in science, indeed ﬁnds its exemplars in the special sciences, and it is a presently
open empirical question whether that notion will have any ultimate role to play
in fundamental physics. This argumentative tour through differences in the kinds
of generalizations furnished by, respectively, special sciences and fundamental
physics will then enable us to complete our account of the metaphysics of the
former.

--- Page 271 ---

5
Causation in a Structural World
Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett
5.1 RUSSELL ’S NATURALISTIC REJECTION
OF CAUSATION
Microbangings, a vaguely characterized class of events that, according to us,
should not be taken seriously by a naturalistic metaphysics, are typically the
paradigm instances of causal connection in modern Western philosophy and,
as we argued in Chapter 4, continue to have this status in contemporary
neo-scholastic metaphysical pictures such as Kim’s. In denying that there are
microbangings, then, are we denying that there are such things as causes?
We will argue that the idea of causation has similar status to those of
cohesion, forces, and things. It is a concept that structures the notional worlds
of observers who must book-keep real patterns from perspectives that involve
temporal and other asymmetries they cannot ignore on pain of discarding
information. Appreciating the role of causation in this notional world is crucial
to understanding the nature of the special sciences, and the general ways in which
they differ from fundamental physics. However, we will devote deeper and longer
attention to causation than we did to cohesion. This is for two reasons. First,
causation, unlike cohesion, is both a notional-world concept and a folk concept.¹
It has, as we will explain below, at least two ‘centres of semantic gravity’—one in
science and one in everyday discourse—that have usually been in tension with
one another in the history of metaphysics. Indeed, in attempting to resolve this
tension, philosophers managed to construct a third centre of semantic gravity
of their own, a bit of mischief which has greatly compounded the difﬁculties in
¹ We explained the idea of a notional world concept in 4.4. By ‘folk concept’ we mean what is
standardly meant by this term in the philosophical literature.

--- Page 272 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 259
achieving clarity on the subject. Second, causation, unlike cohesion, is a basic
category of traditional metaphysics, including metaphysics that purports to be
naturalistic but, according to us, falls short of this ambition. We cannot claim
to have shown how to supplant the tradition with a rigorously naturalistic but
uniﬁed world-view unless we articulate a clear and careful story about how the
various tasks performed by causal concepts in pseudo-naturalistic metaphysics
get displaced and redistributed in the real thing.
We will argue that causation, just like cohesion, is a representational real
pattern that is necessary for an adequately comprehensive science. Thus, we
will not urge its elimination. However, although we will argue that—again, as
with cohesion—fundamental physics and metaphysics can together explain why
causation plays an essential role in science, the correct account of fundamental
physics might not itself incorporate any causal structures, mechanisms, or
relations. Therefore, a PNC-compatible metaphysic cannot go on making
causation fundamental.
Instead of beginning our account with metaphysical pictures in which causation
is fundamental and then showing how to delimit its role, we will follow the
opposite procedure. That is, we will begin with an account that eliminates
causation altogether on naturalistic grounds, and then show, using PNC-
mandated motivations, why this outright eliminativism is too strong. The
eliminativist argument we will discuss is due to Bertrand Russell. As we will see,
Russell’s view has some important contemporary adherents among philosophers
of physics. We are basically sympathetic with him and them, because, as we will
argue, their appreciation of the problem with causal ideas in physics is sound,
and the motivations driving Russell’s argument are gratifyingly PNC-friendly.
(Indeed, Russell’s paper on causation is among the clearest anticipations of PNC-
based metaphysics to be found in the philosophical canon; this alone would justify
our lavishing attention on it in this book, since an enhanced understanding of
Russell’s position entails an enhanced understanding of the commitments of
genuine naturalism.) Russell goes too far in his across-the-board eliminativism.
However, we will argue, he does so only because of his assumption—made for
PNC-compatible reasons—of a version of reductionism that we have argued
should be decoupled from naturalism. Close consideration of Russell’s paper
thus keeps all of our main themes at the focus of attention.
Russell (1913 [1917]) ² characterized what he called ‘the law of causality’ as a
harmful ‘relic of a bygone age’, and urged the ‘complete extrusion’ of the word
‘cause’ from the philosophical vocabulary. His main premises are the descriptive
claim that practitioners of ‘advanced’ sciences, particularly physicists, don’t seek
causes, and the normative claim that it is improper for philosophers to legislate on
whether they should. This is why we said above that Russell’s argument is based
² All references to ‘Russell’ in what follows are to ‘the Russell of 1913’ unless otherwise stated.
Citations are to ‘On the Notion of Cause’ as reprinted in Mysticism and Logic (Russell 1917).

--- Page 273 ---

260 Causation in a Structural World
on exactly the sort of naturalism we are promoting in this book. His contention
that causation is not a signiﬁcant concept in metaphysics is based on the idea
that it is an artefact of an anthropocentric perspective that science supersedes.
In pointing out that Russell’s argumentation here is naturalistic, we do not
mean to imply that Russell consistently observed naturalism as his ﬁrst allegiance.
He was ﬁrst and foremost a Platonist. But as we pointed out in 3.5, 3.6, and 4.4,
there are versions of Platonism that are compatible with naturalism; and Russell’s
Platonism was motivated by facts ab out mathematics and its relationship to
science, so was PNC-compatible. In any case, Russell’s main basis for argument
in the essay on causes is description of the general content of science. Such
appeals have no force without an accompanying normative thesis to the effect
that science should have authority over philosophy. Thus Russell cites James
Ward as complaining about physics on the grounds that ‘the business of those
who wish to ascertain the ultimate truth about the world … should be the
discovery of causes, yet physics never even seeks them’, to which Russell objects
by saying that ‘philosophy ought not to assume such legislative functions’ (1913,
171). Later, having found Bergson attributing an event-regularity principle of
causation to scientists, Russell scolds that ‘philosophers … are too apt to take
their views on science from each other, not from science’ (1913, 176). Towards
the end of his essay, Russell diagnoses commitment to a law of causation as
stemming from projections into the metaphysical interpretation of science of
‘anthropomorphic superstitions’ based on the practical human predicament with
respect to the asymmetry of past and future in our memories and capacities for
control. Finally, at one point (1913, 184) he suggests the very radical naturalist
response to the conﬂict between everyday and scientiﬁc conceptions for which we
have also expressed attraction: the idea that sound metaphysical insights cannot
be stated in natural language, but require expression in a formalism from which
anthropocentric distortions have been purged.
The Russell of the 1913 essay also closely anticipates our stance in supposing
that the only legitimating point of metaphysics is uniﬁcation of our world-
view—which, given the accompanying naturalistic theses, means uniﬁcation
of otherwise separated branches of science. Russell denies (1913, 185 f.) that
scientists make inferences from the hypothesis of the ‘uniformity of nature’,
because such a procedure would treat this hypothesis as at least implicitly a priori.
However, he then goes on directly to argue (1913, 186 f.) that science advances
generalizations about ‘relatively isolated s ystems’ only for practical purposes: its
guiding aim is to achieve generalizations of maximum scope. Thus ‘it should be
observed that isolated systems are only important as providing a possibility of
discovering scientiﬁc laws; they have no theoretical importance in the ﬁnished
structure of a science’ (1913, 187). Despite anticipating Cartwright’s criticism
of the event regularity interpretation of laws, then, Russell is not led from
this towards the view that the world is dappled. As sciences widen the scope
of the generalizations they produce, he says, they abandon simple regularities

--- Page 274 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 261
among ‘causes’ and ‘effects’ which they used as ladders to discovery in their
immature phases, and identify progressively ‘greater differentiation of antecedent
and consequent’ and a ‘continually wider circle of antecedents recognised as
relevant’ (1913, 178).
Where more recent work in naturalistic metaphysics has been preoccupied with
questions about uniﬁcation, this has usually been in the speciﬁc context of trying
to understand the relationship between ca usation and explanation (Friedman
1974, Kitcher 1981, Kitcher 1989). These issues are in turn closely related
to debates around reductionism. For example, Kincaid (1997) takes as his
central problem the challenge to uniﬁcation of the sciences raised by the failure
of reductionism, and by the fact that (he argues) different sciences display a
proliferating range of explanatory strat egies distinguished by reference to special,
parochial causal patterns—patterns which indeed provide much of the basis
for the locations of the boundaries between the scopes of the sciences in the
ﬁrst place. Because of the priority Kincaid attaches to the empirical evidence
against reductionism, he regards the reductionist conclusion of neo-scholastics
like Kim (1998) as a reductio on their premise that where there are multiple (for
example, both mental and neural) causal claims about what happens in some
part of the world, all but one of these must be false unless we accept reduction
or overdetermination. Of course we agree with Kincaid about this. In later
work, Kincaid (2004) makes realism about causes the basis for an argument that
special sciences (including social sciences) discover laws of nature, despite the fact
that the laws in question must usually be stated with ceteris paribus clauses. Thus
we ﬁnd a reductionist champion of the manifest image (Kim) agreeing with an
anti-reductionist naturalist (Kincaid) that our world-view obtains such unity as
can be had by reference to causation. In the context of this current dialectic,
it is interesting that Russell combines the commitments to naturalism and
uniﬁcation shared by us and Kincaid with the latter’s reductionistic physicalism,
and to the mereological atomism embraced by the neo-scholastic metaphysicians
and rejected by us. In Russell’s case, unlike that of the neo-scholastics, this attitude
was PNC-consistent. The new physics coalescing into being in 1913 made the
late nineteenth-century impasses that had inspired Mill’s emergentism about
chemistry (and, by implication, the life and behavioural sciences) look much
less likely to remain pressing problems. Speciﬁcally, Einstein’s introduction
of photons made it seem likely that wave–particle duality with respect to
light was about to be dissolved in a way favourable to atomism. That the
duality would instead be generalized to all matter by de Broglie—let alone
that quantum entanglement would be discovered—was something Russell could
hardly anticipate.³
³ Russell kept a close eye on the frontier of science, however. By the time of his ABC of Relativity
a few years later (Russell 1925), he knew that de Broglie’s work spelled trouble for metaphysical
atomism. We remind the reader that many philosophers writing now still don’t seem to know this.

--- Page 275 ---

262 Causation in a Structural World
Russell construes cause-seeking as the quest for, or assumption of the existence
of, ‘invariable uniformities of sequence’ (1913, 178) or laws of constant succes-
sion. According to Russell, belief in the ‘law of causality’ leads us erroneously to
expect and to prize these uniformities. He blames philosophers for supposing,
against the evidence in science, that there exists such a law identifying causal
relations with uniformities. Here he anticipates Cartwright’s (for example, 1980)
contention that laws understood as stating facts about event regularities have
numerous counterexamples. Russell agrees with Cartwright that laws stating
event regularities don’t describe how bodies actually behave. Instead of conclud-
ing from this that the laws of nature are false, he maintains that they don’t state
event regularities, defending this through an account of the features of scientiﬁc
practice that produce the counterexamples and show the inappropriateness of an
event-regularity view of laws. First, he argues, the Humean interpretation of laws
as regularities depends on a qualitative ba sis for individuating events that cannot
be rendered in objectively quantitative terms; yet a mature science is one that
aims at strictly quantitative description in the limit (1913, 183 f.). Second, the
idea that uniformities of sequence might be ‘laws’ makes asymmetry between the
past and the future fundamental, whereas maturing science aims always at laws
that make no reference to time in this sense (though they often refer to intervals,
some of which may be rightly called ‘temporal’) (1913, 185 f.). Russell concedes
that in the ‘infancy’ of a science (1913, 178) the principle of ‘same cause, same
effect’ may prove useful for discovery, but maintains that advance in science
consists in moving away from such simple formulae, and towards understanding
phenomena in terms of mathematically speciﬁed relations of functional interde-
pendence in which past and future are not systematically different, ⁴ which the
‘law of causality’ is too crude to embrace, and which Russell therefore thinks
should not be called ‘causal’.
Those who now look to causation to provide the unifying structure of the
world have in mind a notion of cause as in some sense the ‘cement of the
universe’ (see Hume 1978 [1740], 662 for the leading source of this metaphor)
or what we elsewhere called the ‘glue’ holding all objective relations in place (Ross
and Spurrett 2004). The causation as glue tradition contains a substantial body
of work, developing what are collectively called causal process theories. Such
glue would be or would provide the necessity that Hume couldn’t ﬁnd in the
impressions and their regular relations. Causal process theories, that is, can
be understood as attempts to answer Hume’s epistemological challenge to say
how anyone could know, by any amount of observation, which links between
processes are causal and which are not. They purport to show that we can, at
⁴ That is, as Field (forthcoming) notes, being ‘ deterministic in both directions ’. We agree with
Field that the (alleged) lack of past– future asymmetrical dependence in fundamental physics is not
Russell’s most important argument against the relevance of causes to science, and that the failure of
the facticity view of laws is.

--- Page 276 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 263
least, observe something that is precisely diagnostic of what we have traditionally
meant by ‘causation’. Contra Russell’s complaints about the law of causality,
causality, or the glue, isn’t itself an event regularity; it is supposed to be that in
virtue of which there are some projectible regularities in the ﬁrst place. ⁵
Salmon’s (1984) causal process theory followed Reichenbach (1957) in describ-
ing real processes in terms of the transmission of marks.⁶ On this view a genuine
process is one that can be modiﬁed (or ‘marked’) at some stage, and observed
to carry the same modiﬁcation at subsequent stages. Some processes, that is,
transmit information about their antecedent stages, while others do not; those
which do are genuine processes, the others pseudo-processes. A crucial scientiﬁc
motivation for Salmon’s project of distinguishing causal from pseudo-processes,
as with Reichenbach, is the alleged relativistic requirement not to count a faster-
than-light process as causal (Salmon 1984, 141; Reichenbach 1957, 147–9).
A commonly used illustration of the problem concerns a spot of light moving
on some surface because the light source is rotating. For large enough distances
between spotlight and surface, the spot cast by the rotating light will move across
the surface at a superluminal velocity (Salmon 1984, 143). Even so, it would not
be a causal process for Salmon, because it cannot be marked. A ﬁlter that turned
the beam red, placed just before one part of the surface, would make the light
that struck that bit of surface red (diagnosing the process between the ﬁlter and
surface as causal) but not change the spot elsewhere, showing that the successive
stages of the spot weren’t causally connected.
The metaphysic suggested by process views is effectively one in which the
entire universe is a graph of real processes, where the edges are uninterrupted
processes, and the vertices the interactions between them. Thus process views, if
correct, would make putatively causal claims by scientists subject to a critical test.
Those that pick out real processes could be causal, those that don’t, can’t. Then,
when scientists ﬁnd causes in their domains of inquiry, whether they put the
matter this way or not, they ﬁnd ways of picking out real information-carrying
relations. That is to say, if macroeconomics, for example, has its own notion
of ‘macroeconomic causation’, this notion will turn out to correspond to some
information-carrying relations really instantiated on the general graph of real
processes.
Russell’s 1913 claims about the irrelevance of causation to science and the
tradition of causal process theories are, then, in conﬂict. It is bound to seem at
ﬁrst glance that unless Russell is completely wrong, the process theory tradition
must be a mistake. There are at least two central reasons why most contemporary
⁵ To suppose that uniﬁcation might consist in the identiﬁcation of some privileged ‘glue’ is,
then, to suppose that there is a master relation (in this case causation) that is implicated in all
projectible generalizations.
⁶ Process theories differ on the question of what real processes actually are. For Dowe (for
example, 1992) they are possessors of conserved quantities, and for Collier (1999) they are transfers
of information.

--- Page 277 ---

264 Causation in a Structural World
naturalistic philosophers are apt to regard Russell as wrong. First, because of his
reductionism and atomism Russell takes for granted a now quaint-seeming view
(among naturalists) of the capacity and right of physics—rather than science
more generally—to populate our ontology. As we’ve explained, attention to the
proliferation of non-reducing patterns of causal explanation in special sciences
largely deﬁnes the contemporary nat uralistic (uniﬁcationist) metaphysician’s
mission. For this, process theories are one possible piece of useful ordinance.
Second, as also discussed above, Russell relies on the Humean conception of
causation in pronouncing for eliminativism. Many, perhaps most, contemporary
philosophers of science would agree with him that scientists don’t seek causes in
that sense, but would then go on to say that that is not the sense in which the idea
of causation is either scientiﬁcally or metaphysically interesting. For these reasons
taken together, Russell’s thesis might be written off as of historical interest only.
Yet Russell’s thesis is not dead. Some contemporary philosophers of physics
continue to endorse and argue for it. Redhead (1990) explicitly acknowledges it
when developing his own argument that talk of causes has no place in physics.
(We qualify this by saying fundamental physics.) He considers an explanation of
the fall of a body using Galileo’s law, and asks what in the explanation might be
regarded as the cause. As he notes, closely following Russell’s logic (Russell 1913,
183 f.) the position at an earlier time ‘can hardly be cited as the cause’, that the
acceleration is merely ‘deﬁned by the kinematic relationship’ expressed in the
law, that the law itself cannot be regarded as a cause because it isn’t an event, and
ﬁnally that citing the force as a cause is ‘a very anthropocentric notion’ (Redhead
1990, 146). ⁷ Developing his charge of anthropocentrism, Redhead maintains
that ‘[t]o most physicists the old-fashioned idea of cause arises from the idea
of our interfering in the natural course of events, pushing and pulling objects
to make them move and so on. In modern physics there are just regularities
of one sort or another’ (147). Batterman (2002) adds further endorsement
motivated by taking physics seriously. As noted in 4.1, the way of interpreting
the concept of ‘emergence’ defended by Batterman in our terms is to say that if
there is emergence, this means that there are real patterns that do not reduce to
physical patterns taken, for explanatory purposes, as networks of causal relations.
( The explanations in question will be Salmon-style, rather than Kitcher-style,
explanations.) Then, Batterman notes, many philosophers reject emergence (in
his sense) on the basis of their claim that attributing causal powers to emergents
that are not shared by their ‘basal constituents’ violates physicalism (on any
⁷ Compare this charge with Gunther Stent (1971), defending what amounts to a version of
idealism as follows: ‘Certainly the most basic law projected by man into nature is causality, or
the belief that the events he observes in the outer world resemble his own conscious acts in
their being connected as cause and effect, rath er than occurring haphazardly … Indeed, even the
most elementary dimensions in terms of which scientists attempt to describe the very events that
causality is supposed to connect, such as time, space, mass, and temperature, are nothing more than
projections into nature of man’s own physiology and anatomy’ (128).

--- Page 278 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 265
reasonable construal of ‘physicalism’) (2002, 126). To this Batterman responds
that ‘I just do not understand the talk of causal powers. I realize that largely this
is just an appeal to our intuitions about causes, but they are, as far as I can tell,
intuitions that resist codiﬁcation in a coherent theory or framework’ (ibid. 127).
We agree with Batterman that the e xplanatory force of the kinds of physical
theories that he takes as exemplary does not consist in appeal to networks of
causal relations. Finally, Norton (2003, 4) endorses Russell’s thesis for Russell’s
reasons, and says ‘mature sciences … are adequate to account for their realms
without need of supplement by causal notions and principles. The latter belong
to earlier efforts to understand our natural world or to simpliﬁed reformulations
of our mature theories, intended to trade precision for intelligibility’ (ibid. 3).
In our terms, Norton here claims that reading commitment to causation into
‘mature’ science—by which, to judge from his examples, he means physics—is
a way of trying to domesticate it. ⁸
The thought that, somehow, both the process tradition and Russell of
1913 could be correct raises perplexing possibilities. Could process theories
unify the special sciences but not unify them with physics? That would be
surprising and confusing, not least because one of the best known and most
carefully articulated criticisms of Salmon’s causal process theory is, roughly,
that the opposite is the case, that is, that it works better for physics than for
the special sciences (Kitcher 1989; see also Ross and Spurrett 2004). Were
the thought that process theories worked for everything except physics instead
taken as grounds for doubt about process theories, then perhaps the rebound
view might be that Kim’s causal exclusion problem and the attractions of
Russell’s thesis in physics mutually support one another: causal overdetermination
is evidence for reductionism—in particular, for doubt that parochial causal
patterns in special sciences are metaphysically signiﬁcant—and then, once we
go reductive, causation, absent in the reduction base, drops out altogether. Two
overdetermining causes aren’t one cause too many but two.
We agree with Russell—and with most current philosophy of science—that
scientists do not generally seek ‘invariable uniformities of sequence’. We also
agree, for PNC-based reasons to be given below, that it doesn’t follow from
this that they seek nothing worth calling causes. We argue that scientists do
seek causes, in an everyday sense we describe, and that they ﬁnd them. This
might look like a straightforward confutation of Russell’s thesis. We go on
t oa r g u et h a ti ti sn o t ,s i n c eR u s s e l l ’ sa r g u m e n ti sm o s ti n t e r e s t i n g l yr e a da s
attacking the idea that there is a ‘master’ concept of causation, independent
of anthropocentric bias, that should be expected to feature in the metaphysical
uniﬁcation of the scientiﬁc world-view. This might be a basis for dissolution of
Kim’s problem, but also seems to imply rejection of the point of process theories.
However, we will skirt that conclusion too. Instead, we will defend the following
⁸ Glymour (1999, 463) also denies that there are causal laws in physics.

--- Page 279 ---

266 Causation in a Structural World
consilience between Russell (and philosophers of physics who agree with him)
and Salmon: the naturalist metaphysical project of seeking universal glue is well
motivated; process theories are on the right track in this search; but ‘causation’
is a semantically unfortunate name for the glue to which they lead our attention.
Part of our defence of the conclusion that it is semantically unfortunate that the
cement of the universe gets called ‘causation’ involves identifying what we call
conﬂicting centres of semantic gravity for ‘causation’. Roughly, there is a folk
centre, a philosophical centre, and a notional-world centre that has a proper place
in science. It is the existence of this third centre that stops us from following
Russell all the way to outright eliminativism about causation.
5.2 PHILOSOPHERS AND FOLK ON CAUSATION
To decide whether there are causes, or whether anyone seeks them, one needs to
decide (i) what to count as a cause, and (ii) how to tell whether such things are real,
or are sought. Russell partly settles (i) by reference to psychology. He also, as noted,
regards psychological considerations as irrelevant to philosophy, ⁹ maintaining
that the content of some cause-talk is anthropomorphic projection, failing to
correspond to what is discovered by science. Russell does not claim, though, that
the ‘law of causality’ itself arises from psychological considerations—he blames
philosophers for the law. Philosophers might reply that in taking ‘invariable
succession’ as causation they were following a long tradition, claiming to ﬁnd
the law of causation through psychological observation. This is particularly true
of the history of the account Russell criticizes, namely, the Humean view that
causes are event regularities or ‘constant conjunctions’. Both Hume and his
successors, including Kant (1933, 218) and Mill (1974, 326–7), derive the
philosophical signiﬁcance of constant conjunctions from purported observation
of their importance to both everyday and scientiﬁc cognition. Naturalists, trying
to shun appeals to intuitions and conceptual analysis, are particularly inclined to
look for evidence in scientiﬁc psychology. ¹⁰
⁹ Russell (1913, 174) objects to one of the deﬁnitions of ‘cause’ in Baldwin’s (1901) Dictionary
that it is psychological, focusing on ‘thought or perception’ of a process where what is required is a
deﬁnition of ‘the process itself ’.
¹⁰ Melnyk (2003, 139–64) gives a Humean account of causation that does not rely on
psychology. Melnyk’s account of causation is parasitic on his account of explanation, and makes
appeals to the existence of brute physical regularities that have no explanations. We agree that
the PNC motivates belief in such regularities. If the universe is a block, these regularities will be
standing structural properties rather than tensed relations . Melnyk’s account seems subtle enough
to allow for this too. But if we imagine a block version of Melnyk’s view, it looks as if he would
be forced to grant that all causation is formal and none is efﬁcient; all that would then be left of
any traditional notion of causation would be th e occurrence of the word ‘because’ in explanations
(see ibid. 141 – 2). Since we don’t think metaphysics can be done as an exercise in semantics, we
don’t think this point sees off Melnyk’s account. However, we do suggest that it would amount to

--- Page 280 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 267
Some of what we know from the study of ‘causal cognition’ or ‘causal learning’
undermines the idea that our causal cognition is Humean. Contrary to early
behaviourist dogma, associations are not all equally learnable. Rats ﬁnd it much
easier to learn (and show appropriate avoidance behaviour when cued for) an
association between eating a certain food and nausea, and a loud ﬂash and an
electric shock, than either complementary pairing (Garcia and Koelling 1966).
We might say that natural selection has projected a regularity in the world of
rats, so that any given rat does not experience some types of phenomena as
‘entirely loose and separate’ (Hume 1975 [1777], 74). The projected regularities
here, referred to by Garcia and Koelling as ‘genetically encoded hypothes[es]’
are not, furthermore, ‘invariable uniformities of sequence’. Learning in the
nausea case can take place even when the delay between stimulus and response
is considerable (over an hour) and avoidance or aversion can also be learned
following a single exposure.
The work of developmental psychologists already tells us a lot about the
causal expectations of, for example, children around 3 months old, who are
surprised when apparently cohesive objects seem spontaneously to fragment, to
pass through one another, or not to exhibit a single trajectory through space
and time (Spelke et al. 1995), or when apparently unsupported objects fail to
fall (Baillargeon et al. 1995). Some headway is being made on the difﬁcult
question of what features of an object’s behaviour and/or structure lead children
to regard it as capable of self-motion (Gelman et al. 1995). Here too some events
are not experienced as ‘entirely loose and separate’.
It is also clear that we do not spontaneously think in terms of constant
conjunctions, but rather in terms of networks of inﬂuence similar to directed
causal graphs, or Bayes nets. Young children (between the ages of 3 and 5) can,
inter alia, reason to unobserved causes, plan appropriate novel interventions to
prevent a process they had only observed in operation (but never seen prevented),
and make inferences about the ‘direction’ of causal dependence in cases of
simultaneous change (see, for example, Gopnik et al. 2004). The evidence is thus
inconsistent with a simple conditioning or associationist view where ‘invariable
uniformities of sequence’ are what is learned.
The relevance of this to a naturalist should be clear: if ‘our’ concept of
causation is an image of the kind of causal cognition that we actually engage
in, then any feat of conceptual analysis starting from a model of ‘Humean’
constant conjunctions, or an appeal to alleged intuitions about such con-
stant conjunctions, seems unlikely to be relevant to us, to science, or to
metaphysics. To the extent that we have culturally universal intuitions about
causation, this is a fact about our ethology and cognitive dispositions, rather
than a fact about the general structure of the world. As we argued in 1.1 and
a backhanded concession that the substance o f Russell’s view—our topic here—might indeed be
shown by physics to be correct.

--- Page 281 ---

268 Causation in a Structural World
1.2, intuitions are not evidence for their own content, in either science or
metaphysics.
Empirical evidence in the speciﬁc case of intuitions about causation provides
a particular exempliﬁcation of this general scepticism. Intuitive (in the sense
of immediate, unforced) responses to causal questions are culturally varied. In
particular it appears that adults in different cultures reason differently about
causes. Chinese and American newspaper reports of very similar local multiple
murders differed strikingly in the extent to which they referred to dispositional
properties of the perpetrator (more common in America) and environmental
ones (more common in China). Further, Chinese and American subjects in an
experimental task involving counterfactual judgements about the murders had
differing views about what sorts of changes (dispositional or situational) would
have been likely to prevent the murder (Morris et al. 1995). Nor are our causal
intuitions a reliable basis for basic scientiﬁc inference. It seems reasonably clear
that people are relatively poor at judgements about conditional dependence, as
measured in the Wason selection task (see Cosmides 1989); probability, where
many will, for example, assert that the conjunction of two possibilities is more
likely than one of the conjuncts alone ( Tversky and Kahneman 1983), and in
other areas, compared to communities of scientists. Our response in such cases
is of course not to take our scientiﬁc practice as thereby impugned. Just as the
scientiﬁc study of vision enables us to explain some visual illusions, so the study
of causal cognition might be expected to show us that we were prone to ‘causal
illusions’ (Gopnik et al. 2004). The proper task of philosophy and science in cases
of causal illusion is to explain the answers people give to some causal questions,
rather than to try to make the answers turn out to be correct.
The upshot of this section so far is twofold. First, human causal cognition
is not Humean. One temptation to take regularity as deﬁnitive of causation is
thereby removed. Second, our intuitions about causation are neither detailed
enough nor stable enough for the entire folk concept as exempliﬁed by this or that
culture to be used as a basis for constructing the notional-world concept relevant
to special sciences. To the limited extent that the folk concept of causation
has a common core across cultural elaborations, its content is as follows. First,
it construes causal relations as centred on some agent of change (animate or
otherwise), thereby distinguishing agents and patients. Second, it postulates
various transformative principles (often conceived as ‘forces’) proceeding out
from an agent to the recipient of causal inﬂuence. Kim’s (2005) endorsement
of a ‘generative’ account of causation may illustrate the attractions of this
feature of the core folk centre of gravity, as we suspect does Armstrong’s (2004)
contention that the philosophical theory of causation begins with our experience
of ‘biff ’ in acting in the world. ¹¹ Third, the core folk notion of causation
¹¹ Norton (2003, 18–19), in trying to articulate the structure of the folk notion of causation,
suggests that it has somewhat more structure than this. However, it seems to us that he reads

--- Page 282 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 269
incorporates assumptions about time-asymmetry: causal inﬂuences ﬂow from
the past into the future. These three features seem empirically to exhaust the
core folk concept. ¹² The artiﬁcial intelligence researcher Patrick Hayes (1979)
spent years trying to work out deductive models of the everyday concept of
causation as the basis for designing a simulation of a person. These models
began with the three features just identiﬁed, then added the knowledge people
have of the mechanics of their own bodies to produce programs for distinctive
manipulations of solid objects and liquids. Folk psychology would be conjoined
with the core folk causal model to produce programs for causally inﬂuencing
other agents.
It is open to a naturalist to allow a folk notion to ﬁx what is to count as a
cause for purposes of inquiry into anthropically constructed or centred domains
and practices. However, the naturalist ca nnot allow anything but science to say
whether there are such things as causes. With a watchful eye open for illicit
appeals to folk notions, then, let us turn to consider science.
5.3 CAUSES IN SCIENCE
Russell maintains that ‘advanced’ sciences have no use for the ‘law of causation’
and don’t seek instantiations of that law, even claiming that in such sciences the
word ‘cause’ never occurs. Whether or not Russell is correct about the relevance
of the ‘law of causality’ to science, many of the sciences at least claim, explicitly,
to pursue and answer causal questions. By this we mean (for now) the weak claim
that the output of many communities of scientists includes papers and other doc-
uments that refer to the ‘causes’ of various phenomena, or the ‘mechanisms’ that
‘produce’ them, or ways in which various effects can be ‘inhibited’ or ‘prevented’.
Consulting a single issue of Science (volume 300—June 2003) we note that
things referred to as being ‘caused’, ‘determined’, or being the ‘result’ of something
within the ﬁrst few pages of the issue (excluding letters, pieces on policy matters,
and editorials) include ‘broadening of lines’ in spectroscopy, ‘global extinctions’,
‘a gradual drop in IOM [Indian Ocean Monsoon] intensity over 5000 years’,
‘an electrical barrier’, ‘how genes are expressed in two closely related species of
fruit ﬂy’, decrease in ‘the reactivity of some state-to-state channels’, ‘efﬁcient,
spontaneous cell-cell fusion’, ‘the common cold’, ‘oceanic primary production’,
and ‘pear blister canker and cadang-cadang disease of coconuts’. A search for
too much philosophical sophistication and restric tiveness into the folk concept. Norton himself
inadvertently provides some evidence for this when he goes on to show how the various folk
properties of causal relations that go beyond th e ones we have identiﬁed are all subject to being
waived in special applications.
¹² Recall our discussion of the containment metaphor in 1.1 where we also referred to ‘causal
oomph’.

--- Page 283 ---

270 Causation in a Structural World
articles in which the word ‘cause’ appeared in the online archives of Science
between October 1995 and June 2003 returned a list of results containing 8,288
documents, averaging around 90 documents per month, in which the word
‘cause’ occurred. ‘Effect’ was more popular—10,456 documents for the same
period, around 112 per month. 3,646 documents included the word ‘inﬂuence’,
8,805 the word ‘response’, 2,683 the word ‘consequence’. (In case the reader
is wondering, ‘philosophy’ turned up in 553 documents, much less often than
‘cause’, and approximately half as often as ‘soil’ with 1,007.)
So scientists talk about causes a great deal and, unless intolerable strain is
to be placed on the notion of an ‘advanced’ science, or ‘advanced science’ is
just a misleading way of denoting fundamental physics, Russell is simply wrong
that the word cause ‘never occurs’. This is a result of very modest signiﬁcance.
As already noted, most philosophers of science today agree with Russell that
scientists don’t seek laws of constant succession. What, then, are the things
scientists call causes? We take it tha t what is being provided, or attempted,
when scientists talk about causes is causal explanation. A well-established set
of philosophical questions about explanation in general, and causal explanation
in particular, arise here focused on the problem of what makes for a good
(causal) explanation in a particular science, in some group of sciences, or in
general. For present purposes we adopt, without argument, a broadly Kitcherian
approach to these questions. As Kitcher has emphasized (for example, 1981),
the explanatory relations accepted in any science are determined by the ‘general
argument patterns’ (see 1.3) accepted in that science. For reasons noted above,
and returned to below, we are much more concerned than Russell to take
seriously the fact of the number and variety of sciences. We agree with Kincaid
(1997) that scientists typically rely on special causal relations that are parochial
to their individual disciplinary traditions, and that don’t, at least on the face
of things, reduce to or welcome analysis by reference to a single over-arching
conception of the kind that philosophers typically seek.
It thus turns out that when contemporary scientists talk about causes what
they are typically doing is documenting the very kind of relationship of multiple
dependence that Russell takes to be distinct from putative ‘causal’ relationships.
Russell’s descriptive claim about what scientists say is incorrect, and he gives
no compelling naturalist reason for sa ying that explanatory interdependencies
shouldn’t be called causes. Further, if we’re correct that cognitive science tells us
that our own cognition isn’t Humean, then a key temptation (for a naturalist)
to make event regularity deﬁnitive of causation disappears. Since in science
causation doesn’t appear to reduce to event regularity, we are left with no
motivation for the Humean analysis. Might our verdict then be that scientists
instead join the folk in using causal ideas to indicate hypotheses about ‘biff ’
and ‘ﬂow’?
Can we seriously attribute to scientists such hazy and immature metaphysical
generalizations as refer to ‘ﬂow’ and ‘biff ’? If the resolution we are canvassing at

--- Page 284 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 271
this point were intended as anything more than a way-station in the argument,
then as naturalists we would have to give this question careful attention. Since
we don’t ultimately attribute the aforementioned hazy metaphysical conviction
to scientists, however, we can just suggest how someone might most plausibly try
to do so. First, one would maintain that scientists have no distinctive general idea
of causation of their own; they just inherit folk custom here, and then tighten
application in any given instance (so as to make causal claims suitable for testing
and measurement) when they hypothesize or aim to discover speciﬁc mechanisms.
It is a regularly encountered thesis in the methodological literatures of the
special sciences that explanations have not been provided until a mechanism,
of a kind distinctive to the special science in question, is speciﬁed. (See, for
example, Elster 1989 and Kincaid 2004). ‘Mechanism’, as this idea is used
outside of mechanics, typically seems to mean nothing more deﬁnite than ‘stable,
quantitatively parameterized and measura ble transmitter of inﬂuence’—which
in turn looks as if it could be rendered without loss as ‘biff-ﬂow channel in a
speciﬁed model’. ¹³ The substantive point here is that ‘inﬂuence’, as restricted to
the sort of thing one needs a mechanism to transmit, is plausibly equivalent to
the folk concept that Armstrong calls ‘biff ’.
These reﬂections might seem at ﬁrst glance to furnish a basis for resolving all
questions about what a contemporary naturalist ought to think about Russell’s
thesis. Neither the folk nor scientists conceptualize causation in a Humean
fashion, in part because both consider more complicated interdependencies than
bare regularities, and both can (more arguably) be taken as generally supposing,
when attributing causal inﬂuence from some x to some y, a ‘ﬂow of biff ’ from
causal agent x to patient y. If we were to accept all this, then we could say that
we let folk custom ﬁx what general sort of relation counts as causal, and then
assign to science the job of telling us in detail what instantiates the set or network
of actual causal relations. ¹⁴ Then our verdict on Russell’s thesis would be that
Russell conceded too much semantic priority to Humeans after all, and was
thereby blinded to the compatibility of everyday and scientiﬁc ways of thinking.
¹³ Consider, for example, how little additional structure the following examples of causal
mechanisms given by Kincaid (1997) have in common: st rategies of organizations produced by the
mechanism of differential birth and survival in different environments (sociology) (19); rational
expectations as mechanisms explaining monetary policy failures (economics) (140); signal sequences
attached to proteins as protein-sorting mechanisms in cells (cellular biology) (53); protein structures
as mechanisms determinant of binding strengths in antibodies (biochemistry/physical chemistry)
(60); distributed rule following by networked individual people as the mechanism that steers an
aircraft carrier (cognitive anthropology) (124); homeotic genes as determinants of development
paths from imaginal disks to speciﬁc organs in organisms (developmental biology/genetics) (61).
In each special science there are background theories about what kind of processes count as
mechanisms.
¹⁴ Note that the ﬁt between the folk notion and the output of science need not be perfect on
this account—the folk can be surprised about what causes what, and also be called upon to make
various modest revisions to their view of what causes are without being subject to the wholesale
violence of Russell’s proposal that there are no causes at all.

--- Page 285 ---

272 Causation in a Structural World
This sort of resolution would be better than either simple eliminativism about
causation, or an attempt to save caus ation by defence of Humeanism. It is very
close to a proposal of Norton (2003), whose general view is in turn the closest
one to ours that we ﬁnd in the literature. However, we think it is not quite
adequate. For one thing, it is silent on any connection between causal relations
and ontological unity. Norton explicitly denies such a connection, for reasons
similar to Kincaid. Certainly, it is a plausible view to hold that causation has
nothing to do with the glue the uniﬁcationist seeks, and that Kim and others
are likewise confused in regarding causal multiplicity as being a problem for
folk metaphysics. But unless one thinks that fundamental physics is the only
metaphysically serious science—as Norton’s failure in his paper to consider any
cases from special sciences as possible counterexamples to Russell’s thesis suggests
that he might—then leaving the problem at this point will be fully satisfying
only to the advocate of metaphysical disunity.
As we have urged, Russellian eliminativism about causes is a plausible—indeed,
we think strongly PNC-motivated—position in fundamental physics.N or e s o l u -
tion of the problem of unity in the face of multidisciplinarity, with respect to
causation or any other putative glue, can by itself resolve the tension between
Russell’s thesis as applied to fundamental physics and causal process theories.
An advocate of metaphysical uniﬁcation could just deny that causal process
theories have got anything right at all, and set off in search of alternative
glue. But this would imply an error theory of the underlying metaphysics
of special sciences—Kincaid (2004), for example, would come out as ﬂatly
wrong— and that in turn leads back to the position of Dennett’s we reject-
ed in 4.2, according to which fundamental physics studies the real illata
and special sciences study ontologically second-rate abstracta.T h i sw o u l db e
reductionism (though not of Kim’s kind), and we fear it is where Norton’s
position leads.
Imagine a philosopher who self-consciously chose this route (unlike Den-
nett, who falls into it by mistake), concluding that special sciences (but not
fundamental physics) are pragmatic pursuits made necessary by the conjunction
of human epistemic limitations and parochial concerns. For such a philoso-
pher it might not be surprising if it turned out that minimal conceptual
revision was necessary for understanding the role of causal generalization and
explanation in special sciences. But it then would be surprising if the home-
ly model of causation were vindicated in application to fundamental physics,
since this would amount to the discovery that our natural conceptual appara-
tus had been well evolved for domains of no consequence to our ﬁtness. (As
we argued in 1.1 and 1.2, this problem should trouble the neo-scholastics.)
The more ambitious uniﬁcationist hope, that special sciences and physics can
justiﬁably be interpreted as pursuing an objective and coherent description
of reality in tandem, should lead us to look for comprehensive revision-
ary principles ﬁrst, then ask how these can accommodate the practices we

--- Page 286 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 273
ﬁnd in special sciences, and what relations these have to patterns of folk
usage.¹⁵
We can make the above agenda more explicit by framing it in terms of
the theses with which we have been contrasting Russell’s, viz. causal process
theories and Kim-style reductionism. The point of process theories, as discussed
earlier, is to distinguish real causal processes from merely apparent ones. Salmon,
like Russell and like us, holds that, on questions about objective reality, not
only should science trump anthropocentric perspectives (that is, we should be
naturalists), but that within science fundamental physics should trump the special
sciences whenever they conﬂict. Thus for Salmon the paradigm instances of real
causal processes are to be sought in fundamental physics, which he takes to be
microphysics. Such commitments fuel the recent controversies based on worries
about causal exclusion, with the added distraction that the promoters of the
worries ignore actual physics in favour of an imaginary physics that hides the
problem.
Kitcher’s (1989) early critique of Salmon centred on just this point, arguing
that our identiﬁcation of causal i nteractions in most, probably all, macro-
processes depends more on our knowledge of the general causal structure of
the macro-world (as uncovered by sciences other than fundamental physics)
than it does on the sorts of micro-process paramount for Salmon. However, for
Kitcher such considerations only give reason for not attempting to extract direct
methodological guidelines for conducting the business of the macro-sciences from
process accounts, and do not seriously undermine the value of Salmon’s approach
and its descendants when they are understood as saying something about the kinds
of real structures in the world that science aims, in the limit, to discover. That is,
in Kitcher’s view a sound point about explanatory practice in science need not
by itself establish anything about fundamental ontology. This is why Kitcher is
able to describe his approach and Salmon’s as complementary, characterizing his
own work as analysing ‘top-down’ explanation, where phenomena are explained
by having their roles in wider ensembles of regularities ﬁxed. He contrasts this
with ‘bottom-up’ explanation, the sort he says is analysed by Salmon—who in
turn explicitly endorsed Kitcher’s suggested complementarity (Salmon 1990).
The problem with this rapprochement is that it sacriﬁces the ambition for
uniﬁcation of fundamental physics and specia l sciences, if it is agreed that special
sciences explain by reference to causal processes but fundamental physics does
not. This is slightly ironic in light of the fact that Kitcher’s overarching aim
is to defend the idea that the scientiﬁc value of explanation consists in the
uniﬁcations it furnishes. The Kitcherian rapprochement, at this point in our
dialectic, supports explanation as uniﬁcation within disciplines, but frustrates
general uniﬁcation—the very point of metaphysics, according to us.
¹⁵ We didn’t worry about an analogous issue in the case of cohesion because, as argued, cohesion
isn’t a folk concept.

--- Page 287 ---

274 Causation in a Structural World
We have now argued our way into a tight corner. Getting out requires us
to seek an account that (i) leaves scientists free to talk about causal processes
without risk of embarrassment in the company of metaphysicians, but (ii)
follows Russell in denying intuitions (folk or Humean) about causation any
role in informing the metaphysical foundations of physics, or science more
generally. The view we outline joins Russell, Redhead, and Norton in leaving
the folk concept of causation intact (as our view of the concept of things
leaves that concept intact, rather than claiming like Eddington that it applies
to electrons but not to tables). We appeal to two considerations, neither of
them derived from natural or folk intuitions, to explain why the core folk
concept of causation need not conﬂict with naturalistic philosophy of science
or naturalistic metaphysics. One consideration is the very thin-ness of the core
folk conception discussed in 4.7. The folk are committed only to the existence
of processes, but not to the metaphysical idea that causal processes are glue.
The second consideration will be a set of reasons for thinking that if Russell,
Redhead, and Norton are right about fundamental physics, then the exact
sense in which they might be right—given the actual state of contemporary
physics—suggests physical and metaphysical explanations for the existence of
processes, while implying that causal processes are not metaphysical glue. Our
view grants Salmon and other process theorists a good deal—in particular, it
accords with their belief in objective causal relations, and with their idea that
those relations should be explicated in terms of processes. In requiring of physical
theory that it explain why special sciences study causal processes as real patterns
it serves uniﬁcation. However, in elaborating on how causation might play no
role in fundamental physics, it accommodates Kitcher’s objection to Salmon
and locates what is right in Russell’s thesis once his primitive reductionism is
set aside.
5.4 LETTING SCIENCE HOLD TRUMPS
As we pointed out above, one premise of Russell’s, deriving from his nat-
uralism in application to the state of empirical science when he wrote, is a
direct and simple form of reductionism about the relations among the sci-
ences. When he champions letting science hold trumps on conceptual revision,
he supposes that it is speciﬁcally fundamental physics that has the cards. He
argues that because the functional generalizations of physical theory involve
no temporal asymmetries, whereas causation in the anthropomorphic sense
depends on such asymmetry, the universe itself cannot have causal relations
as a feature, except in the sense that the universe includes cognitive sys-
tems and cognitive systems anticipate by constructing causal relations. He
thus assumes what current worriers about causal exclusion do, namely, that
whatever general patterns of relations are identiﬁed by any sciences must ulti-

--- Page 288 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 275
mately be (at least in principle) identiﬁable and explicable by fundamental
physics.¹⁶
When Russell wrote his essay this was still a reasonable bet. However, we
have been arguing throughout this book that the bet has been failing almost
since the moment Russell joined others in putting his chips on it—as noted
above, de Broglie’s work was just around the corner. The weak version of
physicalism supported by current scientiﬁc practice, the PPC, is too weak to
license Russell’s inference from eliminativism about causation in fundamental
physics to eliminativism about causation in special sciences. If physical theory
abjures reference to causal relations but biology or economics invokes them, this
generates no contradiction.
Although the PPC doesn’t pack the whole punch of mereological reductionism,
and carry us all the way to Russell’s eliminativism about causation, the PNC
does pack enough punch to allow us to take Russell’s reasoning as a template,
requiring us only to complicate it slightly. By the PNC, if causation does not
ﬁgure in fundamental physics, then the class of causal relations should not be
supposed to pick out an extra-representational real pattern in metaphysics. This
is compatible with the possibility that metaphysics and physics can explain why
a notional-world concept of causation is necessary for organizing special sciences
that successfully identify real patterns.
We want to see where reasoning that resembles Russell’s leads if we replace
his reductionist version of the priority of physics with the weaker PPC. Consider
the set of fundamental physical theories currently being taken seriously by
physicists—that is, those used or investigated in funded research programmes
that aim to unify physics and so shade into metaphysics (the serious candidates
for accounts of quantum gravity reviewed in 3.7.2). Suppose, following the
arguments of Chapter 4, that none of the generalizations in these theories invoke
the kinds of causal asymmetries characteristic of the ﬂow (or process) concept of
causation, while some or all special-science causal principles do presuppose such
asymmetries (as Kincaid persuasively argues). Then three possibilities are open
with respect to the status of these asymmetries in metaphysics.
One possibility is that fundamental physics ultimately endorses a ‘background-
free’ theory of the sort promoted by Smolin (2000). (Recall from 3.7.2 that
background freedom means that the theory has no, or almost no, structure
that is independent of dynamics.) If this is the future of physics, then the
¹⁶ Neither Russell nor the causal exclusionists expect physics to step in and take over the
explanatory projects of the special sciences. Kim (1998), unlike Russell, has a sophisticated account
of why this won’t happen that isn’t just pragmatic. That is, Kim argues that special sciences study
the distributions and effects of properties that are ‘micro-based’ but not themselves microproperties;
and these latter are the direct targets of physical generalizations. However, because for Kim special-
science properties supervene without cross-classiﬁcation on physical ones, physics must still be able
to identify and explain, at least in principle, all general relations that hold among groups of these
micro-based properties.

--- Page 289 ---

276 Causation in a Structural World
search for metaphysical glue is forlorn, and the substance of radical disunity
views might be satisﬁed. Smolin favours Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG) as
the candidate unifying theory for GR and QM in part because he thinks it is
(largely) background free. ¹⁷ Notice, however, that even here both Russell and
the causal process theorists could feel substantially vindicated. The eliminativist
would not be able to rely on the claim that causation is based on asymmetry
and fundamental physics insists on universal symmetries. However, the core
folk causal notion is committed to more than just asymmetry; it is anchored
in the anthropomorphic experience of ﬂow of inﬂuence. In the limiting case of
background freedom, nothing fundamental will be available to stand proxy for
the universal direction of causal inﬂuence, and so the anthropocentric experience
fails to ﬁnd any analogical grip there at all. At the same time, process theories
might be necessary for explaining and predicting the real patterns in our part of
the universe, in which the Second Law holds sway. It would be the responsibility
of LQG to explain the local asymmetries, which would in turn explain the utility
of time-asymmetric processes as locators.
However, a completely background-free physics is in any case just a limiting
possibility, which most physicists (including Smolin) regard as unlikely. (We
indicated the grounds for such doubt in 3.7.2.) We can sort other perspectives
in quantum gravity by reference to the distance they stand away from this
limit. Shifted just over from it are possible theories that give only geometrical
properties of the universe, which neither constrain nor are consequences of any
local processes. Here talk of ‘glue’ still seems inappropriate, and the following
would all look like motivated speculations for the metaphysician: the universe
is minimally uniﬁed, there is no causation at the level of fundamental physics,
process theories might still describe every real pattern we can measure except
some features of the large-scale structures of spacetime, but if they do this cannot
be explained directly by fundamental physics, though they must be compatible
with it.
A more interesting possibility (with respect to the dialectic of this chapter),
which is compatible with both the PNC and the Russell–Redhead–Norton thesis
about physics, is that fundamental physical theory helps us to say something
about what all of the parochial special-science models of causal processes have in
common, though these processes make no ﬁrst-order appearance in fundamental
physical theory itself. If this possibility obtains, the metaphysician is justiﬁed
in studying physics in search of universal glue, but causation cannot itself be
that glue. The triumph of superstring/M theory would support this metaphysical
picture. Investment of energy in superstring/M theory is usually justiﬁed by
the fact that it takes seriously the alleged induction over the history of physics
that respect for symmetries is the key principle of any would-be ‘fundamental’
¹⁷ We worry that this may be an instance of a phy sicist committing a sin more typical of
philosophers: letting metaphysics drive speculations in physics, instead of the other way around.

--- Page 290 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 277
physical theory (see 3.7.2). As we have argued, the folk concept of causation may
not be committed to very much, but it insists on asymmetry between causes and
their effects. Thus if M theory turned out to yield the content of fundamental
physics, then causation could not be universal glue. (‘Stringhood’ might be the
universal glue.)
Recall that M theory and LQG are not strictly exclusive of one another.
There are possible extensions of M theory—albeit not yet mathematically
formulated—which would explain why LQG holds (Greene 1999; Smolin 2000).
This would be a particularly inviting theoretical environment for reconciling
Russell and the process theorists. Though LQG can be interpreted in the context
of a block universe, it is usually presented in tensed terms. Thus it has resources
for potentially providing a correct description of the historical development of
the region of the universe in which we live, or even of the whole of what
physically exists, that would be given in terms of processes. M theory might then
offer the unifying structural account at one higher level of abstraction. At this
level Russell’s thesis would be conﬁrmed.
We claim that on all these possible futures, there might be real process-
es—chemical ones and evolutionary ones and macroeconomic ones (etc.)—but
that there is nothing they would have in common beyond satisfying the thin
folk conception of time-asymmetric inﬂuence-ﬂow described earlier. We are thus
in basic agreement with the claim of Kincaid, cited earlier, that many of the
mechanisms for transmitting inﬂuence found across the sciences have nothing
more general in common than that they transmit inﬂuence. On some scenarios
now seriously entertained (background freedom), fundamental physics would be
merely compatible with asymmetric inﬂuence-ﬂow in some regions of reality.
On another account—M theory—there would be no fundamental asymmetries,
hence nothing corresponding to causal processes at the fundamental level; yet
fundamental physics would explain why such asymmetries hold of real patterns
measurable in special-case regions where values of some of the fundamental
eleven dimensions of strings take vanishingly small values.
It should now be clear in what sense our view accords with Russell’s. Causation,
we claim, is, like cohesion, a notional-world concept. It is a useful device, at
least for us, for locating some real patterns, and fundamental physics might
play a role in explaining why it is. Or, if fundamental physics does not directly
do this, then the PPC at least requires that such time-asymmetry as appears to
be characteristic of our region of the universe be compatible with fundamental
physics; and the ubiquity of such time-asymmetry would in turn explain the value
of the ‘causation’ locator in special sciences. However, we think the current state
of fundamental physics supports Russell’s, Redhead’s, and Norton’s expectations
that it will not directly generalize over causal processes.
How much does this allow us to concede to causal process theories? Salmon
initially sought to provide an account of causation as universal glue. Taken strictly,
this is incompatible with Russell’s thesis. However, faced with the problem that

--- Page 291 ---

278 Causation in a Structural World
quantum theory requires uncaused parameter values, Salmon (1990) ultimately
expressed stark pessimism about the idea of causation as universal glue. Note that
this reason, while different from those we have pursued here, is a PNC-compatible
motivation. What Salmon considered more important to the enterprise of
process theorists was the attempt to distinguish cases of ‘real’ causation from
pseudo-processes; and process theorists still think that this enterprise is getting
somewhere. Now, this may also be thought to be incompatible with Russell’s
thesis. After all, if causation isn’t an extra-representational real pattern, then how
can there be a metaphysical distinction to be drawn between real and pseudo
processes?
The answer to this question rests on reference to Russell’s mistaken belief in
ontological reductionism. For a non-reductionist, the failure of causal concepts
to appear in generalizations of fundamental physics doesn’t imply that these
concepts simply denote ﬁctions. ¹⁸ As discussed in 4.5, all our evidence tells
us that we live in a region of the universe—which might or might not be
coincident with the whole universe—in which the degrees of freedom of every
system we approximately isolate for measurement and projection is restricted
by various asymmetries. This region is highly isotropic, and supports robust
(that is, projectible across all counterfactual spaces within the boundaries of
the region) distinctions between sources and recipients of information. That
is sufﬁcient to establish the scientiﬁc utility of directional ﬂow. This in turn
implies that many of what we refer to as causal processes are real patterns, even
if this does not mean that they exemplify any extra-representational real pattern
of general ‘causation’. We said ear lier that we do not attribute to scientists
a metaphysically serious commitment to hazy folk intuitions about biff and
ﬂow. We can now say what we meant by that. Taking directed, irreversible
transmission of inﬂuence, plus conservation principles, for granted is rational
when you know you’re taking all your measurements from regions governed by
the Second Law. This practice conforms so closely to what is enjoined by a folk
metaphysical endorsement of causation that no serious risk of misunderstanding
arises if the scientist helps herself to the culturally inherited folk idea of causation.
But she need not thereby endorse folk metaphysics, any more than she must
endorse folk physics. It is either to fundamental physics directly, or to some
domain less general than fundamental physics but more general than our domain
of immediate measurement (for example, LQG, in the scenario where that is
¹⁸ Norton (2003, 3) says something that sounds similar: ‘I will characterize causal notions as
belonging to a kind of folk science, a crude and poorly grounded imitation of more developed
sciences. While this folk science is something less th an our best science, I by no means intend to
portray it as a pure ﬁction.’ As we will go on to do, Norton characterizes this not-altogether-ﬁctional
status in terms of ‘heuristics’. However, on our view special sciences, where causal relations are
ineliminably quantiﬁed over, are not ‘crude and poorly grounded imitations’ of physics; they track
real patterns that fundamental physics does not and cannot. Therefore, the sense in which we regard
causal relations as ‘heuristics’ separates them more sharply from ﬁctions than does Norton’s sense of
the term.

--- Page 292 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 279
explained by M theory), to which one must turn for an explanation of how
regions governed by the Second Law can come to be and remain stable (at least
temporarily).
Is this enough to show that there are real processes, and so also cases where
we might misattribute process, that is, pseudo-processes? Or does it merely show
that it is useful for us limited beings, stuck in a restricted region of reality
governed by special asymmetries, to book-keep our experience in terms of the
idea of causal process? This question amounts to asking once again how it is
possible to be a naturalistic realist (in denying anthropocentric instrumentalism)
and a non-reductionist (in denying that fundamental physics exhausts or strictly
implies everything that is true) at the same time. That general question is of
course the subject of this book as a whole.
ITSR explains why parochial causal concepts are robust in special sciences,
but also why nothing stronger than the thin notion of ﬂow or process uniﬁes
them. First, special sciences, by deﬁnition, are not constructed from the vantage
point of the limit. By this we mean not only that they aren’t constructed from
the physical limit; they also aren’t constructed from the limits achievable at their
own scope boundaries. They are developed in, and are accounts of parts of, a
notional world of informational asymmetries. We don’t know, until fundamental
physics tells us, whether in this respect the notional world agrees with the correct
description of the actual world available from the limit. So causation, as it
ﬁgures in science, is a notional-world construct. However, as we argued in 4.5,
this notional world provides a useful heuristic for locating some real patterns.
It is because special sciences are concerned with relatively isolatable regions
of the universe which involve cross-classiﬁcation from the perspective of less-
than-fundamental but nevertheless limiting domains for them, that the causal
relationships on which they variously focus will appeal to different aspects of
their information-carrying potential. This is equivalent to Kitcher’s and Kincaid’s
point that explanatory argument patterns distinguish special sciences, and are
reﬂected in parochial restrictions on what kinds of relations count as causal for
each of them.
This perspective helps us make sense of the relationship of folk causal concepts
to scientiﬁc applications. RR makes it a necessary condition on a pattern’s reality
that it not be informationally redundant in the complete account of the universe.
When actually formulating scientiﬁc theories short of this limit, we cannot
know that our posited patterns would satisfy this criterion, but we care whether
they do, and so we make our existence claims at least implicitly provisional.
Furthermore, as science progresses we adjust our ontology in accordance with our
concern for ontological parsimony.¹⁹However, practical folk have no systematic
reason to be interested in this constraint. Nor could natural selection attend
¹⁹ As naturalists, we do not claim that greater relative parsimony provides any reason to think
a scientiﬁc theory relatively more likely to be true. The point is simply that, as emphasized in

--- Page 293 ---

280 Causation in a Structural World
to it when it designed the native anticipatory a pparatus used by the practical
folk. In coping with problems of scarcity, tracking the trajectories through local
space and time of bundles of rewards is almost everything. Attention to wider
informational dynamics in which processes are embedded typically delivers few
if any additional payoffs, and may get in the way of payoff maximization because
of computational costs. ²⁰ Therefore modelling causal relations as sequences of
collisions of objects in time is a sensible heuristic. Furthermore, for social animals
like people, or mobile asocial animals that prey on and/or are preyed on by other
mobile animals, it might even make sense to model all causal relations on volition,
with rocks amounting to limiting cases of agents with minimal sophistication
of purpose and adaptability. Such models of causation won’t generalize when
one tries to do science, that is, when one’s scope of concern widens beyond
what nature could directly design creatures to worry about. However, special
extensions of the thin concept of ﬂow causation, such as animism, can then be
dropped, leaving us with the kind of stripped-down notion of process sought
by Salmon and his successors. What these theorists give us in so far as their
analytical efforts are successful isn’t universal glue, but it is indeed a binding
agent that holds special sciences together in parts of reality where they have
a point.
Let us summarize the argument of the past few sections. We agree with
Russell that scientists generally don’t seek ‘invariable uniformities of sequence’.
Because we’re persuaded that cognitive science shows that everyday people don’t
anticipate in terms of such uniformities, we’re not convinced that this fact is
important. Second, we asked, if they don’t, does it follow that they don’t seek
what are legitimately called causes? We worked up some concern over a seeming
tension lying within the basis for Russell’s answer. On the one hand, his crucial
premise for justifying the answer ‘no’ is that physicists don’t mention causes
in their fundamental generalizations. Bu t since special scientists carry on about
causes all the time, Russell’s denial entails the conclusion, unacceptable for a
naturalist, that most scientists areontologically confused in ways philosophers can
diagnose. We eventually found the solution to this tension just where a naturalist
should want it, in correcting empirical assumptions about physics that weren’t
borne out by the subsequent development of science. There is no justiﬁcation
for the neo-scholastic projection of causation all the way down to fundamental
physics and metaphysics. Nor, however, does science presently motivate us to
conclude that special sciences don’t measure real patterns that must be modelled
as processes.
Chapter 4, it does not help to unify science, and thus makes no contribution to metaphysics, to say
that objects generalized over only by redundant theories exist.
²⁰ This statement needs some qualiﬁcation. Some folk engage in practical activities of a kind
that evolution could not anticipate, like buying and selling assets in futures markets. When
you do that sort of thing, it is wise to book-keep your structures and relations more like
as c i e n t i s t .

--- Page 294 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 281
5.5 LA WS IN FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS
AND THE SPECIAL SCIENCES
We now return to the issue left at the end of Chapter 4. There, we mentioned
the dispute between Earman and Roberts (1999) and Kincaid (1996, 2004)
over whether fundamental physics and special sciences differ from one another
with respect to their capacities to discover exceptionless laws. Our aim now
is to show how the view of the relationship between fundamental physics and
special sciences defended in this and the preceding chapter, and in particular
our view about the place of the concept of causation in this relationship, allows
us to recover the central insights of both parties to the debate. This continues
our general strategy of defending our position by appeal to its achievements of
consilience.
Of the two views in tension, Kincaid’s belief that special sciences are just as
much in the business of discovering laws as fundamental physics is the more
fashionable among current philosophers. Part of the motivation that leads them
to favour this opinion is naturalistic in just the sense captured by the PNC.
Saying that special sciences do not or cannot achieve something—discovering
exceptionless laws—that fundamental physics sometimes achieves seems at ﬁrst
glance to impugn special sciences and ﬁnd them to be ‘metaphysically second
rate’ on the basis of a philosophical judgement. But this is just what the PNC
forbids. We have pronounced against demands to implicitly (or explicitly) revise
special sciences because they fail to respect traditional intuitions about the causal
closure of the physical. Thus it might appear that we are compelled to join
Kincaid, and also Fodor (1991), Lange (1993), and Pietroski and Rey (1995)
in maintaining that the philosopher’s idea of lawhood should be based just as
ﬁrmly on what special scientists take to be ‘their’ laws as on exemplars from
fundamental physics. If one endorses this stance, and also agrees with these
authors (including Kincaid 1996 but not Kincaid 2004—see below) that special
sciences do not discover exceptionless laws, but instead discover only laws that
a r et r u es u b j e c tt oceteris paribus conditions or ‘provisos’ (‘ ceteris paribus laws’),
then one must reject as a badly motivated philosophical dogma the old doctrine
that being exceptionless is among the necessary properties of a law.
Motivated by his strong naturalism, Kincaid works with a notion of lawhood
that is highly deﬂationary by historical standa rds: ‘A law’, he says, ‘picks out
a causal force or factor’ (Kincaid 2004, 179). By this he does not mean that
picking out a causal factor is necessary for something’s being a law. His nat-
uralistic scruples are so strong that he doubts it makes sense to seek general
necessary (or sufﬁcient) conditions on lawhood, because this would have to rest
partly on a priori conceptual analysis. Rather, what he maintains is roughly
the following. All scientists—fundamental physicists and practitioners of special

--- Page 295 ---

282 Causation in a Structural World
sciences alike—seek generalizations that non-redundantly predict and explain
phenomena (which requires some degree of support for counterfactuals; see Kin-
caid 2004, ibid. 174, and discussion below). The main, though not exclusive,
way they do this is by identifying causal factors that govern ranges of situations.
Whenever a science succeeds in doing this, it has ipso facto discovered a law. Or,
at least, so Kincaid asserts. But even if we agree with him that special sciences
identify causal factors, why should we assimilate this to the discovery of laws?
One premise identiﬁed by Earman and Roberts as a ticket to this inference,
but which is abandoned by Kincaid (2004), is the claim that fundamental physics
doesn’t discover exceptionless laws either; that, as Earman and Roberts put it,
‘it is provisos all the way down to fundamental physics’ (Earman and Roberts
1999, 440; this is the view defended by Cartwright 1983). If this were right then
the general conclusion of Kincaid, Lange, etc. would indeed be irresistible for a
naturalist. The idea of an exceptionless law would then have no PNC-compatible
interest. Were that so then we might as well grant Kincaid his deﬂationary
interpretation of lawhood, because there would be nothing else of well-motivated
signiﬁcance that ‘discovering a law’ could amount to. (Of course, some minimal
conceptual constraints are still lurking in the background here. If identiﬁcations
of causal factors supported no counterfactuals, so were just summaries instead of
generalizations, it would be perverse to refer to them as laws, since all connection
between the traditional concept and the deﬂated one would have dropped out.
We will return to Kincaid’s interesting remarks about the modal force of what
he calls ‘laws’ shortly.)
This version of the argument is the one of immediate interest to us, because it
turns directly on claims about the relationship between fundamental physics and
special sciences. It is also the version contested by Earman and Roberts (1999).
Later, we will consider the modiﬁed position defended in Kincaid (2004). At
that point we will argue that he backs into a view that is implicitly closer to
ours than his rhetoric (which remains largely consistent with his earlier position)
suggests. This will complete our argument for the consilience of ITSR.
Let us ﬁrst summarize the ‘generic’ Kincaid position (that is, the part of the
position that is common to its 1996 and 2004 articulations). We of course agree
with him that it is not among the rights of the philosopher to pronounce some
institutionally bona ﬁde sciences methodologically or metaphysically defective.
We also agree, for the reasons explored in 4.5 and 4.6, that identiﬁcation of
types of causal process is the principal sort of achievement at which special
sciences aim, and at which they regularly succeed. Furthermore, just as Kincaid
says, it is by means of such achievements that they non-redundantly predict
and explain phenomena—that, in our terms, they track real patterns. ( To cite
the leading example discussed in Kincaid (2004), economists over the years
have documented, by careful measurement of found variations, how changes in
supply and demand relationships cause changes in prices, under increasingly rich
and detailed speciﬁcations of kinds of circumstances.) We agree with him that

--- Page 296 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 283
discovery of causal factors does not imply prediction of exceptionless regularities,
since no causal factor identiﬁed by a special science empirically manifests itself
in absolutely all circumstances. Indeed, we join Kincaid (2004, 171–2) in
agreeing with Cartwright (1983) that exceptionless causal regularities are not
even predicted by any part of physics. ²¹
However, we think that Earman and Roberts are correct in their claim that
fundamental physics discovers something of a kind that special sciences don’t; and
we call this kind of something a universal real pattern. We argued in the preceding
sections of this chapter for Russell’s and Redhead’s thesis that these real patterns
are not causal. They are instead structural, in the sense articulated in Chapters 2
and 3. In light of our agreement with Kincaid about what special sciences do,
this means there are, according to us, two respects in which the achievements of
fundamental physics differ from the achievements of special sciences: the former
are exceptionless, and they do not consist in the identiﬁcation of causal factors.
We should reiterate, in this context, what we mean in saying that the
generalizations of fundamental physics are exceptionless. We do not mean that
they potentially predict every event or process. Rather, we mean that any
measurement taken anywhere in the universe is a potential counterexample to
them. This is not true of the generalizations of any special science. At one
level these two claims are tautological: vulnerability to counterexamples from
anywhere is the basis on which we have deﬁned ‘fundamental’ physics, and it
is restriction of the scope of its generalizations that deﬁnes a science as ‘special’.
However, these deﬁnitions are not based on a priori conceptual reﬂection. They
are part of the content of the PPC, which is an institutional norm justiﬁed by
appeal to the history of science.
We thus directly disagree with philosophers, including Kincaid (1996), who
believe in ‘provisos all the way down’. Earman and Roberts (1999) offer what
we regard as a compelling argument for our side of this disagreement. To a large
extent, the rival opinions must obviously be based on interpretations of the actual
history of physics. We are not aware of a convincing history of recent physics
that succeeds in undermining Earman and Roberts’s following remarks:
Typical theories from fundamental physics are such that if they were true, there would be
precise proviso-free laws. For example, Einstein’s gravitational ﬁeld law asserts—without
equivocation, qualiﬁcation, proviso, ceteris paribus clause—that the Ricci curvature
tensor of spacetime is proportional to the total stress-energy tensor for matter-energy; the
relativistic version of Maxwell’s laws of electromagnetism for charge-free ﬂat spacetime
asserts—without qualiﬁcation or proviso—that the curl of the E ﬁeld is proportional to
²¹ Cartwright, Kincaid, and we endorse the same argument for this conclusion where non-
fundamental physics is concerned. Whatever holds of special sciences in general holds of non-
fundamental physics. Cartwright, unlike us, does not believe there is any fundamental physics (in
our sense). So we need an additional basis to Cartwright’s for extending her claim beyond the special
sciences. We provided that basis in 4.5 and 4.6 when we argued that fundamental physics does not
describe causal regularities.

--- Page 297 ---

284 Causation in a Structural World
the partial time derivative of the B ﬁeld, etc. We also claim that the history of physics
and the current practice of physics reveal that it is the goal of physicists to ﬁnd such
strict, proviso free laws … [W]e believe that a fair reading of [that history] shows that
when exceptions are found to the candidates for fundamental physical laws, and when the
theorists become convinced that the excepti ons cannot be accommodated by explicitly
formulated conditions in the language of the the ory, the search is on for new candidates.
(1999, 446)
To resolve this standoff over the interpretation of science satisfactorily, Earman
and Roberts owe some explanation of the fact that important recent philosophers
have taken the opposite view. They ﬁnd this explanation in a misinterpretation
(explicitly advanced by Giere 1988a, Fodor 1991, and Lange 1993) of an insight
due to Hempel (1988). The insight in question is that a typical theory T in an
advanced science will not have any logically contingent consequences that can be
stated without use of any theoretical terms introduced with T. To state a testable
consequence of T that uses only antecedently understood vocabulary, one will
typically have to add a ‘proviso’ that restricts the domain of the prediction by
reference to the new vocabulary of T. In the context of contemporary philosophy
of science, putting everything in these hypothetical-deductive terms may be
thought quaint. Earman and Roberts therefore reformulate Hempel’s insight
(restricted now to theories of fundamental physics) in the terms of the semantic
view of theories as follows:
For a typical theory T of fundamental physics, there are no logically contingent conditions
on the empirical substructures of the models that hold across all models; but there are
locally contingent conditions on empirical substructures that hold across all models in
which some proviso P is true, where P places constraints on features of models other than
their empirical substructures. (Earman and Roberts 1999, 443)
Hempel’s main example is drawn from classical celestial mechanics. Application
of Newtonian mechanics to predict celestial motions presupposes a proviso to
the effect that no forces besides those of mutual gravitational attraction act on
the planets. The proviso is not a proper part of the theory itself; but it cannot
be stated without use of a concept introduced by the theory, viz. ‘forces’ (in
Newton’s sense of them).
Earman and Roberts argue that aspects of this example have caused (at
least) Giere, Fodor, and Lange to confuse Hempel’s provisos with the provisos
incorporated into ceteris paribus theories:
We fully endorse Hempel’s insight. But his example and its mode of presentation
are unfortunate … [I]t uses an idealization (no forces other than gravitational forces)
and/or an approximation (the total resultant forces on the planets are given to good
approximation by the gravitational force component). Approximations and idealizations
are widely used in physics, and their usage raises a host of important methodological
issues. But Hempel’s key point is independent of these issues. In the case at hand, it is
in principle possible to do without any idealiz ation or approximation: there is nothing

--- Page 298 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 285
to prevent the introduction of a speciﬁc postulate into the theory which speciﬁes the
kinds of forces that occur in nature, and there is nothing in principle that prevents the
exact speciﬁcation of the values of each of these forces acting on the planets of the solar
system … Even so, Hempel’s key point stands: the said speciﬁcation requires essential use
of the [theory’s] vocabulary. Hence, with or without idealizations and approximations,
the theory by itself, without conditions of application stated in the [theory’s] vocabulary,
cannot be expected to yield non-trivial predictions stated purely in the [pre-theoretical]
vocabulary. (Earman and Roberts 1999, 445)
Failure to notice that idealization and approximation are incidental features
of Hempel’s example have, Earman and Roberts show, led the philosophers
mentioned above to misread him as having demonstrated that all theories,
including those of fundamental physics, requireceteris paribusprovisos to be stated
truly. But provisos in Hempel’s sense—the provisos required for operationalizing
theories—are not ceteris paribus provisos. Thus Hempel’s insight does not imply
that theories in fundamental physics need be ceteris paribus theories. Laws in
fundamental physics need not be true only ceteris paribus.
Hempel’s insight nevertheless does have implications for theories in special
sciences (including theories in non-fundamental branches of physics, such as
statistical mechanics and, perhaps, thermodynamics). As Earman and Roberts
put the point:
Phenomenological physics and the special sciences t ake as their subject matter entities,
properties, and processes that can be observed independently of any particular theory of
fundamental physics. Thus the pronouncements of these sciences will impose conditions
only on the empirical substructures of the models of any theory of fundamental
physics … It then follows from Hempel’s insight … that any generalization that these
sciences discover will not be true across all models of any of our fundamental physical
theories. (1999, 447)
The consequent here is hardly surprising, and we don’t need Hempel’s insight to
arrive at it. The point of noting that it follows from Hempel’s insight is to draw
attention to an irony: an argument that has been used to collapse an important
part of the distinction between fundamental physics and special sciences—that
the former aims at universal laws and the latter only at scope-restricted, physically
contingent generalizations over pre-demarcated samples of evidence—in fact
reinforces this very distinction.
As noted in 4.5, Earman and Roberts do not conclude from this that special
sciences are in any way impugned by emphasizing that they do not discover
universal laws. In exploring the alternative sources of epistemic value in special
sciences, Earman and Roberts consider one of Kincaid’s (1996) examples of
a kind of proposition that much special science activity aims at conﬁrming:
‘In population H, P is positively statistically correlated with S across all sub-
populations that are homogenous with respect to the variables V
1,… , V 2’ (ibid.
467). If we insist on treating this as a law, it must be a ceteris paribus law. But
we need not treat it as any kind of law to agree that it has explanatory value.

--- Page 299 ---

286 Causation in a Structural World
We typically use propositions of this sort to explain individual events or sets
of events. As Earman and Roberts say ‘there seems to be no compelling reason
to suppose that in order to shed light on the causes of individual events, it is
necessary to cite any general laws. So [this sort of proposition] could be useful for
providing causal explanations, even if it doesn’t state or imply a law’ (ibid. 468).
Earman and Roberts conclude that while special sciences can do ﬁrst-rate work
in furnishing causal explanations, where they do resort to generalizations that
incorporate ceteris paribus provisos, this must in every case show that there is
more science to be done somewhere; such a generalization cannot be an ideal
limit-point of knowledge because a ceteris paribus clause is a locator for a speciﬁc
area of ignorance. Since part of the traditional concept of a ‘law’ is that it
represents an ideal knowledge achievement, and since there really are ‘laws’ in
this sense—in fundamental physics—Earman and Roberts defend a semantic
preference for restricting the concept and denying that there are ceteris paribus
laws. Their motivation is pragmatic: calling ceteris paribus generalizations ‘laws’
implies that our scientiﬁc work is ﬁnished along dimensions where it really isn’t,
and where we’re in a position to know it isn’t.
Saying that special sciences furnish causa l explanations, while fundamental
physics aims at discovering universal laws, comes very close to the view we
articulated in 5.4. Special sciences, according to us, use causal ideas as heuristics
for locating real patterns. Fundamental physics is in the business of describing
the structural properties of the whole universe. These properties are not causal
relations. Special sciences and fundamental physics are thus mainly different
from each other in a way we ﬁnd it very natural to express by saying: fundamental
physics aims at laws, whereas special sciences identify causal factors.
In the context of this dialectic, Kincaid (2004) offers an interesting new move.
Its novelty is slightly obscure in his paper, because the rhetoric there implies
that he is just reiterating and defending the position taken in Kincaid (1996).
However, he is not. He still aims to eliminate or at least de-emphasize the
boundary (with respect to the status of laws) between fundamental physics and
special sciences. But now he does so not by arguing that laws in fundamental
physics are ceteris paribus laws just like those in special sciences. He argues instead
that laws in special sciences—and not just claims about statistical correlations,
but claims with the sorts of logical forms that have usually led them to be
treated as putative covering laws—are not ceteris paribus after all. We can clearly
see his general strategy for defending this idea, despite the fact that his only
example of how ceteris paribus provisos are to be eliminated from consideration
is unfortunately drawn from classical physics instead of a special science. Here is
what he says:
The problem of analyzing ceteris paribus laws can be ignored, because we need not think
of laws in the social sciences as qualiﬁed ceteris paribus in the ﬁrst place … A law picks
out a causal force or factor. The law of universal gravitation, for example, asserts that
there exists the force of gravity. It does not describe a regularity, for gravity is not the only

--- Page 300 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 287
force and the law of gravity is silent on how other forces might combine with it. Since
it does not claim to cite a regularity without exceptions, there is no reason to think of
the law as qualiﬁed ceteris paribus. The law is true if there is indeed a gravitational force.
Laws in the social sciences work in the same way: they claim to identify causal factors
and make no commitment by themselves to what other causal factors there might be and
how they might combine. (Kincaid 2004, 179–80)
Obviously, we do not agree that laws in fundamental physics pick out causal
factors; so even if we were persuaded by Kincaid that picking out causal factors
in special sciences should be thought of as identifying laws, we’d be left with two
kinds of laws, one kind for fundamental physics and one kind for special sciences.
But let us set this aside. What mainly interests us about Kincaid’s 2004 position is
how radical the deﬂation of the idea of a law has become. Kincaid’s laws are now
not even generalizations about causes, of the kinds that provoke our Russellian
worries; they are just identiﬁcations of ‘explainers’. Scientists now discover laws
merely by—to put it in the terms of our view—locating real patterns.
This is a highly eccentric meaning to suggest for ‘law’. (On Kincaid’s view,
there are clearly far more laws than people have thought.) Indeed, it is so much so
that the possibility looms that Kincaid’s disagreement with Earman and Roberts
has turned semantic. ²² But an interesting motivation for Kincaid’s radicalism
lurks elsewhere in his paper.
Among the objections to his 1996 view that Kincaid (2004) considers is that
‘claims citing causal factors may be picking out accidental truths that do not
support counterfactuals and cannot predict unobserved phenomena’ (173). As
part of his answer to this objection he argues against the idea of a sharp distinction
between the necessary and the contingent in the ﬁrst place. ‘All causal claims
hold to some extent by necessity,’ he says; ‘or, in other words, being an accidental
generalization is a relative matter’ (ibid.). This will be a startling remark for many
philosophers. Its motivations are clearly naturalistic. Let us follow the reasoning
a bit further:
Think … about whether laws are necessary. Let’s assume that a relation is necessary when
it holds across different possible arrangements of things. Then the claim that ﬁtness is a
causal factor in inheritance is also necessary, to a degree. In any world in which there is
differential survival and inheritance of traits, ﬁtness is a causal factor—even if different
species exist or even if those organisms have a different physical basis for inheritance than
DNA/RNA. Yet the laws of evolution by natural selection are accidental in that they hold
only of systems with the right inheritance and competitive characteristics. They need not
describe other life forms that do not meet these criteria. Even the claim that ‘all the coins
in my pocket are copper’ looks less accidental if there is some causal mechanism that
excludes non-copper coins—maybe my pocket has holes in it and only pennies do not
²² Earman and Roberts grant that special sciences pick out causal factors. They would just not
agree to call doing that discovery of laws. The substantive issue between them and Kincaid seems
to disappear if he agrees that laws in fundamental physics are not ceteris paribus and that (as follows
from this) it is not ‘provisos all the way down’.

--- Page 301 ---

288 Causation in a Structural World
fall out. And the basic laws of physics are accidental in that the values of the fundamental
constants are apparently the result of chance events in the big bang that need not have
happened. (ibid. 174)
Again, put aside the language in this passage that folds in Kincaid’s view that
all laws describe causes. Then the general point is one that a naturalist should
uphold. Naturalism is, among other things, the metaphysical hypothesis that the
structure of the objective world is not constrained by any reasons or standards of
reasonableness. The hypothesis is motivated by the fact that science conducted in
accord with it has discovered far more than inquiries that ignore it. Furthermore,
if the universe is limned by a singularity, as physics suggests it is, then the
explanation of the fact of the universe’s existence cannot be speculated upon in
a PNC-compatible way; speculation here is empty. It then indeed follows that
necessity is relative. If there are fundamental physical facts—if the world is not
dappled—then at least some of these facts, those that are not explained by some
of the others, are brute contingencies. The point here is not that we must accept
brute contingency in physics; QM forces us to recognize that possibility anyway.
Rather, the point is that it is inconsist ent with naturalism to suppose that any
non-logical or non-mathematical fact is ultimately necessary.
The need for the adjective ‘ultimately’ marks recognition of the fact we can
indeed make sense of relative necessity, as Kincaid says. Physicists are presently
making some progress working on theories that are fundamental, in the sense we
have deﬁned. If there are structural facts about the whole universe, and these facts
constrain all the facts about all particular regions of the universe—the conjecture
institutionalized by the PPC—then the only necessity in nature is furnished by
these constraints. The constraints—that is, the structures themselves—are real
patterns.
Thus we agree with Kincaid that discovering laws is, in the end, just a matter
of correctly describing real patterns. We don’t agree, for reasons given in the
previous section, that all of these real patterns—in particular, those identiﬁed
by fundamental physics—are causal patterns. Furthermore, we think that the
fact that information about the re al patterns identiﬁed by fundamental physics
is available from every measurement point in the universe renders fundamental
physics sharply distinctive among the sciences; thus we agree with Earman and
Roberts that fundamental physics discovers real patterns that are of a higher
order of relative necessity than what is discovered by the special sciences. From
the point of view of those engaged in specialscience activity, fundamental physics gives
the modal structure of the world. For philosophers who insist that talk of ‘higher
and lower orders of necessity’ just makes a nonsense of the idea of necessity
altogether, the italicized claim operationalizes what we mean by such talk.
Thus we have a semantic preference for applying the idea of ‘law’ coextensively
with Earman and Roberts. Yet we are also in substantial agreement with Kincaid
(2004). It makes little difference to his view of special science generalizations

--- Page 302 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 289
whether fundamental physics has unique aspects. His ﬁrst claim that truly matters
is that special sciences are mainly in the business of picking out causal relations.
We reﬁne this when we say, as we did earlier in the chapter, that special sciences
are mainly in the business of locating and measuring real patterns in speciﬁc
regions of the universe using a (thin) concept of causation as the primary heuristic.
Our work in the previous sections of this chapter explains, in a world where
Russell and Redhead are right about physics, the basic fact Kincaid emphasizes:
special sciences seem to be all about causes. Indeed, this is so much the case
that it is easy to understand how Kincaid ﬁnds the identiﬁcation of discovery of
laws with discovery of causal factors plausible; all one needs to succumb to this
temptation is a bit more seduction by disunity hypotheses than we think the
scientiﬁc evidence warrants.
The core (2004) idea of Kincaid’s we applaud is that discovery of laws
consists simply in ﬁnding certain structures , which we gloss as conﬁrmation of
real patterns. According to us, a law is simply a real pattern, described by a
structural claim, that is hostage to disconﬁrmation by any measurement taken
anywhere in the universe. Because we think fundamental physics describes some
such real patterns, we believe there are universal laws. We do not believe they are
about causal factors. But then we believe that special sciences are precisely in the
business of describing real patterns of less-than-universal scope. All such patterns
we can locate will be governed by the asymmetries necessary for application of
causal heuristics. These heuristics have proven extremely powerful in the history
of special sciences, and dominate its practice. This can lead someone who is
committed to uniﬁcation of the sciences to try to get too much metaphysical
work out of the idea of causation; that is, to model fundamental physics on the
special sciences and then promote causation as universal glue.
According to us, those who try to recruit causation to do more metaphysical
work than it can handle typically make two mistakes. We have just discussed
one of them. The second is to read too much special philosophical structure
into the concept they over-extend. Then the result is a picture that is not only
mistaken in taking causation to be universal glue, but furthermore takes the
causation in question to consist either in universal regularities of sequence or in
microbangings. In these days of metap hysical realism the latter interpretation is
far more common. However, we argued in 5.2 that all that is generally important
in the idea of causation is information ﬂow along asymmetric gradients. We
fall into basic metaphysical error when we over-interpret the evidence and think
we have discovered that the world is held together by microbangings. Indeed,
we go wrong as soon as we think there are any microbangings, because that
question is for fundamental physics to settle, and it now speaks against them.
Once we eliminate microbangings from our picture of fundamental physics,
there can surely be no temptation to read them into the causal processes studied
by special sciences, where regularities are all statistical. For example, to suppose
that the relationship between an increase in the money supply and a rise in prices

--- Page 303 ---

290 Causation in a Structural World
consisted in microbangings would require belief in mereological reductionism
and belief that fundamental physical causal connections are microbangings. This
example from macroeconomics draws on the extreme case where no intuitions
not driven by these strong metaphysical hunches will be pulled in the opposite
direction. But then we need simply observe that phenomenological physics and
chemistry are just like macroeconomics in the relevant respect. From the point
of view of fundamental physics, what they all generalize over are strong statistical
attractors of the kind physicists call ‘universalities’ (Batterman 2002). Thus even
mereological reductionism is not enough to save microbangings once they are
expunged from fundamental physics.
In this chapter we have argued that things are pretty much as they seem
on the surface in special sciences. When inquiry is going well, special scientists
successfully track real patterns. They do so by book-keeping them as individuals
interacting in causal processes. Because fundamental physics merely constrains
special sciences, rather than providing their mereological reduction base, there
is no PNC-compatible motivation for seeking counterparts to the individuals
and processes in fundamental physics. In that case, there is no motivation for
including them as elements of our metaphysics; our metaphysics need merely be
compatible with the special-science methodology that makes use of the book-
keeping heuristics. The metaphysics of ITSR is so compatible. It doesn’t imply
that the universe is asymmetrical in a way that would explain the utility of the
heuristics, but it explains why sciences that gather measurements from speciﬁc
perspectives would use individuals and causal processes as locators. Such weak,
but non-trivial, uniﬁcation is the metaphysic that the empirical evidence currently
justiﬁes. Nothing stronger has any naturalistica lly acceptable justiﬁcation at all.
5.6 REAL PATTERNS, TYPES, AND NATURAL KINDS
In much philosophical discussion the concepts of ‘(natural) kind’ and ‘law’ are
yoked together, on the general supposition that natural kinds are what laws are
true of. In the present section we turn to kinds. This requires more than simple
extrapolation because of the presence of an inﬂuential argument for metaphysical
realism concerning natural kinds. Indeed, this argument, due to Putnam (1975b),
was probably the most inﬂuential one for metaphysical realism in general in the
immediate period of the decline of logical empiricism. It begins with the claim
that if intensional meanings of referential terms determine their extensions, then
signiﬁcant theory changes imply changes of reference. This is embarrassing when
we try to say sensible things about the history of science. For example, we want to
say that until recently zoologists falsely believed that giant pandas weren’t bears
but were more closely related to red pandas. But the place of a kind of organism
on the phylogenetic tree is its most important property where classiﬁcation is
concerned. Therefore, if the term ‘giant panda’ was intended twenty years ago

--- Page 304 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 291
to mean ‘one of two kinds of panda’, and intension determines extension, then
zoologists twenty years ago could not have been referring to, and expressing false
beliefs about, one of several kinds of bear. But this is silly. Of course zoologists
of twenty years ago referred to the same group of animals by ‘giant panda’ as do
zoologists now. Both groups refer to ‘those animals, whatever they are like’, where
‘whatever they are like’ is elliptical for ‘whatever properties are the basis for there
being true generalizations about them’. Twenty years ago, zoologists thought that
true generalizations about giant pandas w ere functions of their being a particular
kind of panda; now they know that these generalizations instead depend on their
being a particular kind of bear. This is so obviously the better way to think
about the history of science that Putnam concludes we must reject the idea that
intension determines extension in the case of scientiﬁc kind terms. Instead, we
should suppose that such terms have whatever extensions they do independently
of our beliefs about them, and then try our damnedest to get our beliefs and our
language in tune with these independent facts.
On this sort of account, explanation, generalization, and natural kinds form
an interlocking analytical circle. As Hempel stressed, and as continues to hold
good whether one is closer to Salmon or Kitcher on the rest of the story, to
explain something requires at least showing that it falls under the scope of some
established generalization. That there can be true generalizations, claims good
today of this case and good tomorrow of that one, is a function of the fact that
the world is relatively stable. Saying that there are ‘natural kinds’ in the world
is, on ﬁrst pass, merely one way of expressing this fact. ‘Relatively stable’ implies
that some background stays the same while some foreground shifts. Then natural
kinds are just the clusters of properties that stay clustered while we track some
more transient ones, and which we use to keep our referential grid constant while
we do so.
Thus, as Laporte (2004) argues with the help of many examples—in a nice
demonstration of mostly PNC-consistent metaphysics—‘a natural kind is a kind
with explanatory value’ (19). Lap orte thinks that this insight invites us to relax
about the extent to which types absolutely are or aren’t natural kinds; naturalness,
as he says, is a context-sensitive property. As all biologists know, boundaries in
nature are both ﬂuid and fuzzy, and on evolutionary time scales beyond a certain
magnitude it ceases to make sense to treat bears and pandas as different kinds of
things. In fact, one wonders at this point, why not relax to the point of letting
go? Could anything be regarded as a kind at all if the kind in question had no
explanatory value in any context?
Because, on the one hand, it looks as if the answer to this question is ‘no’,
but, on the other hand, philosophers are convinced that some kinds are natural
while others are not, they typically feel a need to go looking for a basis on
which to distinguish between ‘real’ and merely artefactual kinds. This basis is
commonly located, by Laporte as by others, in the idea that some kinds are sorted
by reference to necessities and others by reference to mere accidents. Here is

--- Page 305 ---

292 Causation in a Structural World
the relevant intuition: my computer and my copy of Laporte’s book might both
be instances of the kind ‘paperweight’ but this is an accident. There are nearby
possible worlds—ones in which my copy of Laporte is a virtual download, for
e x a m p l e — i nw h i c hi ti ss t i l lac o p yo fL a p o r t eb u ti ti s n ’ tap a p e r w e i g h t ;b u t
there are no possible worlds in which giant pandas are still giant pandas but they
aren’t bears. This is supposed to explain our ‘intuition’ that giant pandas, and
bears, are natural kinds but paperweights aren’t.
Dupré (2004) strikes a blow on behalf of PNC-compatibility in metaphysics
when he objects (speciﬁcally to Laporte) that he has never heard any biologist
talk about possible worlds or rigid designation, and doubts that many could be
easily persuaded to do so. We approve of the spirit of this complaint, but it
is somewhat unfair to Laporte. If Laporte’s claim were that names of natural
kinds must rigidly designate because of facts about reference, then indeed this
would accord with the beliefs of few scientists. Naturalists insist that there are no
such facts, and that if there somehow were such facts—say, there’s a language
organ and it explodes if people try to let names change reference across possible
worlds—this would be a good reason for scientists to avoid natural language
wherever possible. But we think it is clear that in Laporte’s case he is just using
the philosophical jargon to characterize externally what he takes to be a fact about
scientiﬁc practice. Scientists treat certain properties as if they were essential to a
kind’s being the kind that it is. Laporte shows by his many examples that they are
not very consistent with respect to principles on which properties are promoted to
essences. Sometimes the honoured properties are properties philosophers would
traditionally call ‘intrinsic’, and sometimes they are functional.
Nevertheless, Dupré is right that Laporte, unlike him, thinks that (some)
classiﬁcations have metaphysical import. This is because Laporte thinks that sci-
entists’ judgements about essential properties broadly reﬂect, sometimes sloppily,
their judgements about modal regularities. We agree. However, we concur with
Dupré (but not for his reasons) that describing this feature of science in terms of
rigid designation of natural-kind terms is very misleading. ²³
Philosophers sometimes invoke natural kinds as if their existence would
explain the possibility of scientiﬁc explanation (in something like the way that
the existence of photons explains the possibility of optics). This is characteristically
neo-scholastic. That anything at all can be explained, and that properties stay
clustered together under various sorts of shifts in circumstance, are two expressions
of one fact: that the world is relatively stable. Philosophers who invoke possible
worlds to explain intuitions about especially natural kinds should most charitably
²³ Note that we do not say ‘false’. We do not think that the proposition ‘ ‘‘Giant pandas’’ pick
out bears in all possible worlds’ is the sort of claim that could be true or false of the world simpliciter
(as it is intended to be by most philosophers who say this sort of thing), though it could be true or
false if ‘possible worlds’ were given some special restric ted sense. All could be well with the locution,
including even truth, if the restriction in question were motivated PNC-compatibly. But what we
argue below is that there are no such motivations.

--- Page 306 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 293
be interpreted as seeking to explain what it is about the stable bits of the world
that distinguishes those bits, in general, from the less stable bits (especially the bits
we can readily rearrange to suit our transient purposes). Are these philosophers
asking a PNC-compatible metaphysical question?
The answer to this turns entirely on how we interpret ‘in general’. In Chapter 4
we discussed the views of some systems theorists, both physicists and biologists,
who think that natural selection, and therefore life, depends on the stability
of pools of information made possible by thermodynamic asymmetry. When
these scientists wonder about ‘general stability’ they are certainly engaged in well
motivated inquiry (by the lights of the PPC). Note that in order for them to
pursue this inquiry, they must consider, for contrastive purposes, possible worlds
in which the Second Law doesn’t hold. As we saw, there isn’t at the moment a
consensus on whether this world is in fact physically possible; if there were, then
it would be a closed, rather than an open, question as to whether thermodynamics
is part of fundamental physics.
Suppose ﬁrst that the question ultimately comes to be settled in favour of
the conclusion that thermodynamics is fundamental. This will mean that we’ll
come to see that we can’t consistently model a world, or parts of a world, absent
the Second Law. In that case whatever aspects of relative stability in our part of
the world are explained by thermodynamics will thereby be as fully explained
as they can be, while the laws of thermodynamics themselves will be (one or
more, depending on how many basic laws are needed) inexplicable brute facts.
On the other, suppose that thermodynamics is found not to be fundamental.
This implies that fundamental physics will explain why its generalizations hold
in some parts, including our part, of the universe. Notice that on the second
outcome more stability properties get explained than on the ﬁrst outcome. This
reﬂects the insight of Friedman (1974), clariﬁed by Kitcher, that the extent of
explanation is inversely related to the proportion of facts that must be taken
as brute.
In this book we have defended the claim that scientists treat the space for
modelling as modally constrained; the constructive empiricist makes a mistake
in denying this. What we mean by ‘modal constraints’ are those generalizations
about structure that apply universally across the domain. Commitment by
scientists to unity is embodied in their respect for the PPC, since it reﬂects the
so-far successful bet that one part of science constrains all domains and that
part is entirely within the preserve of physics. This subpart of physics is in turn
just that part that physicists will conclude cannot be itself explained. Thus: how
much of the stability of the world is explicable is itself a matter for empirical
science, not philosophy, to determine. We could only have a full determination
to the extent that we had a completed physics. But because current physics allows
that thermodynamics might not be fundamental, we can see, in outline, how
explanations of it would go if it isn’t. (E ach candidate framework in fundamental
physics, as reviewed in 3.7.2, offers an alternative sketch.)

--- Page 307 ---

294 Causation in a Structural World
This picture offers quite a lot of scope for asking and trying to answer sensible
questions about general conditions for stability, including recursively conditional
stability. (For example: if system S is at equilibrium then this restricts dynamics
of sub-systems s1,…, s 2 with their own local equilibrium properties, and so on.)
But here is an interpretation of the philosopher’s question that is not sensible:
how or why is there any stability in the universe at all? By this point in the book,
we have available a number of things we can say by way of rejecting this question,
each of which has been given a clear meaning. Taking this question seriously
violates the PNC. It ventures not just beyond actual innocent phenomena, but
beyond all possible phenomena. It asks us to compare the actual world with
one in which there are no real patterns, but this activity has no constraints
and therefore no epistemic point. We invite philosophers to ask themselves:
how much of the discussion of natural kinds is trying to ask this pointless
question?
Natural-kind talk is perfect for disguising the pointlessness of the question,
because of the way in which it appeals to the old intuitions that in some sense
‘before’ there are structures and theories and models there are self-subsistent
things. These intuitions, as we have discussed, are incompatible with the objective
existence of paperweights. But they have us imagine that giant pandas could (in
some extra-physical sense) be a type regardless of the context, just as long as the
properties essential to their kind were glued together in the appropriate way.
This is beguiling because, after all, some cohesive objects in our notional world
are so effective at resisting entropy that we can transport them to radically new
environments in space and time and yet relocate them. But for a naturalist it
is beguiling nonsense. Nothing in contemporary science motivates the picture.
( Take giant pandas to Saturn, or 6000 Mya backward in their light-cone. It’s
easy to think about , isn’t it? But organisms are unusually strongly cohesive real
patterns, unlike many real patterns studied by scientists. Now imagine taking the
market in airline risk derivatives to Saturn or 6000 Mya backward in its light
cone. That was a bit harder even to imagine, wasn’t it?)
We said above that we agree with Laporte that scientists’ judgements about
essential properties broadly reﬂect, sometimes sloppily, their judgements about
modal regularities. How shall we ﬂesh out this agreement without reference to
natural kinds as kinds of things constituted out of essential properties?
We contend that everything a naturalist could legitimately want from the
concept of a natural kind can be had simply by reference to real patterns.
Real patterns are of course modally signiﬁcant: projectible by deﬁnition, and
represented by structures. The obvious way in which a would-be defender of
natural kinds would respond to their proposed replacement by real patterns
would be to try to show that the idea of a natural kind allows us to mark
off an important difference within the real patterns. This, one might think, is
trivially easy for her to do. We have said, after all, that everything that exists is a
real pattern, and that Napoleon and the table in the corner are among the real

--- Page 308 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 295
patterns. But these are among the paradigm cases of what natural kinds are not
supposed to be. So whatever it is that makes giant pandas a natural kind and the
table in the corner not a natural kind is lost sight of if our ontological typology
has only real patterns in view.
This objection establishes only that in translating Laporte’s good sense into
our terms, we have to say somewhat more than just that successful scientiﬁc
theories are about real patterns; it does not show that we need to ﬁnd criteria
for marking off a special subclass of the real patterns such that they can be
surrogate natural kinds for all purposes to which philosophers have tried to put
natural kinds. (Laporte, given his acknowledgement of the context-relativity of
natural-kind-hood, must agree.) So let us duly say some more.
For any given real pattern, there will be a speciﬁc range of locators from which
measurements carry information about it. The universal real patterns, those that
are studied by fundamental physics, are measurable at all locators. The real
patterns of solid state physics are mea surable from all locators within a certain
temperature band. The real patterns of biology are measurable from many points
near the surface of the earth and after 3500 Mya, but no others (as far as we now
know). The table in the corner is measurable only in the tiny locator sets along
its historical spacetime trajectory and the spacetime trajectories of the people
who register it in a way sufﬁcient to pick it out from other very similar tables,
and for as far along their trajectories as these registrations are recoverable. Let us
say that to the extent that a real pattern is fully measurable from many locators
it has high indexical redundancy. This is not to be confused with informational
redundancy (which undermines pattern reality) as invoked in the deﬁnition of
a real pattern. The idea is that for patterns with high indexical redundancy,
most measurements carry no new information about them to most measurers.
For example, most people could get new information about my left shoe by
any measurements they take of it, while people earn Nobel prizes for ﬁnding
ways to take measurements that bring a nyone new information about the real
patterns of fundamental physics. To be objective, indexical redundancy should
be deﬁned modally, that is, in terms of physically possible perspectives. Let us
say that a real pattern’s indexical redundancy is an inverse function of the size
of its ‘measurement basin’ in locator space (however many dimensions science
turns out to require to ﬁx that) multiplied by the proportion x:0 > x > 1o f
physically possible perspectives from which information about the real pattern
not available from other perspectives is detectable.
As a ﬁrst pass, one is tempted to suggest that what philosophers have typically
meant by ‘natural kinds’ are real patterns with high indexical redundancy. Notice
that in general there are two ways in which a real pattern’s indexical redundancy
will tend to be reduced. One is for it to be measurable from only small regions
of the universe. A second is for it to be extremely complex, since then no matter
how ‘small’ it is, there will be many physically possible perspectives from which
non-redundant information about it is obtainable. This corresponds to the two

--- Page 309 ---

296 Causation in a Structural World
main features of types of things that incline philosophers not to regard them as
natural kinds.
A complication here is that parad igm instances of natural kinds in many
philosophical discussions have been biological taxa. As real patterns go, these
have quite low indexical redundancy, since, on the scales at which we consider
the universe, most of them ﬂicker brieﬂy into and out of existence in a minuscule
bit of space. However, we can turn this complication to our advantage. Ever since
the suggestion was made in a classic paper by David Hull (1976), it has become
increasingly common for philosophers of biology—and even, in one of the rare
cases of philosophy inﬂuencing science and thus obtaining ratiﬁcation of PNC-
compatibility, for biologists—to regard biological taxa as individuals. The basic
motivation for this is that taxa are historically unique. In the debate around this
proposal, what is being contrasted with individuals are universals; and of course
the individual/universal distinction is not the same as the natural kind/artefactual
kind distinction. However, it seems that if a philosopher accepted that biological
taxa are individuals but still wanted to promote them as exemplary natural kinds,
this philosopher would then have to be willing to admit Napoleon as a natural
kind. This would be ﬁne with us—‘natural kind’ isn’t our notion anyway,
and why should not ‘Napoleon’ be a type, of which ‘Napoleon in 1805’ and
‘Napoleon in 1813’ are instances? (Indeed, these can themselves be, recursively,
types. There are true generalizations, of abiding interest to historians, about
the 1805 edition of Napoleon that do not apply to the 1813 edition and vice
versa.) To the extent that a philosopher is willing to admit individuals as natural
kinds, this philosopher is choosing to emphasize the objectivity of the nature
of the kind, rather than its tendency to feature in generalizations, and hence in
explanations, as emphasized by Laporte. This hypothetical philosopher seems to
have no need of any surrogate for natural-kind-hood more speciﬁc than that of a
real pattern in general.
Thus we conclude our discussion of natural kinds as follows. To the extent
that philosophers who believe in self-subsistent individuals are persuaded by
Laporte’s analysis of natural kinds, they should grant that we can get the work
they want out of the natural kind/a rtefactual kind distinction by invoking real
patterns with high indexical redundancy. To the extent that they resist Laporte’s
analysis because of its tolerance for contextualization of natural-kind-hood, when
what attracts them to the concept is its focus on objectivity, they should be open
to just replacing reference to natural kinds with reference to real patterns.
Twenty years ago, zoologists tracked some real patterns from a certain set of
locators, and as a result obtained some generalizations about a group of organisms
they called ‘giant pandas’. They a lso then had some generalizations about two
other groups of organisms, red pandas and bears. We have since learned that
these zoologists had two general groups of false beliefs going with their true ones.
First, they thought that the conjunction of the two real patterns named by ‘giant
panda’ and ‘red panda’ was itself a real pattern. Second, they thought that when

--- Page 310 ---

Don Ross, James Ladyman, and David Spurrett 297
they measured the real pattern named by ‘gia nt panda’ they were not measuring
the real pattern named by ‘bear’ and vice versa. Learning that both of these
beliefs are false is equivalent (if we assume we know that red pandas aren’t bears)
to learning that either giant pandas are bears or bears are giant pandas. They
never imagined that everything projectible of giant pandas might be projectible
of bears; but now they know that everything projectible of bears is projectible of
giant pandas. So giant pandas turned ou t to be bears, not (giant pandas and red
pandas = pandas).
We share the standard scientiﬁc realist’s commitment to the view that scientiﬁc
inferences are intended with modal force, and that this is crucial to the possibility
of scientiﬁc explanation. We also share her opinion, contra that of the constructive
empiricist, that explanation and uniﬁcation are goals that normatively regulate
the practice of science. We have now shown how to maintain these aspects of
realism without violating the PNC by conjuring up real essences or magical
‘referential cables’ that transcend empirical veriﬁcation. ‘Natural kind’ is a more
elegant phrase than ‘real pattern of high indexical redundancy’; but then folk
metaphysics generally makes for better poetry than scientiﬁc metaphysics.

--- Page 311 ---

6
Conclusion—Philosophy Enough
Don Ross and James Ladyman
We close by returning to our opening themes and adding some further reﬂections
on them that would have been premature in advance of the arguments presented
over the preceding chapters, and by putting our views in broader context.
6.1 WHY ISN’T THIS DENNETT? WHY ISN’T IT KANT?
In 4.2 we criticized Dennett for dividing reality into ﬁrst-class illata and second-
class abstracta. Now we have argued that fundamental physics directly studies
extra-representational real patterns, while special sciences study real patterns
located by means of the notional-world concepts of cohesion and causation.
How is this not just Dennett’s distinction after all, with the addition of a special
analysis of what abstracta are?
Dennett’s abstracta are approximate descriptions of the illata, where the
approximations in question usefully serve human purposes. By contrast, special-
science real patterns are not, according to us, approximations of (fundamental)
physical real patterns. The PPC is the only physicalist principle motivated by
actual science, and it is too weak to support any form of reduction of special-
science real patterns to physical rea l patterns. (Instances of Nagelian reduction
occur, but this has nothing to do with physicalism.) The basis for our conﬁdence
that the special sciences often successfully tra ck real patterns is the no-miracles
argument as defended in Chapter 2, not any claim about how the special sciences
inherit ontological seriousness from their relationship to physics.
We indeed argued that special-science kinds do not exist in the way that folk
metaphysics takes them to do, that is, as self-subsistent individuals that constitute
history by banging into each other. The basis for this denial is the failure of
fundamental physics to describe a world uniﬁed by the organizing principles
of the special sciences, viz., cohesion and causa tion. But the fact that special
sciences are organized by notional-world principles doesn’t make the subject

--- Page 312 ---

Don Ross and James Ladyman 299
matter of special sciences, the real patterns they study, into notional-world
subject matter. Special sciences study local reality at scales where distinctive,
irreducibly dynamical, real patterns are manifest. We do not know what the
general positive relationship between the real patterns of fundamental physics
and the real patterns of special sciences is, though we sometimes empirically
discover particular such relations. Indeed, we do not even know whether there is
any single general positive relation. This is the bite in our claim that the history
of science warrants no metaphysical thesis of physicalism, but merely the much
weaker institutional norm of the PPC. The PPC is just strong enough to suggest
the unity of science, because the best metaphysical explanation for the PPC
is that all locators tracked by special sciences bear information about the real
patterns studied by fundamental physics, or equivalently, the modal structure
studied by fundamental physics constrains the modal structures studied by the
special sciences. (But modal relationships among locators described by special
sciences generally fail to be detectable when these locators are redescribed by
physics.)
This is why our view isn’t Dennett’s. But now it might be objected that,
in explaining this, we have turned our position into Kant’s, though with new
terminology. How is it that special-science objects of generalization don’t stand
to the fundamental physical structures as phenomena stand to noumena in Kant’s
system? After all, it is the essence of our view that we resist substantivalizing the
fundamental physical structures. We say these structures describe real patterns,
but since we can only represent the real patterns in question in terms of
mathematical relationships, in what sense are these real patterns ‘real’ other
that in which, according to Kant, noumena are real? This will be an especially
tempting line for someone who derives their interpretation of Kant from the
work of Michael Friedman (1992), which emphasizes the realist and naturalist,
as opposed to idealist and transcendentalist, aspects of Kant’s thought. (Given
the extent to which we revive the spirit of logical positivism it is no surprise, on
Friedman’s (1999a) reading of the positivists as pursuing a neo-Kantian agenda,
that such a similarity is apparent. The positivists thought that formal logic
enabled them to drop Kant’s tr anscendentalism in favour of conventionalism
without thereby abandoning his commitment to science’s claim to epistemic
authority.)
Then, to make it even easier to read us as Kantians, we claim that peopleneed to
organize the local domain of reality by means of the notional-world book-keeping
principles of cohesion and causation. Are these then not just new candidates for
‘principles of the understanding’ that structure phenomena? Finally, we say we
don’t know, in general, how special-science real patterns are related to physical real
patterns, or even if there is any such general relation. Doesn’t this just echo Kant’s
insistence that trying to account for phenomena by reference to noumena is empty
metaphysics? Even our version of veriﬁcationism, it might seem, is just Kant’s
version.

--- Page 313 ---

300 Conclusion
However, our differences from Kant are profound. Unlike Kant, we insist
that science can discover fundamental structures of reality that are in no way
constructions of our own cognitive dispositions. For this reason, our current best
theory of the fundamental real patterns at any time is open to modiﬁcation; the
structures are determined empirically, not a priori.
It is true that, like Kant, we distinguish the propositions to be taken seriously in
science and metaphysics by reference to human constructions. But for us these are
literally constructions: our scientiﬁc institutions. As collective constructions, the
institutional ﬁlters of science need not mirror or just be extensions of individual
cognitive capacities and organizing heuristics. They have shown themselves to
have a truth-tracking power—partly thanks to mathematics—that bootstraps
the process of scientiﬁc learning beyond the capacities of individual minds.
Furthermore, the limitations on the sorts of heuristics we must use for doing
special sciences arise not from limitations of the kinds of minds we have, but
from the irreducibly asymmetric nature of the local spacetime in which all our
measurements must be taken. We are persuaded by Humphreys (2004) that a
point is rapidly coming, if it is not upon us already, at which most of our science
will necessarily be done by our artefacts because the required computations are
beyond us, and we think there may well be a time after which people will no
longer be capable of understanding what their artefacts tell them. The artefacts
will, according to us, be studying real patterns. Yet even then, we expect, the
artefacts will need to manipulate object-oriented frameworks because of the
nature of the local part of the universe.
We grant that some elements of the prevailing world-view, namely cohesion
and causation, are notional-world ideas, and in so being resemble abstracta
and noumena. Of course it would be strange if, according to us, Dennett
and Kant arrived at their views of these things on no basis whatsoever. But
cohesion and causation are precisely not scientiﬁc ideas: they are metaphysical
ones. Science, including special sciences as full, ﬁrst-class, citizens, tells us to
banish them from our ﬁrst-order ontology. They do not then lead a whole
parade of special-science objects of attention into metaphysical purgatory. Prices,
neurons, peptides, gold, and Napoleon are all real patterns, existing in the same
unqualiﬁed sense as quarks, bosons, and the weak force. We use concepts of
cohesion and causation to keep track of the former but not the latter. This
has no more direct ontological signiﬁcance than does the fact that people who
study peptides and bosons often wear white coats, while people who study prices
generally don’t.
6.2 A REDUCTIO
As defenders of the claim that naturalism has radical consequences which few
putatively naturalistic metaphysicians have taken sufﬁciently seriously, we note

--- Page 314 ---

Don Ross and James Ladyman 301
the existence of an unlikely ally in Michael C. Rea. Rea is an avowed foe of
naturalism from the most traditional perspective of all. His general view will be
gleaned from a statement that closes his (2002): ‘[T]hough ultimately I reject it,
I think that in fact naturalism is the most viable research program apart from a
brand of supernaturalism that warra nts belief in a suitably developed version of
traditional theism’ (226). Rea’s strategy for arguing against naturalism is to show
that it has consequences he thinks few philosophers would be disposed to accept.
We agree with him that it has these consequences and that few philosophers are
disposed to accept them. But the conclusion we draw from this, unlike Rea, is
that there is something wrong with the thinking of the philosophers, not that
there is something wrong with naturalism.
According to Rea, naturalism is a research programme rather than a substantive
metaphysical thesis in itself (2002, 54–72). We agree; the content of our natural-
ism is given by the PNC, and the PNC is a claim about how to do metaphysics,
not a ﬁrst-order claim about what there is. R ae’s formulation of the naturalistic
research programme in philosophy is as follows: ‘[N]aturalism is a research
programme which treats the methods of science, and those methods alone, as
basic sources of evidence’ (67). If ‘methods’ here were replaced by ‘beliefs that
survive the institutional ﬁlters of science’ then Rae’s description would apply to
our naturalism. Though this difference is not trivial, we think that our naturalism
is of the right tenor to be an instance of the sort Rae aims to portray and combat.
Rae’s basic strategy is to show that na turalism leads to denial of ‘realism
about material objects (RMO)’ (77), where ‘material object’ is deﬁned by
reference to ‘non-trivial modal properties’ (81). These are properties, such as
possibilities and necessities with respect to persistence, that ﬁgure in traditional
non-naturalistic metaphysics. They are indicated as the sorts of properties one
must investigate to solve ‘the problem of material constitution’, which is the
problem arising from ‘scenarios in which it appears that an object a and an
object b share all of the same parts and yet have different modal properties’
(79). There is a question about ‘how we could possibly learn (or acquire
justiﬁed beliefs about) the truth or falsity of some of the crucial premises
in puzzles that raise the problem’ (80). Rae’s example here is the ‘puzzle’
about how a person could be identical to a collection of particles and be the
same person at an earlier and later time while being different collections of
particles at those times. ‘Philosophers of every persuasion’, Rae announces,
‘have devoted attention to the problem of material constitution, and virtually
nobody responds to the puzzles that raise it by saying that we cannot have
justiﬁed beliefs about the modal properties associated with various arrangements
of matter’ (80).
That is of course exactly what we say. The claim that a person is identical
to a collection of particles has no basis in any science. The concept of ‘material
object’ at work in Rae’s discussion has no counterpart in real physics. There is
therefore no reason to believe there are any such things. And the particular kinds

--- Page 315 ---

302 Conclusion
of modal properties the philosophers are sure we have justiﬁed beliefs about are
properties unknown to science.
Rae knows all of this. In fact, his knowing it is fundamental to his argument.
He takes lengthy and careful pains to show that one cannot be a sceptic about
justiﬁed belief in modal properties associated with arrangements of matter (‘MP-
beliefs’) and yet be said truly to believe in ‘material objects’. We of course claim
a genuine naturalist must be a sceptic about MP-beliefs. Therefore, we agree
with Rae that naturalists should not believe in ‘material objects’. The ‘material
objects’ in question are not what physics (or any other science) studies; they
are pure philosophical inventions. Rae thinks it should shock naturalists to
ﬁnd that they shouldn’t believe in such objects. We agree that many will be
shocked, and take this as evidence that their naturalism comes up short of the
real thing.
Like most philosophers, Rae combines some accurate beliefs about science
with some quaint ones. At one point he says that a
common strategy for defending realism about various kinds of problematic objects is to
argue that belief in or talk about such objects is indispensable for science … No doubt it
would be impossible to engage in scientiﬁc theorizing as we know it without presupposing
the existence of material objects; and as we have s een, belief in material objects carries a
commitment to modal properties. Thus one might argue that our particular MP-beliefs
a r ej u s t i ﬁ e do nt h eg r o u n d st h a tw eh a v et of o r ms o m eM P - b e l i e f so ro t h e r ,a n dt h eo n e s
we in fact form have allowed us to formulate a w ide variety of very successful scientiﬁc
theories. (129)
Given what is meant here by ‘material objects’—extended individual things that
‘take up’ space and ‘persist through’ time thanks to ‘intrinsic’ modal properties
that ground their identity—we think it would be nothing short of preposterous
to suppose that belief in them has been indispensable to the construction of
successful physical theories. But then Rae nevertheless rejects the reasoning he
has canvassed, which might have rescued ‘material objects’ for naturalists, on the
basis of a sensible view of science:
‘[E]ven if we agree (as seems reasonable) that theories that quantify over
familiar material objects like cells or atoms are in some sense committed to the
existence of such things, there is no reason to believe that simply by quantifying
over such things a theory is committed to any philosophical thesis about what
those things are’ (ibid.). Indeed.
Because Rae’s book advances its case by way of a complex argument about
putative philosophical facts that we deny could be subject matter for justiﬁed
belief one way or the other, we cannot express an opinion on the soundness
of his conclusion that either naturalists must adopt the radical view we defend
or believe that the world was designed by a traditional sort of deity. But if his
conclusion is true, then just a few obvious logical steps would take us from it to
our main theses by an unexpected alternative route. We welcome this surprising
additional consilience.

--- Page 316 ---

Don Ross and James Ladyman 303
6.3 NEO-POSITIVISM
The most general claims of this book can be summarized as follows. Taking
naturalism seriously in metaphysics is equivalent to adopting a veriﬁcationist
attitude towards both science and metaphysics. On the basis of this we arrived
at the scientistic stance, where this is our dialectical combination of realism
and empiricism. This in turn, when applied to the current near-consensus in
science as a body of input beliefs, yields the details of our information-theoretical
structural realism as a body of output (metaphysical) beliefs. The main part
of this book has been devoted to arguments for ITSR. In coming back to the
abstract philosophical topics with which we opened, we re-focus attention on the
scientistic stance.
We take it that the consistency of our veriﬁcationism (which, recall, is
veriﬁcationism about epistemic value, not meaning) will only be doubted by a
philosopher who supposes that no veriﬁcationist can have any truck with objective
modality. To this our response is to remind readers of the deﬂationary nature
of our commitment to modal structure. We claim that science has provided
evidence that some structural properties are properties of the whole universe.
The evidence for all generalizations of this sort is testable. We then claim that
the rational goal of seeking a uniﬁed account of reality justiﬁes us in framing
new theories on the assumption that some properties of the whole measured
universe are properties of the whole measurable universe. (Which such properties
this applies to is a function of the details of physical theory. Examination of
these details, we have argued, shows that quantum properties are such properties,
while the jury remains out on thermodynamic properties.) Since the scope of
the measured universe is constantly expanding with the progress of science, the
stronger claim about the measurable universe is being constantly checked with
respect to conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation. We assert no claims intended with
ultimate modal force. Thus, for example, if we say that Heisenberg’s Uncertainty
Principle is a law of nature, we do not mean that it is true in every logically or
semantically possible world; despite its modal inﬂections, science does not aim
to describe such worlds. We mean only that the Uncertainty Principle happens
to constrain possible measurements everywhere in this world, the one world in
which we can take measurements.
The moment they recognize our deﬂationary commitment to modality, some
will call the seriousness of our realism into question. Such critics might contend
that we overstate the difference between our view and constructive empiricism by
pretending that deﬂated modality is ‘true’ modality. We dealt with this critical
thrust back in Chapter 2. But the critic might now attempt a more direct way
of trying to drive a wedge between our commitments to veriﬁcationism and
realism. This direct way would begin by insisting that our primary commitment

--- Page 317 ---

304 Conclusion
to naturalism tethers us unequivocally to veriﬁcationism. Then it would press an
argument based on the claims that veriﬁcationism just is empiricism, and that
empiricism is (with instrumentalist constructivism and relativist scepticism) one
of the three foils against which realism is identiﬁed. ¹
It may be wondered how this direct criticism could still be dangling unac-
counted for so late in the book. The answer is that few philosophers since the
fall of logical empiricism have supposed that naturalism implies veriﬁcationism.
Thus none of the various arguments against which we have sparred—arguments
coming from standard scientiﬁc realists, from constructive empiricists, from
naturalistic advocates of disunity—have been based on this premise. But it is a
premise we endorse. Thus it is an available premise for a critic we have not yet
considered. Seeing off this hypothetical critic will complete the presentation of
our view. However, before we do so, let us stress that we do not care whether
we’re deemed better entitled to ‘empiricist’ or ‘realist’ party cards. The other
comprehensive PNC-compatible recent book of metaphysics, with which our
view may usefully be compared, is that of Melnyk (2003). Melnyk takes pains to
defend his position as a realist one. As we have said, our ﬁrst commitment is to
veriﬁcationism. Therefore, the fault line between these labels is a convenient hook
for addressing the relationship between contempora ry naturalistic metaphysics
and standardly identiﬁed philosophical isms.
The ﬁrst modern philosopher who was consistently naturalistic was Hume,
and he was of course an empiricist. As van Fraassen (2002) argues, however
(see 1.7) to say this at the level of beliefs (as opposed to stances) is to say
something ambiguous. Melnyk (2003, 229–30), in trying to give content to
the identiﬁcation of his own metaphysical view as a realist one, says that a
realist will ‘ﬁnd repugnant’ the ‘empiricist idea that the difference between being
observable and being unobservable marks a distinction of great epistemological
signiﬁcance’. Let us agree that this marks one diagnostic distinction between
empiricism and realism. Veriﬁcationism is usually conceived as the idea that we
can know (or justiﬁably believe) only what we could in principle conﬁrm (or
test) by observation. Hume thought this. Hume’s empiricism in so far as it went
beyond his acceptance of the empirical stance and included an epistemological
doctrine consisted in what we would now call veriﬁcationism. Furthermore, his
naturalism is also nearly the same thing as (or is only a very few logical steps
away from) his veriﬁcationism: he rejected supernatural entities and inﬂuences
because he thought they fail the veriﬁcationist’s requirement; indeed he more or
less deﬁned ‘supernatural entities and inﬂuences’ as posits of hypotheses failing
that requirement.
Thus the logical tie amongst naturalism, veriﬁcationism, and empiricism as
a contrasting foil for realism has solid historical roots. (While we continue
¹ This would be a critic who did not accept van Fraassen’s account of the core contrasting
principles of empiricism and (naturalistic) realism.

--- Page 318 ---

Don Ross and James Ladyman 305
to endorse van Fraassen’s ‘stance stance’ with respect to ‘strong’ metaphysics,
we think his identiﬁcation of naturalism with the ‘materialist stance’ forces an
unduly strained history of philosophy.) Kant abandoned the whole package,
but then the logical positivists showed how to remain Kantians in other main
respects while taking the package back again. For them, rejection of the Humean
package was an unnecessarily high price to pay for the Kantian construction
of the foundations of scientiﬁc knowledge, particularly its analysis of the
relationship between particular judgements and generalizations. The passage
from logical positivism to logical empiricism was a slide from Kantianism back
to Humeanism on those topics, which Quine, the completer of that line of
thinkers, decisively ratiﬁed by pronouncing ofﬁcially for naturalism (Friedman
1999a). The observable/unobservable distinction does the same work for Quine
as it does for Hume. ²
We thus endorse Melnyk’s analysis of what it is to be a realist, where this
analysis includes a clause explicitly denying the sort of signiﬁcance to the observ-
able/unobservable distinction historically promoted by naturalists/veriﬁcationists
(and most rigorously and carefully promoted, as discussed in Chapter 2, by van
Fraassen). Here is Melnyk’s analysis:
The deepest commitment of those who would call themselves scientiﬁc realists and
antirelativists … consists … in the respectful way in which they regard (certain) current
scientiﬁc hypotheses. By and large, they regard these current scientiﬁc hypotheses as
(I) true or false in virtue of the way the mind-independent world is;
(II) objectively superior, in some tr uth-connected sense, to earlier hypotheses in the
ﬁeld, so that science has, in this sense, progressed;
(III) objectively superior, in the same sense, to current rival scientiﬁc hypotheses;
(IV) objectively superior, in the same sense again, to current rival hypotheses advocated
by people outside the scientiﬁc establishment; and
(V) such that whether the regard for a hypothesis expressed by I–IV is appropriate
is generally independent of whether or not the hypothesis postulates entities and
properties that cannot be observed. (Melnyk 2003, 229)
Reproduction of this analysis out of its textual context may leave the reader unsure
about how to interpret clause (III). Let us therefore note that it does not imply that
philosophers, qua philosophers, should take sides amongst current rival scientiﬁc
hypotheses—something we deny. ³ R a t h e r ,i ts a y st h a tr e a l i s tp h i l o s o p h e r s
recognize that scientists establish preferences among current scientiﬁc hypotheses
on the basis of their evaluations of truth-related considerations. Note that it is
² This is clearest in Quine’s book The Roots of Reference (1974).
³ What if a current scientiﬁc hypothesis reduced the u nity of science? We claim that unity of
science is a scientiﬁc norm, implying that scientists themselves police this in considering hypotheses.
The job of the philosopher (qua philosopher) is to articulat e the unity scientist s collectively foster,
not to show the scientists which hypotheses best achieve it.

--- Page 319 ---

306 Conclusion
precisely naturalism, of the sort captured by the PNC, that makes clause (III)
essential to a realist position; if clause (III) did not hold but clause (II) did, then
we would have to suppose that all theory change occurred through epistemically
irrational paradigm shifts. But then if the history of science consistently found
the scientiﬁc community deciding after the fact that theories they had initially
rejected just because they were unfashionable were in fact false—yielding a
kind of ‘Stalinist’ picture of internal scientiﬁc historiography—this would put
intolerable strain on the plausibility of the PNC itself. We conjecture that this
is mainly how constructivist critics will aim to put pressure on the PNC; but
in doing so they will need to surmount the battery of standard realist responses
found in the literature, and try to undermine OSR, since OSR minimizes
the extent to which the history of science should be read as a history of
revolutions.
On Melnyk’s other clauses, we have dealt extensively with the ways in which
our view incorporates commitments (II) and (IV). Some will worry that we
violate clause (I) with respect to special-science hypotheses by sliding too far
towards a Kantian position on them; we addressed this concern in 5.7. But even
someone left unconvinced by that discussion should at least grant that our view
is realist where fundamental physics is concerned—provided we can satisfy her
that we respect Melnyk’s clause (V).
Our critical encounter with constructive empiricism in Chapter 2 did not
directly address this issue. We argued, contra van Fraassen, that science describes
(in ontological seriousness) a modally structured reality that extends beyond the
scope of what can be observed. However, this does not imply clause (V). We deny,
on grounds defended throughout the book, that science describes (in ontological
seriousness) unobservable entities. However, we have not denied that it describes
properties (in structural terms). Our claim that science describes modal structures
implies that science describes unobservable instances of properties, since some of
its generalizations will apply to counterfa ctual instantiations of them. But our
endorsement of veriﬁcationism might be taken to imply that we think that science
doesn’t describe (in ontological seriousness) unobservable types of properties. And
then it will be objected that if that is so we are not realists according to the part
of Melnyk’s criterion expressed in clause (V).
However, clause (V) needs more clariﬁcation than Melnyk provides. In fact he
provides none; we take it that clause (V) is merely intended to gesture towards the
‘core’ idea of any version of empiricism, which might be given somewhat different
exact interpretations by different empiricists. This is a reasonable procedure on
Melnyk’s part given the doctrines with which he means to contrast realism:
classical, logical, and constructive empiricism. However, the approach requires
supplementary work when what is at stake is the question of whether a view
Melnyk does not have in mind—in this case, our ITSR—is an expression of
empiricism or realism. The obvious way to do this supplementary work, in a way
consistent with Melnyk’s procedure, is to ask how closely the new view compares

--- Page 320 ---

Don Ross and James Ladyman 307
with the prototypes he has in mind with respect to some or all under-explicated
elements of clause (V).
The element on which we focus attention is ‘observation’ (as this enters into
the construction ‘cannot be observed’ in (V)). Classical, logical, and constructive
empiricists all mean by ‘observation of P by x’t h a tx transduces some property or
properties of P by operations of one or more of her sensory modalities, mediated
by no more than minimal inference. (We say ‘minimal inference’ to allow for
the fact that contemporary versions of classical empiricism often concede that
there is no such thing as ‘direct’ perception. Empiricist theories informed by
cognitive science sometimes gloss ‘minimum’ as meaning the minimum required
for normal performance by the sensory modalities in question of the functions
for which they were selected. ‘Minimal’ for Hume, and for the logical positivists,
meant zero.) Then when classical and logical empiricists endorse veriﬁcationism,
they incorporate into this endorsement the idea that a veriﬁable claim p about
P is one with respect to which observation of P by x, or reliable testimony to x
about someone else’s observation of P, bears on x’s justiﬁcation for believing p.
The veriﬁability criterion that we endorse is based on a different relation: that
of ‘being informationally connected to’. x is informationally connected to P iff
there exists an information channel from P to x. Following Dretske (1981), an
informational channel from P to x is a set of standing conditions necessary for
the receipt of information about P by x, but which itself carries no information
about P, or only redundant information about P. By ‘redundant information’
we refer to information carried with less noise by another information channel
from P to x. x is a ‘perspective’ as deﬁned in 4.4. In that chapter, we identiﬁed
perspectives with ‘observation points’. Perspective is thus our surrogate for the
philosophical idea of observation. Is this surrogate enough like the empiricist’s
idea of observation that, when we plug it into a statement of veriﬁcationism, it
would be disingenuous for us not to consider ourselves empiricists?
There are two main differences between the relation of being informationally
connected and the traditional empiricist relation of ‘being an observer of [ ]’.
The ﬁrst is that informational connectedness invokes no bias against mediation
by inference. If I receive the information that the price of a commodity in a
particular market has been stable for a year, and I receive the information that
the price in question is not controlled by institutional rules, then if standing
conditions include my awareness of basic economics, I receive the information
that there is an equilibrium of supply and demand in that market with respect to
the commodity and its close substitutes and main complements. My knowledge
of economics is an objective fact about the world and so can count as part of
channel conditions. Chains of inference can be information channels as long
as they are sound. ⁴ (Astrological inferences are not information channels, a
⁴ Barwise and Seligman (1997) provide a formal theory of this.

--- Page 321 ---

308 Conclusion
fact we diagnose when we see that they do not support projection as deﬁned
in 4.4.)
Many philosophers, told we are going to formulate a veriﬁability criterion
in terms of information channels, will now object that this criterion is bound
to come out extraordinarily weak. If some inferential connections can stand in
where traditional empiricists put observation relations, then if some scientiﬁcally
dubious metaphysical speculation is the consequence of a sound inference to the
best explanation our veriﬁability criterion will not block it.
Well, just so; this is precisely to the point of our emphasizing our dis-
tance from traditional empiricist accounts. Informational connection is a
much less demanding relation than traditional empiricist observation. As we
stressed in Chapter 1, what rules out the kind of metaphysics the logical
positivists were right to reject should not be, for a naturalist who stands
o p p o s e dt os t r o n gm e t a p h y s i c s ,a nap r i o r ie p i s t e m i cr u l el i k eav e r i ﬁ a b i l -
ity criterion. In the case of our account, what is supposed to block the
kinds of inference to ‘the best explanation’ in which ‘strong’ metaphysicians
engage is the PNC. The kind of ‘empirical’ premise that the PNC requires
for a justiﬁed speculation is not picked out by reference to any philosoph-
ical analyses, but by reference to evolved (and evolving) norms of scientiﬁc
practice.
In that case, our critic may wonder, why do we want to bother with
any veriﬁability criterion at all? The answer brings us to the second major
difference between our veriﬁcationism and that of classical and logical empiri-
cists. For the latter, veriﬁability criteria were intended to rule out certain
propositions as signiﬁcant. Ours may do something similar—declaring some
propositions to be not worth taking seriously, even if they are perfectly
meaningful—but only as a by-product. What we really want a veriﬁabil-
ity criterion to capture is the pointlessness of merely putative domains of
inquiry.
When the classical and logical empiricists thought about an observation-
al relation between some x and some P, they thought of x as a cognitive
agent and of P as an object of predication. When we think about a relation
of informational connectedness between some x and some P, we are think-
ing about both x and P as points (nodes) or regions (interconnected sets of
nodes) in networks. Some relevant x’s are indeed cognitive agents, but many
are not. As discussed in Chapter 4, many perspectives are unoccupied, or occu-
pied only by very stupid agents. (Increasingly many perspectives are occupied
by information processors that are more powerful than humans or networks
of humans; large computers open new informational channels (Humphreys
2004).) Which perspectives an agent occupies—which x she instantiates, if
you like—is partly a function of the inferences available to her, which is in
turn a function of both her computational capacities and her position in the
network of information ﬂow. This includes her position in spacetime, and

--- Page 322 ---

Don Ross and James Ladyman 309
her position with respect to testiﬁers with whom she is informationally con-
nected; thus it incorporates her background knowledge (again, as in Dretske
1981).⁵
On the prototypical P’s, we differ even more radically from traditional
empiricists. We do not conceive of these as objects but as locations.⁶ The
basic sorts of elements with which perspectives are, or aren’t, information-
ally connected are parts of the universe to which they can direct attention
(perform the operation of locating) and at which they can take measure-
ments. Then science—not philosophy—tells us that there are terminal points
in chains of informational connection. A sound veriﬁability criterion will tell
us not to waste resources (including by misleading us about what we can
aim to know) trying to extend our inquiries and the coverage of our the-
ories beyond these terminal points. If the Big Bang is a singularity (which
is for physics to determine) then there is no point in wondering about the
other side of it. Within upper and lower bounds established by inference
from other cases and available speciﬁc evidence, there is no point in us won-
dering exactly how many hairs Napoleon sported at Waterloo, because we
are collectively disconnected from that information. ⁷ Note that this is not
because of anything that is defective about any proposition;i ti sb e c a u s ew e
have lost connection with that region of spacetime at the relevant measurement
scale.
We have now said enough to be able to state informatively our version of a
normative veriﬁability criterion: the science and metaphysics of a community of
inquirers should remain silent about putative domains of inquiry from which the
community is collectively informationally disconnected.
Let us stress that we really mean ‘silent’, not just ‘muted’. Again, if the Big Bang
is a singularity there are no grounds for regarding the other side of it as part of
reality or talking about the other side of it as if that locution was functioning as a
locator. With respect to locutions such as ‘origins of reality’—which exempliﬁes
a range of examples—our view indeed converges with that of the positivists (but
on grounds that have nothing directly to do with empiricism). It is far from
obvious that ‘the origins of reality’ has any intelligible sense unless ‘reality’ is
⁵ This paragraph adds nothing to what we argued in Chapter 4; it merely synopsizes that material
in such a way as to make salient its relevance to the set of issues now before us.
⁶ In Chapters 4 and 5, of course, we reconstructed reference to objects in terms of dynamic
relationships between reference to locations and applications of theories.
⁷ Here is a good place at which to remind readers again of our pervasive fallibilism. Current
evidence suggests that we are disconnected from this information. But suppose that it turns out
that a person’s quantity of hair at any given age is rigorously determined by a genetic algorithm,
modulo chemotherapy or malnutrition or the inﬂuenc e of basketball fashion. Then, since we know
that Napoleon did not have chemotherapy or shave his head, if someone recovered his DNA from
surviving corpse fragments, we might establish a connection to the information about his exact
hirsuteness at Waterloo. As far as we now know, ho wever, the speculative possibility on which this
whole fantasy depends is false.

--- Page 323 ---

310 Conclusion
deﬂated. (For example, when people consider whether God created reality, they
have deﬂated reality so as to allow for there to be something more.) The positivists
tried to get too much philosophical work out of the idea of meaninglessness.
But it’s true that people very often imagine themselves to be expressing coherent
content when they are not, merely because the strings of words they are using
are grammatical. Because the positivists’ veriﬁability criterion of meaning was
refuted, it was widely concluded that philosophers no longer have grounds for
alleging that, for example, religious or neo-scholastic metaphysicians are saying
nothing clear or coherent enough to evaluate. But this is a non-sequitur. We
think that such people are indeed doing nothing but revealing properties of
themselves and don’t usually realize it.
Our veriﬁability criterion has an essentially different status from that of
classical and logical empiricists. The content of ours is settled by science, not by
an a priori theory of the cognitive role of perception. Its purpose is to describe
limits identiﬁed by scientists, not to prescribe such limits. It is not part of the
foundations of our view, but a consequence of the view’s application to the state
of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Nevertheless, we do have in common with naturalistic empiricists (for example,
Hume and Quine) the property that our veriﬁcation ism is epistemically foun-
dational. This is bound to be so given our agreement that naturalism and
veriﬁcationism are the same thesis, or almost the same thesis. But in so far as our
veriﬁcationism is foundational, it is captured by the PNC, not by the veriﬁability
criterion, and the PNC does not mention observability, or any surrogate notion.
Therefore our view does not fall afoul of Melnyk’s clause (V).
We thus conclude that what we have defended in this book, having assumed
naturalism, are veriﬁcationism and realism. Since these two things have been
generally thought to be incompatible, it is no wonder that a signiﬁcant logical
space in the metaphysics of science has gone unexplored, and some conundra
have seemed insurmountable. Of all the main historical positions in philosophy,
the logical positivists and logical empiricists came closest to the insights we have
urged. Over-reactions to their errors have led metaphysicians over the past few
decades into widespread unscientiﬁc and even anti-scientiﬁc intellectual waters.
We urge them to come back and rejoin the great epistemic enterprise of modern
civilization.

--- Page 324 ---

References
Adams, R. (1979). Primitive thisness and primitive identity. Journal of Philosophy 76:
5–26.
Addleson, M. (1997). Equilibrium versus Understanding. London: Routledge.
Adler, S. (2003). Why decoherence has not solved the measurement problem: A response
to P. W. Anderson. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics34: 135–42.
Aharonov Y., Bergmann, P. G. and Lebowitz, J. L. (1964). Time symmetry in the
quantum process of measurement. Physical Review 134B: 1410–16.
Ainslie, G. (2001). Breakdown of Will. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Albert, D. (2000). Time and Chance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
and Loewer, B. (1988). Interpreting the many worlds interpretation. Synthese 77:
195–213.
Almeder, R. (1998). Harmless Naturalism. La Salle: Open Court.
Alspector-Kelley, M. (2001). Should the empiricist be a constructive empiricist?Philosophy
of Science 68: 413–31.
Ambjorn, J, Jurkiewicz, J., and Loll, R. (2004). Emergence of a 4D world from causal
quantum gravity. Physical Review Letters 98: 131–301.
Annas, J. and Barnes, J. (eds.) (1985). The Modes of Scepticism: Ancient Texts and Modern
Interpretations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Armstrong, D. (1983). What is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
(2004). Going through an open door again: Counterfactual versus singularist
theories of causation. In J. Collins, N. Hall and L. A. Paul (eds.), Causation and
Counterfactuals, pp. 445–58. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Auyang, S. (1995). How Is Quantum Field Theory Possible? Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Baez, J. (2001). Higher-dimensional algebra and Planck scale physics. In C. Callender
and N. Huggett (eds.), Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale: Contemporary
Theories in Quantum Gravity, pp. 177–95. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baillargeon, R., Kotovsky, L., and Needham, A. (1995). The acquisition of physical
knowledge in infancy. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, and A. James Premack (eds.),
Causal Cognition, pp. 79–116. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bain, J. (2003). Towards structural realism. http://ls.poly.edu/ ∼ jbain/papers/SR.pdf
(2004). Theories of Newtonian gravity and empirical indistinguishability. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 35: 345–76.
and Norton, J. (2001). What should philosophers of science learn from the history
of the electron. In J. Z. Buchwald and A. Warwick (eds.), Histories of the Electron, pp.
451–65. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baldwin, J. M. (ed.) (1901). Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology. London: Macmillan.
Ball, P. (2004). Critical Mass. London: Heinemann.
Barrett, J. (1999). The Quantum Mechanics of Minds and Worlds .O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.

--- Page 325 ---

312 References
Barrow, J., Davies, P., and Harper, C. (eds.) (2004). Science and Ultimate Reality:
Quantum Theory, Cosmology and Computation . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Barwise, J. and Seligman, J. (1997). Information Flow. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Batterman, R. W. (2002). The Devil in the Details. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(2005). Response to Belot’s ‘Whose devil? Which details?’. Philosophy of Science 72:
154–63.
Bealer, G. (1987). The philosophical limits of scientiﬁc essentialism. Philosophical
Perspectives, vol. 1, Metaphysics: 289–365.
Beckermann, A. (1992). Supervenience, emergence, and reduction. In A. Beckermann
(ed.), Emergence or Reduction? pp. 94–118. Berlin & New York: De Gruyter.
Bell, J. (1976). How to teach special relativity. Progress in Scientiﬁc Culture 1. Reprinted
in his (1987).
(1987). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Belot, G. (2005a). Dust, time and symmetry. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 56: 255–91.
(2005b). Whose devil? Which details? Philosophy of Science 72: 128–53.
and Earman, J. (2000). From metaphysics to physics. In J. Butterﬁeld and C.
Pagonis (eds.), From Physics to Philosophy , pp. 166–86. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
(2001). Pre-Socratic quantum gravity. In C. Callender and N. Huggett (eds.),
Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale: Contemporary Theories in Quantum Gravity,
pp. 213–55. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Benacerraf, P. (1965 [1983]). What numbers could not be. Philosophical Review 74:
47–73. Reprinted in P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam (eds.), Philosophy of Mathematics:
Selected Readings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1983.
Bennett, C. (1990). How to deﬁne complexity in physics, and why. In W. Zurek (ed.),
Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, pp. 137–48. Boulder: Westview.
Berry, M. (1989). Principles of Cosmology and Gravitation.B r i s t o l :A d a mH i l g e r .
Beth, E. (1949). Towards an up-to-date philosophy of the natural sciences. Methodos 1:
178–85.
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and Species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bickle, J. (1992). Mental anomaly and the new mind–brain reductionism. Philosophy of
Science 59/2: 217–30.
(1996). New wave reductionism and the methodological caveats. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 56/1: 57–78.
(1998). Psychoneural Reduction: The New Wave. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bird, A. (2007). Nature’s Metaphysics: Dispositions, Laws, and Properties.O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Birkhoff, G. and Bennett, M. (1988). Felix Klein and his ‘Erlanger Programme’. History
and Philosophy of Modern Mathematics, Minnesota Studies in Philosophy of Science,
Volume XI, pp. 145–76. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Bishop, M. (2003). The pessimistic induction, the ﬂight to reference and the metaphysical
zoo. International Studies in Philosophy of Science 17: 161–78.

--- Page 326 ---

References 313
Bitbol, M. (forthcoming). Structuralism and the a priori (2): Kant’s ungrounded relations
and quantum non-supervenient relations.
Black, M. (1952). The identity of indiscernibles. Mind 61: 153–64.
Blackburn, S. (2002). Realism: Deconstructing the debate. Ratio 15: 111–33.
Block, N. (1997). Anti-reductionism slaps back. Mind, Causation, World: Philosophical
Perspectives 11: 107–33.
Bontly, T. (2001). The supervenience argument generalizes. Philosophical Studies 109:
75–96.
Bookstein, F. (1983). Comment on a ‘nonequilibrium’ approach to evolution. Systematic
Zoology 32: 291–300.
Born, M. (1953). Physical reality. Philosophical Quarterly 3: 139–49.
Bourne, C. (2004). Becoming inﬂated. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
55: 107–19.
Boyd, R. N. (1984). The current status of scientiﬁc realism. In J. Leplin (ed.), Scientiﬁc
Realism, 41–82. Berkeley: University of California Press.
(1985). Lex orandi est lex credendi . In P. M. Churchland and C. A. Hooker (eds.),
Images of Science, pp. 3–34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braithwaite, R. B. (1940). Critical notice: The Philosophy of Physical Science. Mind 49:
455–66.
(1953). Scientiﬁc Explanation: A Study of the Function of Theory, Probability and
Law in Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brighouse, C. (1994). Spacetime and holes. In D. Hull, M. Forbes, and A. Fine (eds.),
PSA 1994, volume 1, pp. 117–25. East Lansing: Philosophy of Science Association.
Brillouin, L. (1956). Science and Information Theory . 2nd edn., 1962. New York:
Academic Press.
Brittan, G. G. (1970). Explanation and reduction. Journal of Philosophy 67/13: 336–457.
Broad, C. D. (1925). The Mind and its Place in Nature. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Brooks, D. R. and Wiley, E. O. (1985). Nonequilibrium thermodynamics and evolution:
Responses to Bookstein and Wicken. Systematic Zoology 34: 89–97.
Brooks, D. R. and Wiley, E. O. (1986). Evolution as Entropy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Brown, H. (1993). Correspondence, invariance and heuristics in the emergence of
Special Relativity. In S. French and H. Kaminga (eds.), Correspondence, Invariance and
Heuristics: Essays in Honour of Heinz Post, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
Volume 148, pp. 227–60. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(2005). Physical Relativity: Space-Time Structure from a Dynamical Perspective.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brown, H. and Pooley, O. (forthcoming). Minkowski space-time: a glorious non-entity.
In Petkov (ed.), The Ontology of Spacetime.
Brown, H. and Wallace, D. (forthcoming). Solving the measurement problem: de
Broglie-Bohm loses out to Everett. Foundations of Physics
Brown, H., Elby, A., and Weingard, R. (1996). Cause and effect in the pilot-wave
interpretation of quantum mechanics. In J. T. Cushing et al. (eds.),Bohmian Mechanics
and Quantum Theory: An Appraisal, pp. 309–19. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Brown, J. (1999). Philosophy of Mathematics. London: Routledge.

--- Page 327 ---

314 References
Bub, J. (2004). Why the quantum? Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
35: 241–66.
Bueno, O. (1997). Empirical adequacy: A partial structures approach. Studies in the
History and Philosophy of Science 28: 585–610.
Bueno, O., French, S., and Ladyman, J. (2002). On representing the relationship between
the mathematical and the empirical. Philosophy of Science 69: 452–73.
Busch, J. (2003). What structures could not be. International Studies in the Philosophy of
Science 17: 211–25.
Butterﬁeld, J. (1989). The hole truth. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40:
1–28.
(1992). Review of B. C. van Fraassen, Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 24: 443–76.
(2002). Critical notice: Julian Barbour’s The End of Time. The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 53: 289–330.
(2006). The Rotating Discs Argument Defeated. The British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science 57: 1–45.
Byrne, R. W. and Whiten, A. (1988). Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and
the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes and Humans .O x f o r d :O x f o r dU n i v e r s i t y
Press.
(1997). Machiavellian intelligence. In A. Whiten and R. W. Byrne, Machi-
avellian Intelligence II: Extensions and Evaluations , pp. 1–23. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Callender, C. and Huggett, N. (eds.) (2001). Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale:
Contemporary Theories in Quantum Gravity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Camerer, C. (2003). Behavioral Game Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cao, T. (1997). Conceptual Development of 20th Century Field Theories .C a m b r i d g e :
Cambridge University Press.
(2003). Structural realism and the interpretation of quantum ﬁeld theory. Synthese
136: 3–24.
and Schweber, S. (1993). The conceptual foundations and the philosophical aspects
of renormalization theory. Synthese 97: 33–108.
Carnap, R. (1928). The Logical Structure of the World. Berkeley; University of California
Press.
(1936–7). Testability and meaning. Philosophy of Science 3: 419–71.
(1939). Foundations of Logic and Mathematics . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
(1952). The Continuum of Inductive Methods .C h i c a g o :U n i v e r s i t yo fC h i c a g o
Press.
Carroll, L. (1895). What the tortoise said to Achilles. Mind 4: 278–80.
Cartwright, N. (1980). Do the laws of physics state the facts? Paciﬁc Philosophical
Quarterly 61: 75–84.
(1983). How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(1989). Nature’s Capacities and their Measurement .O x f o r d :O x f o r dU n i v e r s i t y
Press.
(1992). Aristotelian natures and the modern experimental method. In J. Earman
(ed.), Inference, Explanation and Other Frustrations in the Philosophy of Science, pp.
44–71. Berkeley: University of California Press.

--- Page 328 ---

References 315
(1999). The Dappled World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(2002). Reply. In Book Symposium on The Dappled World. Philosophical Books 43:
271–8.
Cassirer, E. (1936 [1956]). Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics .N e w
Haven: Yale University Press.
(1944). Group concept and perception theory. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 5: 1–35.
Castellani, E. (1998). Galilean particles: An example of constitution of objects. In E.
Castellani (ed.), Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects in Modern Physics ,
pp. 181–94. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
(2002). Reductionism, emergence and effective ﬁeld theories. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 33: 251–67.
(ed.) (1998). Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects in Modern Physics .
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Caves, C. (1990). Entropy and information: How much information is needed to assign
a probability? In W. Zurek (ed.), Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information ,
pp. 91–115. Boulder: Westview.
Chaitin, G. (1966). On the length of programs for computing ﬁnite binary sequences.
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 13: 547–69.
(1987). Algorithmic Information Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chakravartty A. (1998). Semirealism. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Science
29: 391–408.
Chiara, D., Krause, D., and Giuntini, R. (1998). Quasiset theories for microobjects: a
comparison. In E. Castellani (ed.), Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects
in Modern Physics, pp. 142–52. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(2004). Natural Born Cyborgs. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cleland, C. (1984). Space: An abstract system of non-supervenient relations. Philosophical
Studies 46: 19–40.
Clifton, R. and Halvorson, H. (2002). No place for particles in relativistic quantum
theories? Philosophy of Science 69: 1–28.
Clifton, R., Bub, J., and Halvorson, H. (2003). Characterising quantum theory in terms
of information-theoretic constraints. Foundations of Physics 33: 1561–91.
Coffa, A. (1993). The Semantic Tradition from Kant to Carnap: To the Vienna Station.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collier, J. (1986). Entropy in evolution. Biology and Philosophy 1: 5–24.
(1988). Supervenience and reduction in biological hierarchies. Canadian Journal of
Philosophy Supplementary Volume 14: 209–34.
(1990). Two faces of Maxwell’s demon reveal the nature of irreversibility. Studies in
the History and Philosophy of Science 21: 257–68.
(1996). Information originates in symmetry breaking. Science and Culture 7:
247–56.
(1999). Causation is the transfer of information. In H. Sankey (ed.), Causation,
Natural Laws and Explanation, pp. 279–331. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(2000). Autonomy and process closure as the basis for functionality. In J. L. R.
Chandler and G. de Vijver (eds.), Closure: Emergent Organizations and their Dynamics,
pp. 280–91. The Annals of the New York Academy of Science vol. 901.

--- Page 329 ---

316 References
Collier, J. (2001). Dealing with the unexpected. International Journal of Computing
Anticipatory Systems 10: 21–30.
(2003). Hierarchical dynamical information systems with a focus on biology.
Entropy 5: 100–24.
(2004). Self-organization, individuation and identity. Revue Internationale de
Philosophie 59: 151–72.
and Burch, M. (1998). Order from rhythmic entrainment and the origin of levels
through dissipation. Symmetry: Culture and Science 9: 2–4.
and Hooker, C. (1999). Complexly organized dynamical systems. Open System and
Information Dynamics 6: 241–302.
and Muller, S. (1998). The dynamical basis of emergence in natural hierarchies. In G.
Farre and T. Oksala (eds.), Emergence, Complexity, Hierarchy and Organization, Selected
and Edited Papers from the ECHO III Conference, Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica, MA91.
Espoo: Finish Academy of Technology.
Connes, A. (1994). Non-commutative Geometry. New York: Academic Press.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped how
humans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task. Cognitive Psychology 31:
187–276.
Couvalis, S. G. (1997). The Philosophy of Science: Science and Objectivity.L o n d o n :S a g e .
Crane, T. (1995). Mental causation. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplementary
vol. 69: 211–36.
Creath, R. (ed.) (1991). Dear Carnap, Dear Van: The Quine–Carnap Correspondence and
Related Work. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Crook, S. and Gillett, C. (2001). Why physics alone cannot deﬁne the ‘physical’:
materialism, metaphysics, and the formulation of physicalism. Canadian Journal of
Philosophy 31: 333–60.
Cruse, P. (2005). Ramsey sentences, structural realism and trivial realization. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science 36: 557–76.
Curiel, E. (2001). Against the excesses of qauntum gravity: A plea for modesty. Philosophy
of Science supplementary vol. 68: 424–41.
Cushing, J. and McMullin, E. (eds.) (1987). Philosophical Consequences of Quantum
Theory: Reﬂections on Bell’s Theorem . Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Cussins, A. (1990). The Connectionist Construction of Concepts. In M. Boden (ed.),
The Philosophy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 368–440. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
da Costa, N. C. A. and French, S. (2003). Science and Partial Truth: A Unitary Approach
to Models and Scientiﬁc Reasoning . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dahlbom, B. (ed.) (1993). Dennett and his Critics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Darrigol, O. (1992). From c-Numbers to q-Numbers: The Classical Analogy in the History
of Quantum Theory, California Studies in the History of Science. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Davidson, D. (1970 [1980]). Mental events. In L. Foster and J. W. Swanson (eds.),
Experience and Theory , pp. 79–101. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Reprinted in N. Block, Readings in Philosophy of Psychology Volume 1 , pp. 107–19.
London: Methuen. 1980.
Davies, P. (1990). Why is the physical world so comprehensible? In W. Zurek (ed.),
Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, pp. 61–70. Boulder: Westview.

--- Page 330 ---

References 317
Dawid, R. (forthcoming). Scientiﬁc realism in the age of string theory. http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001240
Demopoulos, W. (forthcoming a). Carnap’s philosophy of science. In R. Creath and
M. Friedman (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Carnap . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Demopoulos, W. (forthcoming b). Review of Hallvard Lillehammer and Hugh Mellor
(eds.), Ramsey’s Legacy, Notre Dame Philosophy Reviews.
Demopoulos, W. and Friedman, M. (1985 [1989]). Critical notice: Bertrand Russell’s
The Analysis of Matter : Its historical context and contemporary interest. Philosophy of
Science 52: 621–639. Reprinted in C. W. Savage and C. A. Anderson (eds.) (1989),
Rereading Russell: Essays on Bertrand Russell’s Metaphysics and Epistemology. Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume XII. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Dennett, D. (1971). Intentional systems. Journal of Philosophy 68: 87–106.
(1991a). Real patterns. Journal of Philosophy 88: 27–51.
(1991b). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little Brown.
(1993). Back from the drawing board. In B. Dahlbom (ed.), Dennett and his Critics,
pp. 203–35. Oxford: Blackwell.
(2000). With a little help from my friends. In D. Ross, A. Brook and D. Thompson
(eds.), Dennett’s Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment, pp. 327–88. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
(2005). Sweet Dreams. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(2006). Breaking the Spell. New York: Viking.
DePaul, M and Ramsey, W. (1998). Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and
its Role in Philosophical Inquiry. Oxford: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
Deutsch, D. (1997). The Fabric of Reality. London: Penguin.
(1999). Quantum theory of probability and decisions.Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London A455: 3129–37.
(2004). It from qubit. In J. Barrow, P. Davies, and C. Harper (eds.), Science and
Ultimate Reality, pp. 90–102. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dipert, R. R. (1997). The mathematical structure of the world: The world as graph.
Journal of Philosophy 94: 329–58.
Dirac, P. (1930). The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
DiSalle, R. (1994). On dynamics, indiscernibility, and spacetime ontology. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 45: 265–87.
Domski, M. (1999). The epistemological foundations of structural realism: Poincar ´ea n d
the structure of relations. Paper presented to the research workshop at the University
of Leeds.
Dorato, M. (1999). Cao on substantivalism and the development of 20th century ﬁeld
theories. Epistemologia 22: 151–66.
(2000). Substantivalism, relationism and structural spacetime realism. Foundations
of Physics 30/10: 1605–28.
Dowe, P. (1992). Wesley Salmon’s process theory of causality and the conserved quantity
theory. Philosophy of Science 59/2: 195–216.
Dowell, J. (2006). The Physical: Empirical, Not Metaphysical. Philosophical Studies 131:
25–60.

--- Page 331 ---

318 References
Dowker, F. (2003). Real time. New Scientist 180: 36–9.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal
of Human Evolution 20: 469–93.
Dupr´e, J. (1993). The Disorder of Things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
(1999). On the impossibility of a monistic account of species. In R. Wilson (ed.),
Species, pp. 3–22. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(2001). Human Nature and the Limits of Science. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
(2004). Review of Laporte, Natural Kinds and Conceptual Change. Notre Dame
Philosophical Reviews. http://ndpr.nd.edu/review.cfm?id=1439
Durlauf, S. (1997). Statistical mechanics approaches to socioeconomic behavior. In W.
Arthur, S. Durlauf and D. Lane (eds.), The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II,
pp. 81–104. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Duwell, A. (2003). Quantum information does not exist. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics 34: 479–99.
Earman, J. and Norton, J. (1987). What price space-time substantivalism? The hole story.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 38: 515–25.
Earman, J. and Roberts, J. (1999). Ceteris paribus , there is no problem of provisos.
Synthese 118: 439–78.
Eddington, A. (1928). The Nature of the Physical World. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
(1939). The Philosophy of Physical Science . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Elder, C. (2004). Real Natures and Familiar Objects. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ellis, B. (1985). What science aims to do. In P. M. Churchland and C. A. Hooker (eds.),
Images of Science, pp. 48–74. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Elster, J. (1989). Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
English, J. (1973). Underdetermination: Craig and Ramsey. The Journal of Philosophy
70: 453–62.
Esfeld, M. (2004). Quantum entanglement and a metaphysics of relations. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 35: 601–17.
Esfeld, M. and Lam, V. (forthcoming). Moderate structural realism about space-time.
Synthese
Feigl, H. (1950). Existential hypotheses: Realistic versus phenomenalistic interpretations.
Philosophy of Science 17: 35–62.
Feyerabend, P. (1962). Explanation, reduction and empiricism. In H. Feigl and G.
Maxwell (eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 3 , pp. 29–97.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Field, H. (forthcoming). Causation in a physical world. In M. Loux and D. Zimmerman
(eds.), Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fine, A. (1984a). The natural ontological attitude. In J. Leplin (ed.), Scientiﬁc Realism ,
pp. 83–107. Berkeley: University of California Press.
(1984b). And not anti-realism either. Noˆus 18: 51–65.
(1986). The Shaky Game. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- Page 332 ---

References 319
(1987). Do correlations need to be explained? In J. Cushing and E. McMullin
(eds.), Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reﬂections on Bell’s Theorem, pp.
175–94. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Floridi, L. (2003). Informational realism. Computers and Philosophy 37: 7–12.
Fodor, J. (1974). Special sciences, or the disunity of science as a working hypothesis.
Synthese 28: 77–115.
(1991). You can fool some of the people all the time, everything else being equal:
Hedged laws and psychological explanation. Mind 100: 19–34.
(2004). Water’s water everywhere. London Review of Books 26/20, 21 October.
Forrest, P. (1994). Why most of us should be scientiﬁc realists: A reply to van Fraassen.
Monist 77: 47–70.
Forrest, S. (ed.) (1991). Emergent Computation.C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s .
French, S. (1989). Identity and individuality in classical and quantum physics.Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 67: 432–46.
(1995). The esperable uberty of quantum chromodynamics. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 26: 87–105.
(1997). Partiality, pursuit and practice. In M. L. Dalla Chiara, K. Doets, D.
Mundici and J. van Benthem (eds.), Structures and Norms in Science: Proceedings of the
10th International Congress on Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, pp. 35–52.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
(1998). On the withering away of physical objects. In E. Castellani (ed.),Interpreting
Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects in Modern Physics , pp. 93–113. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
(1999). Models and mathematics in physics: The role of group theory. In J.
Butterﬁeld and C. Pagonis (eds.), From Physics to Philosophy, pp. 187–207. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
(2000). The reasonable effectiveness of mathematics: Partial structures and the
application of group theory to physics. Synthese 125: 103–20.
and Kaminga, H. (eds.) (1993). Correspondence, Invariance and Heuristics: Essays
in Honour of Heinz Post, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 148 .
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
and Krause, D. (2006). Identity in Physics: A Historical, Philosophical and Formal
Analysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
and Ladyman, J. (1997). Superconductivity and structures: Revisiting the London
account. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 28: 363–93.
(1998). A semantic perspective on idealism in quantum mechanics. In N.
Shanks (ed.), Idealization IX: Idealization in Contemporary Physics: Poznan Studies in
the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, pp. 51–73. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
(1999). Reinﬂating the semantic approach. International Studies in the Philos-
ophy of Science 13: 103–21.
(2003a). Remodelling structural realism: Quantum physics and the meta-
physics of structure. Synthese 136: 31–56.
(2003b). Between platonism and phenomenalism: Reply to Cao. Synthese 136:
73–8.
and Redhead, M. (1988). Quantum physics and the identity of indiscernibles.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 39: 233–46.

--- Page 333 ---

320 References
Frieden, B. (1998). Physics from Fisher Information . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Friedman, Milton (1953). Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Friedman, Michael (1974). Explanation and scientiﬁc understanding. Journal of Philosophy
71: 5–19.
(1981). Theoretical explanation. In R. Healey (ed.), Reduction, Time and Reality:
Studies in the Philosophy of Natural Sciences , pp. 1–16. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
(1983). Foundations of Spacetime Theories: Relativistic Physics and Philosophy of
Science. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
(1992). Kant and the Exact Sciences. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
(1999a). Reconsidering Logical Positivism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1999b). Dynamics of Reason. Stanford: CSLI.
(2000). A Parting of the Ways.C h i c a g o :O p e nC o u r t .
Fuchs, C. and Peres, A. (2000). Quantum theory needs no interpretation. Physics Today
3: 70–1.
Garcia, J. and Koelling, R. A. (1966 [1972]). Relation of cue to consequence in
avoidance learning. Psychosomatic Science 4: 123–4. Reprinted in Seligman and Hager
(1972, 10–14).
Gasper, P. (1992). Reduction and instrumentalism in genetics. Philosophy of Science 594:
655–70.
Geach, P. (1972). Logic Matters. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gell-Mann, M. and Hartle, J. (1990). Quantum mechanics in the light of quantum
cosmology. In W. Zurek (ed.), Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, pp.
425–58. Boulder: Westview.
Gelman, R., Durgin, F., and Kaufman, L. (1995). Distinguishing between animates and
inanimates: Not by motion alone. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, and A. James Premack
(eds.), Causal Cognition, pp. 150–84. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ghemawat, P. (1997). Games Businesses Play. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ghiradi, G. C., Rimini, A., and Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic
and macroscopic systems. Physics Review D 34: 470–9.
Giere, R. (1985). Constructive realism. In P. M. Churchland and C. A. Hooker (eds.),
Images of Science, pp. 75–98. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Giere, R. (1988a). Laws, theories and generalizations. In A. Gr ¨unbaum and W. Salmon
(eds.), The Limits of Deductivism, pp. 37–46. Berkeley: University of California Press.
(1988b). Explaining Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Glimcher, P. (2003). Decisions, Uncertainty and the Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glymour, C. (1999). A Mind is a Terrible Thing to Waste. Critical Notice: Jaegwon
Kim, Mind in a Physical World. Philosophy of Science 66: 455–71.
G¨odel, K. (1949). A remark about the relationship between Relativity Theory and
idealistic philosophy. In A. Schilpp (ed.), Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist , pp.
557–62. La Salle: Open Court.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2001). Three kinds of adaptationism. In S. Orzack and E. Sober
(eds.), Adaptationism and Optimality, pp. 335–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

--- Page 334 ---

References 321
Gold, T. (1962). The arrow of time. American Journal of Physics 30: 403–10.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, Fiction and Forecast. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
(1978). Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E., Kushnir, T., and Danks, D. (2004).
A theory of causal learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological
Review 111/1: 1–31.
Gould, S. J. (1999). Rocks of Ages. New York: Ballantine.
Gower, B. (2000). Cassirer, Schlick and ‘structural’ realism: The philosophy of the exact
sciences in the background to early logical empiricism. British Journal for the History of
Philosophy 8: 71–106.
Greaves, H. (2004). Understanding Deutsch’s probability in a deterministic multiverse.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 35: 423–56.
Greenberg, O. W. and Messiah, A. M. L. (1964). Symmetrization postulate and its
experimental foundation. Physical Review 136B: 248–67.
Greene, B. (1999). The Elegant Universe. London: Jonathan Cape.
(2004). The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time and the Texture of Reality .L o n d o n :
Allen Lane.
Guhl, A. M. (1956). The social order of chickens. Scientiﬁc American 194: 42–6.
Hackerm¨uller, L., Hornberger, K., Brezger, B., Zeilinger, A., and Arndt, M. (2004).
Decoherence of matter waves by thermal emission of radiation. Nature 427: 711–14.
Hacking, I. (1985). Do we see through a microscope? In P. M. Churchland and C.
A. Hooker (eds.), Images of Science , pp. 132–52. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Hagar, A. (2005). A philosopher looks at quantum information theory. Philosophy of
Science 70: 752–75.
Hale, S. C. (1990). Elementarity and anti-matter in contemporary physics: Comments on
Michael Resnik’s ‘Between mathematics and physics’. PSA 1990, Vol. 2, pp. 379–83.
East Lansing: Philosophy of Science Association.
Halvorson, H. (2004). On information-theoretic characterizations of physical theories.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 35: 277–93.
Hanna. J. (2004). Contra Ladyman: What really is right with constructive empiricism.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 55: 767–77.
Hardin, C. L. and Rosenberg, A. (1982). In defence of convergent realism. Philosophy of
Science 49: 604–15.
Hardy, L. (2003). Probability theories in general and quantum theory in particular.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34: 381–93.
(2005). Why is nature described by quantum theory. In J. Barrow, P. Davies, and
C. Harper (eds.), Science and Ultimate Reality , pp. 45–71. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Harris, R. (2005). The Semantics of Science. London: Continuum.
Harte, V. (2002). Plato on Parts and Wholes: The Metaphysics of Structure.O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Hartle, J. (2004). General Relativity and quantum cosmology. http://www.arxiv.org/
abs/gr-qc/0403001
Hartmann, S. (2001). Effective ﬁeld theories, reductionism and scientiﬁc explanation.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 32: 267–304.

--- Page 335 ---

322 References
Haugeland, J. (1993). Pattern and being. In B. Dahlbom (ed.), Dennett and his Critics,
pp. 53–69. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hausman, D. (1998). Causal Asymmetries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hayes, P. (1979). The naïve physics manifesto. In D. Michie (ed.), Expert Systems in the
Micro-electronic Age, pp. 242–70. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Heil, J. (2003). From an Ontological Point of View. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heisenberg, W. (1962). Physics and Philosophy. New York: Harper and Row.
Hellman, G. (2001). Three varieties of mathematical structuralism. Philosophia Mathe-
matica 3: 184–211.
(2005). Structuralism. In S. Shapiro (ed.), The Oxford Handbook if Philosophy of
Mathematics and Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hellman, G. P. and Thompson, F. W. (1975). Physicalism: Ontology, determination,
and reduction. Journal of Philosophy 72: 551–64.
Hempel, C. (1950). Problems and changes in the empiricist criterion of meaning. Revue
Internationale de Philosophie 11: 41–63.
(1963). Implications of Carnap’s work for philosophy of science. In P. Schilpp
(ed.), The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap. LaSalle: Open Court.
(1965). Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science .
New York: Free Press.
(1988). Provisos: A problem concerning the inferential function of scientiﬁc laws. In
A. Gr¨unbaum and W. Salmon (eds.), The Limits of Deductivism, pp. 19–36. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Hempel, C. and Oppenheim, P. (1953). The logic of explanation. In H. Feigl and
M. Brodbeck (eds.), Readings in the Philosophy of Science , pp. 319–52. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Henderson, L. (2003). The Von Neumann entropy: A reply to Shenker. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science 54: 291–6.
Hesse, M. (1966). Models and Analogies in Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hochberg, H. (1994). Causal connections, universals and Russell’s hypothetico-scientiﬁc
realism. Monist 77: 71–92.
Hoefer, C. (1996). The metaphysics of space-time substantivalism. Journal of Philosophy
93: 5–27.
Hogarth, M. L. (1992). Does General Relativity allow an observer to view an eternity in
a ﬁnite time? Foundations of Physics Letters 5: 173–81.
(1994). Non-Turing computers and non-Turing computability. In D. Hull, M.
Forbens and R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, pp. 126–38. East Lansing: Philosophy
of Science Association.
(2001). Predictability, computability, and spacetime. PhD Dissertation, University of
Cambridge.
(2004). Deciding arithmetic using SAD computers. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 55/4: 681–91.
Hoover, K. (2001). Causality in Macroeconomics . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hopf, F. (1988). Entropy and evolution: Sorting through the confusion. In B. Weber, D.
Depew, and J. Smith (eds.), Entropy, Information and Evolution , pp. 263–74. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.

--- Page 336 ---

References 323
Horgan, T. (1982) Supervenience and Microphysics, Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 63:
29–43.
Horgan, T. and Potrc, M. (2000). Blobjectivism and indirect correspondence. Facta
Philosophica 2: 249–70.
(2002). Addressing questions for blobjectivism. Facta Philosophica 4: 311–22.
Howson, C. (2000). Hume’s Problem: Induction and the Justiﬁcation of Belief .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press.
Huggett, N. (1997). Identity, quantum mechanics and common sense. The Monist 80:
118–30.
(1999). Atomic metaphysics. Journal of Philosophy 96: 5–24.
Hull, D. (1976). Are species really individuals? Systematic Zoology 25: 174–91.
Hume, D. (1975 [1777]). Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning
the Principles of Morals, (3rd edn.), ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, rev. P. H. Nidditch. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
(1978 [1740]) A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Humphreys, P. (2004). Extending Ourselves. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
H¨uttemann, A. (2004). What’s Wrong with Microphysicalism? London: Routledge.
and Papineau, D. (2005) Physicalism decomposed. Analysis, 65: 33–9.
Jackson, F. (1986) What Mary didn’t know. Journal of Philosophy 83: 291–5.
(1998). From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defence of Conceptual Analysis.O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Jauch, J. M. (1968). Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Jaynes, E. (1957a). Information theory in statistical mechanics I. Physical Review 106:
620–30.
(1957b). Information theory in statistical mechanics II. Physical Review 108:
171–90.
Johnson, S. (2001). Emergence. London: Penguin.
Jones, R. (1991). Realism about what? Philosophy of Science 58: 185–202.
Jozsa, R. (1998). Quantum information and its properties. In H.-K. Lo, S. Popescu, and
T. Spiller (eds.), Introduction to Quantum Computation and Information , pp. 49–75.
Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Kant, I. (1933) Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. N. Kemp Smith. London: Macmillan.
Kantorovich, A. (2003). The priority of internal symmetries in particle physics. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34: 651–75.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe. London: Penguin.
Kelso, S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kemeny, J. C. and Oppenheim, P. (1956). On reduction. Philosophical Studies 7: 6–19.
Ker¨anen, J. (2001). The identity problem for realist structuralism. Philosophia Mathemat-
ica 3: 308–30.
Ketland, J. (2004). Empirical adequacy and ramsiﬁcation. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 55: 409–24.
Kim, J. (1993). Mind and Supervenience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1996). Philosophy of Mind.B o u l d e r :W e s t v i e wP r e s s .
(1998). Mind in a Physical World. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1999). Making sense of emergence. Philosophical Studies 95: 3–36.

--- Page 337 ---

324 References
Kim, J. (2005). Physicalism or Something near Enough. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Kincaid, H. (1990). Defending laws in the social sciences. Philosophy of the Social Sciences
20: 56–83.
(1996). Philosophical Foundations of the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
(1997). Individualism and the Unity of Science. Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littleﬁeld.
(2004). There are laws in the social sciences. In C. Hitchcock (ed.), Contemporary
Debates in Philosophy of Science, pp. 168–85. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kitcher, P. (1976). Explanation, conjunction and uniﬁcation. Journal of Philosophy 73:
207–12.
(1981). Explanatory uniﬁcation. Philosophy of Science 48: 507–31.
(1982). Abusing Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1984). 1953 and all that: A tale of two sciences. Philosophical Review 93: 335–73.
(1989). Explanatory uniﬁcation and the causal structure of the world. In P. Kitcher
and W. Salmon (eds.), Scientiﬁc Explanation , pp. 410–505. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
(1993). The Advancement of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Krause, D. (1992). On a quasi-set theory. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 33:
402–11.
Kripke, S. (1973). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
Kukla, A. (1993). Laudan, Leplin, empirical equivalence, and underdetermination.
Analysis 53: 1–7.
(1994). Non-empirical theoretical virtues and the argument from underdetermina-
tion. Erkenntnis 41: 157–70.
(1995). Scientiﬁc realism and theoretical uniﬁcation. Analysis 55: 230–8.
(1996a). Does every theory have empirically equivalent rivals? Erkenntnis 44:
137–66.
(1996b). Scientiﬁc realism, scientiﬁc practice and the natural ontological attitude.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 45: 955–75.
(1998). Studies in Scientiﬁc Realism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kydland, F and Prescott, E. (1982). Time to build and aggregate ﬂuctuations. Economet-
rica 50: 345–70.
Ladyman, J. (1998). What is structural realism? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
29: 409–24.
(1999). Review of A Novel Defense of Scientiﬁc Realism by J. Leplin. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 50: 181–8.
(2000). What’s really wrong with constructive empiricism? Van Fraassen and
the metaphysics of modality. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 51:
837–56.
(2002a), Science, metaphysics and structural realism. Philosophica 67: 57–76.
(2002b). Understanding Philosophy of Science. London: Routledge.

--- Page 338 ---

References 325
(2004). Modality and constructive empiricism: A reply to van Fraassen. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 55: 755–65.
(2005). Mathematical structuralism and the identity of indiscernibles. Analysis 65:
218–21.
(forthcoming a). The Epistemology of Constructi ve Empiricism. In B. Monton
(ed.), Van Fraassen’s Philosophy of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(forthcoming b). On the Identity and Diversity of Individuals. In The Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society.
, Douven, I., Horsten, L., and van Fraassen, B. C. (1997). In defence of van
Fraassen’s critique of abductive reasoning: A reply to Psillos. Philosophical Quarterly
47: 305–21.
, Presnell, S., Short, A., and Groisman, B. (2007). The relationship between logical
and thermodynamic reversibility. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous Things. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Landauer, R. (1961). Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process. IBM
Journal of Research and Development 5: 183–91.
Lange, M. (1993). Natural laws and the problem of provisos. Erkenntnis 38: 233–48.
(2002). Baseball, pessimistic inductions and the turnover fallacy. Analysis 62:
281–5.
Langton, R. (1998), Kantian Humility: Our Ignorance of Things in Themselves .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press.
and Lewis, D. (1998). Deﬁning ‘intrinsic’. In D. Lewis, Papers in Metaphysics and
Epistemology, pp. 116–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laporte, J. (2004). Natural Kinds and Conceptual Change. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press
Laudan, L. (1981). A confutation of convergent realism. Philosophy of Science 48: 19–49.
(1984). Discussion: Realism without the real. Philosophy of Science 51: 156–62.
and Leplin, J. (1991). Empirical equivalence and underdetermination. Journal of
Philosophy 88: 269–85.
(1993). Determination underdeterred. Analysis 53: 8–15.
Laurence, S. and Margolis, E. (2003). Concepts and conceptual analysis. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 67: 253–82.
Layzer, D. (1982). Quantum mechanics, thermodynamics and the strong cosmological
principle. In A. Shimony and H. Freshbach (eds.), Physics as Natural Philosophy , pp.
240–62. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1988). Growth of order in the universe. In B. Weber, D. Depew, and J. Smith
(eds.), Entropy, Information and Evolution, pp. 23–39. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1990). Cosmogenesis: The Growth of Order in the Universe .O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Leggett, A. (1995). Time’s arrow and the quantum measurement problem. In S. Savitt
(ed.), Time’s Arrow Today: Recent Physical and Philosophical Work on the Direction of
Time, pp. 97–106. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- Page 339 ---

326 References
Leitgeb, H. and Ladyman, J. (forthcoming). Criteria of identity and structuralist ontology.
Philosophica Mathematica.
Leplin, J. (1997). A Novel Defense of Scientiﬁc Realism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1970). How to deﬁne theoretical terms. Journal of Philosophy 67: 427–46.
(1983). Extrinsic properties. Philosophical Studies 44: 197–200.
(1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
(1991). Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
(1999). Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
(2004). How many lives has Schr ¨odinger’s Cat. Australasian Journal of Philosophy
82: 3–22.
(forthcoming). Ramseyan humility. In D. Braddon-Mitchell, R. Nola, and D. Lewis
(eds.), The Canberra Programme. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, P. (2001). Why the pessimistic induction is a fallacy. Synthese 129: 371–80.
Lipton, P. (1991). Inference to the Best Explanation. London: Routledge.
(2001). Is explanation a guide to inference? In G. Hon and S. Rackover (eds.),
Explanation: Theoretical Approaches, pp. 93–120. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Litt, A., Eliasmith, C., Kroon, F., Wei nstein, S., and Thagard, P. (forthcoming). Is the
brain a quantum computer? Cognitive Science.
Lockwood, M. (1989). Mind, Brain and the Quantum. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Loewer, B. (2001). From physics to physicalism. In C. Gillett and B. Loewer (eds.),
Physicalism and its Discontents, pp. 37–56. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Loux, M. and Zimmerman, D. (2003). The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press.
Lovtrup, S. (1983). Victims of ambition: Comments on the Wiley and Brooks approach
to evolution. Systematic Zoology 32: 90–6.
Lowe, E. J. (2002). AS u r v e yo fM e t a p h y s i c s. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(2003a). In defense of moderate-sized specimens of dry goods. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 67: 704–10.
(2003b). Individuation. In Loux and Zimmerman (2003, 75–95).
(2006). The Four-Category Ontology: A Metaphysical Foundation for Natural Science.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lucas, J. and Hodgson, P. (1990). Spacetime and Electromagnetism .O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Lyons, T. (2006). Scientiﬁc realism and the stratagema de divide et impera. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 57: 537–60.
Lyre, H. (2004). Holism and structuralism in U(1) gauge theory. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 35: 643–70.
MacBride, F. (2004). Introduction. The Philosophical Quarterly 54: 1–15.
(2005). Structuralism reconsidered. In S. Shapiro (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Logic and Mathematics, pp. 563–89. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McDowell, J. (1994). Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McMullin, E. (1984). The goals of natural science. Proceedings of the American Philosoph-
ical Association 58: 37–64.
(1985). Galilean idealization. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 16:
247–73.

--- Page 340 ---

References 327
(1990). Comment: Duhem’s middle way. Synthese 83: 421–30.
McLaughlin, B. and Bennett, K. (2005). Supervenience. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/supervenience
McLeish, C. (2005). Scientiﬁc realism bit by bit: Part I. Kitcher on reference. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science 36: 667–85.
(2006). Scientiﬁc realism bit by bit: Part II. Disjunctive partial reference. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science 37: 171–90.
Maddy, P. (1990). Realism in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Magnus, P. D. and Callender, C. (2004). Realist ennui and the base rate fallacy.Philosophy
of Science 71: 320–38.
Mainzer, K. (1996). Symmetries of Nature: A Handbook for Philosophy of Nature and
Science.B e r l i n :d eG r u y t e r .
M¨aki, U. (1992). Friedman and realism. In W. Samuels and J. Biddle (eds.), Research in
the History of Economic Thought and Methodology, Volume 10, pp. 171–95. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
Malament, D. (1996). In defense of dogma: Why there cannot be a relativistic quantum
mechanical theory of (localizable) particles. In R. Clifton (ed.),Perspectives on Quantum
Reality, pp. 1–10. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(2006). Classical General Relativity. In J. Butterﬁeld and J. Earman (eds.),Handbook
of the Philosophy of Physics. North Holland: Elsevier.
Margolis, E. and Laurence, S. (2003). Should we trust our intuitions? Deﬂationary
accounts of the analytic data. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 103/3: 299–323.
Markosian, N. (2000). What are Physical Objects? Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 61: 375–95.
(2005). Against ontological fundamentalism. Facta Philosophia 7: 69–84.
Marras, A. (2000). Critical notice of Kim’s Mind in a Physical World. Canadian Journal
of Philosophy 30: 137–60.
(2002). Kim on reduction. Erkenntnis, 57: 231–57.
(2005). Consciousness and reduction. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
56: 335–61.
Maudlin, T. (1990). Substances and spacetimes: What Aristotle would have said to
Einstein. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 21: 531–61.
(1994). Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity. Oxford: Blackwell.
(1998). Part and whole in quantum mechanics. In E. Castellani (ed.) (1998),
46–60.
(2002a). Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity,2 nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.
(2002b). Remarks on the passing of time. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 102:
237–52.
(2007). Non-local correlations in quantum theory: some ways the trick might
b ed o n e .I nQ .S m i t ha n dW .L .C r a i g( e d s . ) ,Einstein, Relativity, and Absolute
Simultaneity. London: Routledge.
Maxwell, G. (1962). The ontological status of theoretical entities. In H. Feigl and G.
Maxwell (eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 3 , pp. 3–14.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
(1970a). Structural realism and the meaning of theoretical terms. In S. Winokur
and M. Radner (eds.), Analyses of Theories and Methods of Physics and Psychology:

--- Page 341 ---

328 References
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 4 , pp. 181–92. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
(1970b). Theories, perception and structural realism. In R. Colodny (ed.), The
Nature and Function of Scientiﬁc Theories: University of Pittsburgh Series in the
Philosophy of Science, Volume 4, pp. 3–34. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
(1972). Scientiﬁc methodology and the causal theory of perception. In H. Feigl, H.
Sellars, and K. Lehrer (eds.), New Readings in Philosophical Analysis, pp. 148–77. New
York: Appleton-Century Crofts.
Melia, J. (1999). Holes, haecceitism and two conceptions of determinism. The British
Journal of Philosophy of Science 50: 639–64.
and Saatsi, J. (2006). Ramsiﬁcation and theoretical content. The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 57: 561–85.
Melnyk, A. (2003). A Physicalist Manifesto. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mermin, N. (1998). What is quantum mechanics trying to tell us? American Journal of
Physics 66: 753–67.
Merricks, T. (2001). Objects and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(2003a). Pr´ecis of Objects and Persons. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research67:
700–3.
(2003b). Replies. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 67: 727–44.
Meyering, T. (2000). Physicalism and downward causation in psychology and the special
sciences. Inquiry 43: 181–202.
Mill, J. S. (1974). A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Deductive, Being a Connected View
of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Scientiﬁc Investigation ,v o l .1 ,e d .J .M .
Robson; vol. VII, J. M. Robson (general ed.), The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Møller, A. P. (1994). Directional selection on directional asymmetry: Testes size and
secondary sexual characters in birds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London ,S e r i e s
B258: 147–51.
Montero, B. (2006). Physicalism in an Inﬁnitely Decomposable World, Erkenntnis 64:
177–91.
Monton, B. (forthcoming). Presentism and quantum gravity.
Monton, B. and van Fraassen, B. C. (2003). Constructive empiricism and modal
nominalism. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 54: 405–22.
Morgan, M., Morrison, M., Skinner, Q., Tulley, J., Daston, L., and Ross, D. (1999).
Models as Mediators. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Morganti, M. (2004). On the preferability of epistemic structural realism. Synthese 142:
81–107.
Morowitz, H. (1986). Entropy and nonsense: A review of Daniel R. Brooks and E. O.
Wiley. Evolution as Entropy, Biology and Philosophy 1: 473–6.
Morris, M. W., Nisbett, R. E., and Peng, K. (1995). Causal attribution across domains
and cultures. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, and A. James Premack (eds.), Causal
Cognition, pp. 577–612. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Muller, F. (2005). The deep black sea: Observability and modality aﬂoat. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 56: 61–99.
Mumford, S. (2004). Laws in Nature. Routledge Studies in Twentieth-Century Philosophy.
London: Routledge.

--- Page 342 ---

References 329
Musgrave, A. (1988). The ultimate argument for scientiﬁc realism. In R. Nola (ed.),
Relativism and Realism in Sciences, pp. 229–52. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Myrvold, W. (2002). On peaceful coexistence: Is the collapse postulate incompatible
with relativity? Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 33: 435–66.
Nagel, E. (1949). The meaning of reduction in the natural sciences. In R. C. Stouffer
(ed.), Science and Civilization, pp. 99–135. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
(1961). The Structure of Science. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World.
Nagel, J. (2000). The empiricist conception of experience. Philosophy 75: 345–76.
Needham, P. (2002). The discovery that water is H 2O. International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science 16: 205–26.
Newman, M. H. A. (1928). Mr Russell’s causal theory of perception. Mind 37: 137–48.
Ney, A. (forthcoming a). Physicalism as an attitude. Philosophical Studies.
(forthcoming b). Physicalism and our knowledge of intrinsic properties.Australasian
Journal of Philosophy.
Nickles, T. (1973), Two concepts of intertheoretic reduction. The Journal of Philosophy
70: 181–201.
Nielsen, M. and Chuang, I. (2000). Quantum Computation and Quantum Information .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nolan, D. (2004). Classes, worlds and hypergunk. The Monist 87: 3–21.
Norton, J. (2003). Causation as folk science. PhilSci archive. www.philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001214
Nottale, L. (1993). Fractal Space-Time and Microphysics. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Oppenheim, P. and Putnam, H. (1958). Unity of science as a working hypothesis. In
H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and G. Maxwell (eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, Volume II, pp. 3–36. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Orzack, S., and Sober, E. (eds.) (2001). Adaptationism and Optimality. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pais, A. (1991). Neils Bohr’s Times, in Physics, Philosophy, and Polity .O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Papineau, D. (1993). Philosophical Naturalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
(1996). Theory-dependent terms. Philosophy of Science 63: 1–20.
(2001). The rise of physicalism. In C. Gillet and B. Loewer, Physicalism and its
Discontents, pp. 3–37. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
and H ¨uttemann, A. (2005). Physicalism decomposed. Analysis 65: 33–9.
Parsons, C. (1990). The structuralist view of mathematical objects. Synthese 84: 303–46.
Paul, L. A. (2004). The context of essence. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 82: 170–84.
P e i r c e ,C .S .( 1 9 6 0 – 6 ) .Collected Papers, ed. C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Pennock, R. (2000).Tower of Babel: The Evidence against the New Creationism.C a m b r i d g e ,
MA: MIT Press.
Penrose, R. (2001). On gravity’s role in quantum state reduction. In C. Callender and N.
Huggett (eds.), Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale, pp. 290–304. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
(2004). The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe.L o n d o n :
Jonathan Cape.
Peres, A. (1990). Thermodynamic constraints on quantum axioms. In W. Zurek (ed.),
Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, pp. 345–56. Boulder: Westview.

--- Page 343 ---

330 References
Perry, J. (1970). The same ‘F’. Philosophical Review 79: 181–200.
Pettit, P. (1993). A deﬁnition of physicalism. Analysis 53: 213–23.
Pierce, J. (1980). An Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols, Signals and Noise. 2nd,
rev. edn. New York: Dover.
Pietroski, P. and Rey, G. (1995). When other things aren’t equal: Saving ceteris paribus
laws from vacuity. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 46: 81–110.
Poincar´e, H. (1898). On the foundations of geometry. The Monist 9: 1–43.
(1905 [1952]). Science and Hypothesis.N e wY o r k :D o v e r .
(1906 [1914] [1958]). The Value of Science . Trans. G. B. Halsted, 1914. Repr.
1958. New York: Dover.
Poland, J. (1994). Physicalism: The Philosophical Foundations. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ponce, V. (2003). Rethinking Natural Kinds. Doctoral dissertation, Duke University.
Pooley, O. (2006). Points, particles and structural realism. In D. Rickles, S. French and
J. Saatsi (eds.) pp. 83–120.
Post, H. R. (1971 [1993]). Correspondence, invariance and heuristics. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science 2: 213–55. Reprinted in S. French and H. Kamminga
(eds.), Correspondence, Invariance and Heuristics: Essays in Honour of Heinz Post, Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science , vol. 148, pp. 1–44. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Press. 1993.
Poundstone, W. (1985). The Recursive Universe. New York: Morrow.
Prigogine, I (1980). From Being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in Physical Science .
San Francisco: Freeman.
Psillos, S. (1994). A philosophical study of the transition from the caloric theory of heat
to thermodynamics: Resisting the pessimistic meta-induction. Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Science 25: 159–90.
(1995). Is structural realism the best of both worlds? Dialectica 49: 15–46.
(1996). On van Fraassen’s critique of abductive reasoning. Philosophical Quarterly
46: 31–47.
(1997). How not to defend constructive empiricism: A rejoinder. Philosophical
Quarterly 47: 369–72.
(1999). Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks Truth . London: Routledge.
(2000). Carnap, the Ramsey-sentence and realistic empiricism. Erkenntnis 52:
253–79.
(2001). Is structural realism possible? Philosophy of Science 68 (supplementary
volume): S13–S24.
(forthcoming). The structure, the whole structure and nothing but the structure?
In Philosophy of Science: Supplementary Volume.
Putnam, H. (1962). What theories are not. In H. Putnam, Mathematics, Matter and
Method: Philosophical Papers Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1967). Time and physical geometry. Journal of Philosophy 64: 240–7.
(1975). Mathematics, Matter and Method . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
(1975a). Philosophy and our mental life. In H. Putnam Mind, Language, and
Reality, pp. 291–303. New York: Cambridge University Press.
(1975b). Mind, Language and Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- Page 344 ---

References 331
(1995). Pragmatism. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 95: 291–306.
Quine, W. V. (1951). Two dogmas of empiricism.The Philosophical Review, 60/1: 20–43.
(1953 [1966]). Mr. Strawson on logical theory. Mind, 62/248: 433–51. Repr. in
The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays. New York: Random House. 1966.
(1953). From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
(1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1969). Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia University
Press.
(1974). The Roots of Reference. La Salle: Open Court.
(1976 [1981]). Grades of discriminability. Journal of Philosophy 73: 113–16.
Reprinted in Theories and Things, 1981, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
(1978). A postscript on metaphor. Critical Inquiry 5: 161–2.
Ramsey, F. P. (1929). Theories. In R. B. Braithwaite (ed.),The Foundations of Mathematics
and Other Logical Essays, pp. 212–36. Paterson, NJ: Littleﬁeld and Adams.
Rea, M. (2002). World without Design: The Ontological Consequences of Naturalism.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reck, E. and Price, M. (2000). Structures and structuralism in contemporary philosophy
of mathematics. Synthese 125: 341–87.
Redhead, M. L. G. (1980). Models in physics. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
31: 145–63.
(1987). Incompleteness, Nonlocality and Realism: A Prolegomenon to the Philosophy of
Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
(1990). Explanation. In D. Knowles (ed.), Explanation and its Limits, pp. 135–54.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1995). From Physics to Metaphysics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1999). Quantum ﬁeld theory and the philosopher. In T. Cao (ed.), Conceptual
Foundations of Quantum Field Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(2004). Asymptotic reasoning. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
35: 527–30.
Reichenbach, H. (1956). The Direction of Time. Berkeley: University of California Press.
(1957). The Philosophy of Space and Time.N e wY o r k :D o v e r .
Resnik, M. (1997). Mathematics as a Science of Patterns . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
(1990) Between mathematics and physics. PSA 1990, Vol. 2 , pp. 369–78. East
Lansing: Philosophy of Science Association.
Rickles, D. (2005). A new spin on the hole argument. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics 36: 415–34.
, French, S., and Saatsi, J. (eds.) (2006). Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity.
Oxford: Oxford University Press
R i c k l e s ,D . ,F r e n c h ,S . ,a n dS a a t s i ,J .( f o r t h c o m i n g ) .The Structural Foundations of
Quantum Gravity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rorty, R. (1993). Holism, intrinsicality and the ambition of transcendence. In B.
Dahllbom (ed.), Dennett and His Critics, pp. 184–202. Oxford: Blackwell.
Rosen, G. (1984). What is constructive empiricism? Philosophical Studies 74: 143–78.
Rosenberg, A. (1992). Economics: Mathematical Politics or Science of Diminishing Returns?
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- Page 345 ---

332 References
Rosenberg, A. (1994). Instrumental Biology or the Disunity of Science. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Ross, D. (2000). Rainforest realism: A Dennettian theory of existence. In D. Ross, A.
Brook, and D. Thompson (eds.), Dennett’s Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment, pp.
147–68. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(2004). Metalinguistic signalling for coordination amongst social animals. Language
Sciences 26: 621–42.
(2005). Economic Theory and Cognitive Science: Microexplanation. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
(forthcoming a). The economic and evolutionary basis of selves. Journal of
Cognitive Systems Research.
(forthcoming b). H. sapiens as ecologically special: what does language contribute?
Language Sciences.
and Spurrett, D. (2004). What to say to a skeptical metaphysician: A defense manual
for cognitive and behavioral scientists. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27/5: 603–27.
Rovelli, C. (1997). Relational quantum mechanics. International Journal of Theoretical
Physics 35: 1637–78.
(2004). Quantum Gravity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rowlands, M. (1999). The Body in Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russell, B. (1903).The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1913 [1917]). On the notion of cause. In B. Russell, Mysticism and Logic , pp.
173–99. London: Unwin.
(1925). ABC of Relativity. London: Allen and Unwin.
(1927). The Analysis of Matter. London: Routledge Kegan Paul.
(1948). Human Knowledge. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Ruttkamp, E. (2002).A Model-Theoretic Realist Interpretation of Science.Dordrecht: Kluw-
er.
Ryckman, T. (2005). The Reign of Relativity: Philosophy in Physics 1915–1925 .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press.
Saatsi, J. (2005). Reconsidering the Fresnel-Maxwell theory shift: how the realist can have
her cake and EAT it too. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 36: 509–38.
Salmon, W. (1984).Scientiﬁc Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World.P r i n c e t o n :
Princeton University Press.
(1989). Four decades of scientiﬁc explanation. In P. Kitcher and W. C. Salmon
(eds.), Scientiﬁc Explanation: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 13,
pp. 3–219. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
(1990). Scientiﬁc explanation: Causation and uniﬁcation. Critica Revista His-
panoamericana de Filosoﬁa 22: 3–21.
Saunders, S. (1993a). To what physics corresponds. In S. French and H. Kamminga
(eds.), Correspondence, Invariance and Heuristics: Essays in Honour of Heinz Post, Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol 148, pp. 295–325. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(1993b). Decoherence, relative states and evolutionary adaptation. Foundations of
Physics 23: 1553–85.
(1995). Time, decoherence and quantum mechanics. Synthese 102: 235–66.
(2003a). Indiscernibles, general covariance, and other symmetries. In A. Ashtekar,
D. Howard, J. Renn, S. Sarkar and A. Shimony, eds., Revisiting the Foundations of
Relativistic Physics: Festschrift in Honour of John Stachel.D o r d r e c h t :K l u w e r .

--- Page 346 ---

References 333
(2003b). Physics and Leibniz’s principles. In K. Brading and E. Castellani, eds.,
Symmetries in Physics: Philosophical Reﬂections, pp. 289–307. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
(2003c). Structural realism again. Synthese 136: 127–33.
(2003d). Critical notice: Cao’s ‘The Conceptual Development of 20th Century
Field Theories’. Synthese 136: 79–105.
(2006). Are quantum particles objects? Analysis 66: 52–63.
Savitt, S. (ed.) (1995). Time’s Arrow Today: Recent Physical and Philosophical Work on the
Direction of Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scerri, E. R. and McIntyre, L. (1997). The case for the philosophy of chemistry. Synthese
111: 213–32.
Schaffer, J. (2003). Is there a fundamental level? Noˆus 37: 498–517.
Schr¨odinger, E. (1935–6). Discussion of probability relations between separated systems.
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 31 (1935): 555–63; 32 (1936):
446–51.
(1944). What is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Seife, C. (2006). Decoding the Universe. New York: Viking.
Sellars, W. (1962). Philosophy and the Scientiﬁc Image of Man. In R. Colodny (ed.),
Frontiers of Science and Philosophy , pp. 35–78. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press.
Shalizi, C. (2004). Functionalism, emergence, and collective coordinates: A statistical
physics perspective on ‘What to say to a sceptical metaphysician’. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 27: 635–6.
and Moore, C. (2003). What is a macrostate? Subjective observations and
objective dynamics. Philsci Archive, Univers ity of Pittsburgh. http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001119/
Shannon, C. and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Shapiro, S. (1997). Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology .O x f o r d :O x f o r d
University Press.
Shenker, O. (1999). Is -kTr( {rho} ln {rho}) the entropy in quantum mechanics? British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 50: 33–48.
Shoemaker, S. (1980). Causality and properties. In P. van Inwagen (ed.), Time and Cause,
pp. 109–36. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Sider, T. (1993). Van Inwagen and the possibility of gunk. Analysis 53: 285–9.
(2001). Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1971). Beyond Freedom and Dignity. New York: Knopf.
Sklar, L. (1967) Types of inter-theoretic reduction. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 18/2: 109–24.
(1974). Space, Time and Spacetime. Berkeley: University of California Press.
(1993). Physics and Chance: Philosophical Issues in the Foundations of Statistical
Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smart, J. (1963). Philosophy and Scientiﬁc Realism . London: Routledge.
(1989). Our Place in the Universe: A Metaphysical Discussion .O x f o r d :B a s i l
Blackwell.

--- Page 347 ---

334 References
Smolin, L. (1997). T h eL i f eo ft h eC o s m o s .Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(2000). Three Roads to Quantum Gravity. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Smolin, L. (2006). The case for background independence. In D. Rickles, S. French, and
J. Saatsi, Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity , pp. 196–239. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sober, E. (2001). Venetian sea levels, British bread prices, and the principle of the
common cause. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 52: 331–46.
Sorkin, R. (1995). A specimen of theory construction from quantum gravity. In J. Leplin
(ed.), The Creation of Ideas in Physics, pp. 167–79. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sorrell, T. (1991). Scientism. London: Routledge.
Spelke, E. S., Phillips, A., and Woodward, A. L. (1995). Infants’ knowledge of object
motion and human action. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, and A. James Premack (eds.),
Causal Cognition, pp. 44–78. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spurrett, D. and Papineau, D. (1999). A note on the completeness of ‘physics’. Analysis
59/1: 25–9.
Stachel, J. (2002). ‘The relations between things’ versus ‘the things between relations’:
The deeper meaning of the hole argument. In D. Malament (ed.), Reading Natural
Philosophy: Essays in the History and Philosophy of Science and Mathematics , 231–66.
Chicago and LaSalle, IL: Open Court.
(2006). Structure, individuality and quantum gravity. In D. Rickles, S. French,
and J. Saatsi (eds.), Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity , pp. 53–82. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Stamp, P. (1995). Time, decoherence and ‘reversible’ measurements. In S. Savitt (ed.),
Time’s Arrow Today: Recent Physical and Philosophical Work on the Direction of Time ,
pp. 107–54. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stanford, P. K. (2000). An antirealist explanation of the success of science. Philosophy of
Science 67: 266–84.
(2003). Pyrrhic victories for scientiﬁc realism. Journal of Philosophy 11: 551–72.
Stapp, H. (1987). Quantum nonlocality and the description of nature. In J. Cushing and
E. McMullin (eds.), Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reﬂections on Bell’s
Theorem, pp. 154–74. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Stein, H. (1968). On Einstein-Minkowski space-time. Journal of Philosophy 65: 5–23.
(1989). Yes, but, … Some skeptical remarks on realism and antirealism. Dialectica
43: 47–65.
(1991). On relativity and openness of the future. Philosophy of Science 58: 147–67.
Stent, G. (1971). An ode to objectivity: Does God play dice? Atlantic, November: 128.
Strawson, P. (1959). Individuals. London: Methuen.
Suppe, F. (1977). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
(1989). Scientiﬁc Realism and Semantic Conceptions of Theories . Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
(1961). A comparison of the meaning and use of models in mathematics and the
empirical sciences. In P. Suppes, Studies in the Methodology and Foundations of Science
pp. 10–23. Dordrecht: Reidel.
(1962). Models of data. In E. Nagel, P. Suppes and A. Tarksy (eds.), Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science , pp. 252–61. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

--- Page 348 ---

References 335
(1969). Studies in the methodology and Foundations of Science. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Swoyer, C. (1983). Realism and Explanation. Philosophical Inquiry 5: 14–28.
Teller, P. (1989). Relativity, relational holism, and the Bell inequalities. In J. T. Cushing
and E. McMullin (eds.), Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reﬂections on
Bell’s Theorem, pp. 208–21. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
(1990). Prolegomenon to a proper interpretation of quantum ﬁeld theory.Philosophy
of Science 57: 594–618.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual Revolutions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Thornhill, R. and Gangestad, S. W. (1999). The scent of symmetry: A human sex
pheromone that signals ﬁtness? Evolution and Human Behavior 20: 175–201.
Timpson, C. (2004). Quantum Information Theory and the Foundations of Quantum
Mechanics. Unpublished doctoral thesis.
(2006). The grammar of teleportation. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 57: 587–621.
and Brown, H. (forthcoming). Relativit y and entanglement. In R. Lupacchini and
V. Fano (eds.), Understanding Physical Knowledge (Preprint no. 24, Department of
Philosophy, University of Bologna, CLUEB, 2002).
Tooley, M. (1997). Time, Tense and Causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The
conjunction fallacy in probability judgement. Psychological Review 90: 293–315.
Twardy, C. R. and Bingham, G. P. (2002). Causation, causal perception, and conservation
laws. Perception & Psychophysics 64/6: 956–68.
Tymoczko, T. (1991). Mathematics, science and ontology. Synthese 88: 201–28.
Unger, P. (2001). Why there are no people. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 4:
177–222.
Vaidman, L. (1994). On the paradoxical aspects of new quantum experiments. In D.
Hull, M. Forbes, and R. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, volume 1, pp. 211–17. East Lansing:
Philosophy of Science Association.
Valentini, A. (2002). Signal locality and subquantum information in deterministic hidden
variable theories. In J. Butterﬁeld and T. Placek (eds.), Non-locality and Modality,v o l .
64 of Nato Science Series: II, pp. 81–103. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
van Brakel, J. (1986). The chemistry of substances and the philosophy of mass terms.
Synthese 69: 291–324.
van der Waerden, B. L. (ed.) (1968). Sources of Quantum Mechanics .N e wY o r k :
Dover.
van Dyck, M. (forthcoming). Constructive e mpiricism and the argument from underde-
termination. In B. Monton (ed.), Van Fraassen’s Philosophy of Science, Mind Occasional
Series. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1977). The only necessity is verbal necessity. Journal of Philosophy
74: 71–85.
(1978). Essence and existence. In N. Rescher (ed.), Studies in Ontology, pp. 1–25.
Oxford: Blackwell.
(1979). Russell’s philosophical account of probability. In G. W. Roberts (ed.),
Bertrand Russell Memorial Volume. London: George Allen and Unwin.
(1980). The Scientiﬁc Image . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- Page 349 ---

336 References
van Fraassen, B. C. (1981). Essences and the laws of nature. In R. Healey (ed.), Reduction,
Time and Reality: Studies in the Philosophy of the Natural Sciences , pp. 189–200.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1985). Empiricism and the philosophy of science. In P. Churchland and C. Hooker
(eds.), Images of Science, pp. 245–308. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
(1989). Laws and Symmetry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(1991). Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
(1994). Against transcendental empiricism. In T. J. Stapleton (ed.), The Question of
Hermeneutics, pp. 309–35. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(1995). Against naturalised epistemology. In P. Leonardi and M. Santambro-
gio (eds.), On Quine: New Essays , pp. 68–88. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
(1997). Sola experimentia? Feyerabend’s refutation of classical empiricism. Philoso-
phy of Science 64 Supplementary Volume: 385–95.
(1997). Structure and perspective: Philosophical perplexity and paradox. In M. L.
Dalla Chiara, K. Doets, D. Mundici, and J. van Benthem (eds.), Logic and Scientiﬁc
Methods, pp. 511–30. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(2002). The Empirical Stance. New Haven: Yale University Press.
(2006). Structure: Its shadow and substance. The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 57: 275–307.
(2008). Scientiﬁc Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
van Inwagen, P. (1990). Material Beings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
von Foerster, H. (1960 [2003]). On self-organising systems and their environments.
Reprinted in Understanding Understanding, pp. 1–19. New York: Springer-Verlag.
(1981). Observing Systems: Selected Papers of Heinz von Foerster .S e a s i d e ,C A :
Intersystems.
Vorbeij, G. (2005). Nature: An Economic History. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Votsis, I. (forthcoming). The upward path to structural realism. Philosophy of Science
supplementary volume.
Wald, R. M. (2004). Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime and Blackhole Thermo-
dynamics. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Wallace, D. (2000). The quantization of gravity: An introduction. Unpublished
manuscript. Available at http://www.arXiv:gr-qc/0004005 v1.
(2001). Implications of quantum theory in the foundations of statistical mechanics.
Unpublished manuscript. Available at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu
(2002). Worlds in the Everett interpretation. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics 33: 637–61.
(2003a). Everett and structure. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
34: 87–105.
(2003b). Everettian rationality: Defending Deutsch’s approach to probability
in the Everett interpretation. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34:
415–39.
(2004). Protecting cognitive science from quantum theory. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 27: 636–7.

--- Page 350 ---

References 337
(2006). In Defence of Naivet ´e: The Conceptual Status of Lagrangian Quantum
Field Theory. Synthese 151: 33–80.
(2006). Epistemology quantised: Circumstances in which we should come to
believe in the Everett interpretation. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 57: 655–89.
Walter, S. and Heckmann, H.-D. (eds.) (2003). Physicalism and Mental Causation.
Bowling Green: Academic Imprint.
Weatherson, B. (2003). What Good are Counterexamples? Philosophical Studies 115:
1–31.
Weyl, H. (1931, 1950). The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics ( t r a n s .H .P .
Robertson). New York: Dover.
Wheeler, J. A. (1990). Information, physics, quantum: the search for links. In W. Zurek
(ed.), Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, pp. 3–28. Boulder: Westview.
Wheeler, Q. and Meier, R. (eds.) (2000). Species Concepts and Phylogenetic Theory. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Whiten, A. and Byrne, R. W. (1997). Machiavellian Intelligence II: Extensions and
Evaluations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wicken, J. (1983). Entropy, information, and nonequilibrium evolution. Systematic
Zoology 32: 438–43.
(1988). Thermodynamics, evolution and emergence: ingredients for a new synthesis.
In B. Weber, D. Depew, and J. Smith (eds.), Entropy, Information and Evolution, pp.
139–69. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiley, E. O. (1981). Phylogenetics: The Theory and Practice of Phylogenetic Systematics.
New York: Wiley.
and Brooks, D. R. (1983). Nonequilibrium thermodynamics and evolution: A
response to Lovtrup. Systematic Zoology 32: 209–19.
Wilson, J. (2005). Supervenience-based formulations of physicalism. Noˆus 39: 426–59.
(2006). On characterizing the physical. Philosophical Studies 131: 61–99.
Wilson, R. (ed.) (1999). Species. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wolpert, L. (1992).The Unnatural Nature of Science.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Worrall, J. (1984). An unreal image: Review article of van Fraassen. British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 35: 65–79.
(1989). Structural realism: The best of both worlds? Dialectica 43: 99–124.
(1994). How to remain (reasonably) optimistic: Scientiﬁc realism and the ‘luminif-
erous ether’. In D. Hull, M. Forbes, and R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, Volume 1 ,
pp. 334–42. East Lansing: Philosophy of Science Association.
(1996). Structural realism: The best of both worlds? In D. Papineau (ed.), The Phi-
losophy of Science, pp. 139–65. Oxford: Oxford University Press (originally published
in Dialectica 43 (1989): 99–124).
Worrall, J. and Zahar, E. (2001). Ramsiﬁcation and structural realism. Appendix in
E. Zahar, Poincar´e’s Philosophy: From Conventionalism to Phenomenology, pp. 236–51.
Chicago, IL: Open Court Publishing Co.
Yi, S. W. (2003). Reduction of thermodynamics. Philosophy of Science 70: 1028–38.
Zahar, E. (1994). Poincar´e’s structural realism and his logic of discovery. In G. Heinzmann
et al. (eds.), Henri Poincar´e, pp. 43–68. Nancy: Akten Des Internationale Kongresses.

--- Page 351 ---

338 References
Zeh, H. (1990). Quantum measurements and entropy. In W. Zurek (ed.), Complexity,
Entropy and the Physics of Information, pp. 405–20. Boulder: Westview.
Zeilinger, A. (2004). Why the quantum? ‘It’ from ‘bit’? A participatory universe? Three
far-reaching challenges from John Archibald Wheeler and their relation to experiment.
In J. Barrow, P. Davies, and C. Harper (eds.), Science and Ultimate Reality: Quantum
Theory, Cosmology and Computation, pp. 201–20. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Zurek, W. (1990b). Algorithmic information content, Church-Turing thesis, physical
entropy, and Maxwell’s demon. In W. Zurek (ed.), Complexity, Entropy and the Physics
of Information, pp. 73–89. Boulder: Westview.
(ed.) (1990a). Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information.Boulder: Westview.

--- Page 352 ---

Index
abstract/concrete distinction 159 – 60, 186
Addleson, M. 7
Ainslie, G. 45
Albert, D. 166, 177 n. 80, 194 n. 5
Anaxagoras 20
Aristotle 3, 61, 65, 86, 148, 251
Armstrong, D. 4 n. 1, 255, 268, 271
bundle theory 144
metaphysical naturalism 23 – 4
atomism 20, 234
mereological 17–22, 50, 54–5, 178 n. 83,
261
Auyang, S. 140 n. 20, 146 n. 30, 158
background independence 169–70
Baillargeon, R. 267
Bain, J. 82–3, 94, 132 n. 1, 145 n. 27
Baldwin, J. M. 266 n. 9
Barbour’s relationism 171
Barwise, J. 224, 307 n.
Batterman, R. W. 49, 95 n. 23 193, 204–5,
237–8,
emergence 264–5
universality classes 204, 290
Belot, G. 143, 164 n. 63, 170, 204 n.
B e a l e r ,G . 1 7n .1 9
Benacerraf, P. 138
Bennett, C. 220
Bennett, K. 41
Bennett, M. 147 n. 34
Bergson, H. 260
Berkeley, G. 227
Bickle, J. 48, 49, 197
biology 21, 214–15, 216–17
biological thermodynamics 217 – 18
spec i es 222–3
Bishop, M. 92
Blackburn, S. 76
Black, M. 137
Block universe 172–3, 175–80, 215, 216,
219–20
information transfer 211–12
Bohm, D.
pilot wave theory 136 n., 165, 173, 181,
185 n. 93
Bohr, N. 43, 90, 95, 173–4
Bookstein, F. 217 n.
Born, M. 146 n. 30, 147, 151 n. 40
Born rule 175–6, 182
Bontly, T. 192, 197
boson 135 n. 13, 136, 145
Boyd, R. N. 69, 70, 73, 88
Boyle, R. 11, 20, 48
Braithwaite, R. B. 75, 156 n. 52
Brittan, G. G. 48, 49 n. 47
B roa d, C . D . 42–3, 56
de Broglie, L. V. 261, 275
Brooks, D. R. 217, 250 n. 65
Brown, J. 237
Bueno, O. 97 n., 116, 117 n. 42
Burch, M. 217
Butterﬁeld, J. 9 n. 9, 143, 149, 171 n. 76
Byrne, R. W. 2
Callender, C. 74, 85 n. 14
caloric 84, 88–93
Carnap, R. 8, 29, 75, 123, 125
deﬁnition of theoretical terms 107 n. 36,
111, 113–14
Cartwright, N. 5, 6, 44, 56, 71, 76, 226 n. 45,
238, 262, 283
auxiliary assumptions 115
ontological plurality 118 n. 44, 260–1
Cassirer, E. 123, 132, 140, 145, 147
causation 1, 15, 16, 31 n., 38–9, 160
causal asymmetry 163, 274, 277 see also
time, temporal asymmetry
causal capacities 56
causal process theories 263, 265–6, 273,
277–8, 280 see also Salmon
downward 45, 57
ef ﬁc i en t 3–4 see also containment metaphor
eliminativism 4, 259, 258–66, 275
essentialism 156 n. 50
folk c on c ept 266–80
functional interdependence 22, 262
and information 210–11
in science 22, 44, 269–74
a n d st ru c t u ra l rea li sm 158–9, 191–4
cellular automata 201 – 2
Chaitin, G. 183, 213, 214
Chakravartty, A. 90 n. 18, 154
Chuang, I. 183
cladistics 223 n.
Clark A. 2, 209 n. 19
Cleland, C. 150 n. 39
cohesion 240–57, 294–7
Collier, J. 211, 215, 216–18, 263 n. 6
bound information 186, 227
cohesion 240, 246–7

--- Page 353 ---

340 Index
common sense realism 106 see also
metaphysics, intuitions and common
sense
complexity 197–8, 214–15, 223
composition relation 11
in economic models 21
in the physical sciences 21
computation 214, 216–18 see also complexity;
compressibility; projectibility
physical limitations 208 – 10
compressibility 202–7, 213–15, 220–1, 250
n. 64, 251
constructive empiricism 95 – 111 see also van
Fraassen, B.
critcism of 97, 101–11, 306–7
m oda li t y 107–11
containment metaphor 3–4, 269 n. 12 see also
metaphysics, habitual
microbangings 4, 23
spacetime substantivilism 142
Conway, J. 201
Cosmides, L. 268
Couvalis, S. G. 107 n. 34
Crook, S. 39 n. 37
Dahlbom, B. 228 n. 28
Darwin, C. 28, 73, 78–9, 203
Davidson D. 22, 49, 51
Mental Events 41
Davies, P. 221
Dawid, R. 175 n.
dem a rc a t i on 7, 27–8, 32–4 see also (PNC)
principle of naturalistic closure; positivism
anthropocentric investigations 36 – 7
institutional factors 33 – 8
Democritus 20
Demopoulos, W. 113 n., 126, 127 n. 52
Dennett, D. 64 n., 225, 231, 232, 242, 254,
256, 272, 298–300
dynamic patterns 200 – 2
information 210, 213 n. 24
instrumentalism 199, 233
intuitions in metaphysics 14 – 15
notional worlds 244–6, 247–9, 252, 300
real patterns 36, 196–210, 218, 220–38
DePaul, M. 10 n. 10
derivatives, ﬁnancial 92 n.
Descartes, R. 10, 11, 20
determinism 142, 173
Deutsch, D. 176
Dipert, R. R. 138 n., 148
Dirac, P. 146
discernibility 134
of quantum particles 153
relative 137
strong 137
weak 137, 152
distinguishability see discernibility
disunity hypotheses 190–6
domestication 149 n. 36, 189
and causation 3, 265
G od 29–30
of scientiﬁc discoveries 1–6, 17, 24, 29–30,
52
Domski, M. 123, 155 n. 47
D ora t o, M. 144–5
Dowe, P. 263 n. 6
Dowell, J. 39 n. 37
Dretske, F. 307, 309
D u n b a r ,R .I .M . 5 0
Dupr´e, J. 7 n. 4, 40, 44, 196 n., 223, 226 n.
45, 292
ontological plurality 5–6, 71, 194–5
Durlauf, S. 250 n. 65
dynamic patterns 200 – 2
Earman, J. 142–3, 170, 256–7, 281–8
Eddington, A. 132, 145, 156 n. 52, 252–3,
274
Einstein, A. 28, 77, 90, 141, 151 n. 40, 153,
261
Elder, C. 23
Elster, J. 271
emergentism 20, 45, 56, 192–3, 204,
215, 264–5 see also scale relativity
of ontology
entropy 165–7, 212–13, 214, 216–17,
219–20
(ESR) epistemic structural realism 124 – 9,
130–1, 144 n. 26, 158
Esfeld, M. 67 n. 1, 132 n. 1, 145 n. 27, 150 n.
39, 152–4, 188 n. 101
ether 84, 85, 88–93
extrinsic properties 134 n. 11, 135, 148
Faraday, M. 42
Feigl, H. 114
Feyerabend, P. 47, 48, 93
fermions 135 n. 13, 136, 145
Field, H. 262 n.
Fine, A. 75, 187, 200, 253
Floridi, L. 121 n. 45, 190–1, 203
Fodor, J. 9 n. 8, 22, 49, 50, 51, 281, 284
formal mode of discourse 119, 120
Forrest, S. 45
Frege, G. 100
French, S. 9, 44, 67, 116, 135, 97 n.
semantic approach and isomorphism 117
ontic structural realism 94 n. 21, 131
identity of particles 132
Fresnel, A.
w a v e opt i c s 76–7, 88–9, 93

--- Page 354 ---

Index 341
Friedman, M. 27, 126, 198, 261, 293, 305
a rgu m en t for rea li sm 71–2
fundamentalism 178 see also reductionism;
metaphysics, levels
Galilean transformations 95
G a m e t heory 222–3
Garcia, J. 267
Gassendi, P. 11, 20
Geach, P. 17
Gell-Mann, M. 219, 225
Gelman, R. 267
(GR) General Relativity 11, 57, 76–7, 141–5
equivalence principle 167
general covariance 141 – 4
stress-energy tensor 141, 283
time 164
geometry 155
Giere, R. 67, 99, 111, 284
semantic approach 117–18
Gillett, C. 39 n. 37
Glimcher, P. 53
Glymour, C. 14 n. 14, 18 n. 22, 22 n. 27, 265
n.
G¨odel, K. 163 n. 60, 235
Godfrey-Smith, P. 203
Goodman, N. 70 n. 4, 80, 194
Gopnik, A. 267, 268
Gould, S. J. 28 n.
Gower, B. 123, 132, 157
graph theory 138 n., 148
gravitational entropy 166
Greene, B. 277
group theory 145–7
Hacking, I 69 n. 3
haecceity 134, 136 n., 142–3, 175 see also
discernibility
Hanson, R. 70 n. 4
Hardin, C. L. 85
Harris, R. 7 n. 4
Hartle, J. 173, 178 n. 82, 219, 220 n., 225
Haugeland, J. 199
Hayes, P. 14, 269
Hegel, G. 62
Heidegger, M. 5
Heil, J. 54 n.
Heisenberg, W. 90, 146, 165
Hellman, G. 38, 39, 161 n. 56
Helmholtz, H. 42
Hempel, C. 8, 32, 39 n. 37, 46 n., 284–5, 291
Henderson, L. 213 n. 23
hermeneutic economics 7
Hilbert, D. 100
Hoefer, C. 143
Hogarth, M. L. 235
Holbach, P. D. 62
hole problem 142–3, 170
Hooker, C. 218
Hoover, K. 203
Hopf, F. 217–18
Horgan, T. 40, 253–4
Howson, C. 74, 79
Hull, D. 296
Hu m e, D . 8, 26–7, 304–5, 310
c a u sa t i on 262–3, 266–7
Humean supervenience 19–22, 54,
148–51, 175
veriﬁcationism 64
Humphreys P. 209 n. 20, 300, 308
H¨uttemann, A. 24, 25, 41, 55–7, 203
identity 131, 132–40
(PII) identity of indiscernibles 135 – 8,
151–3
synchronic identity 135 n. 14
individualism 191–2, 196
intelligent design theory 7
i dea li sm 194–5
impenetrability 134
indexical redundancy 295 – 7
indispensible terms 86–9 also see scientiﬁc
realism
indistinguishability postulate 133 see also
identity
individuality 132–40, 242–5 see also
discernibility
induction 255
inductive libertarianism 103 – 11
(IBE) inference to the best explanation 17 n.
18, 102
defense of realism 69, 75, 98
information 220–1
bound information 186, 227
and causation 210–11
(ITSR) Information-Theoretic Structural
Realism 238–57, 279–80
i n form a t i on t heory 183–9, 210–20see also
quantum information theory
information transfer see block universe
informational connection see
veriﬁcationism
instrumentalism 196–210
intrinsic properties 130–7, 148–51, 152 n. 44
irreversible processes
thermodynamic 214–15, 217
isomorphism
between models and structures 117
underdetermination 100
Jackson, F. 16, 19, 39 n. 38, 40, 127 n. 53,
154

--- Page 355 ---

342 Index
Johnson, S. 3, 3 n. 3, 197
Jones, R. 82
Joule, J. P. 42
Kahneman, D. 268
Kant, E. 266, 299–300, 305
Kantorovich, A. 147
Kauffman, S.
complexity theory 45
Kelso, S. 201
K e m e n y ,J .C . 4 6
Ketland, J. 127 n. 52
Kim, J. 39 n. 37, 40, 51, 197, 252, 258, 268,
272
causal exclusion 191–4, 265
emergentism 199, 204
Mind in a Physical World 18
reductionism 19, 26, 261
Kincaid, H. 191, 200 n. 10, 261
causation 270–2, 275, 277, 279
spec i a l sc i en c es 256–7, 281–3, 285–9
Kitcher, P. 7 n. 5, 11, 27, 46, 71 n., 86, 87,
90, 265, 274, 291
explanatory argument patterns 30–2, 261,
270, 273, 279, 293
Koelling, R. A. 267
Krause, D. 10 n., 139 n.
Kripke, S. 91
Naming and Necessity 9, 9 n. 8
Kuhn, T. 9, 47, 70 n. 4
Kuhn-losses 157
Kukla, A. 72, 81 n.
Kydland, F. 92 n.
Ladyman, J. 44, 77 n, 99, 116, 125, 138 n.
(PII) identity of indiscernibles 151
Landauer’s Principle 189 n. 102, 208 n. 18
ontic structural realism 67, 131–2
semantic approach and isomorphism 117
Lakoff, G. 3
Landauer, R. 218
Landauer’s Principle 189 n. 102, 208 n. 18,
214 n. 26
Lange, P. 85 n. 14, 281, 284
Laplace, P. S. 62
Laporte, J. 291–2, 295, 296
Laudan, L. 75, 81 n., 84, 85, 86, 87
laws (in physics and the special
sc i en c es) 281–90
Layzer, D. 214 n. 27, 215, 217–18
Leggett, A. 165 n. 64, 219 n.
Leibniz, G. W. 20, 141 n. 22, 148
equivalence 143
identity of indiscernibles 134
Leitgeb, H. 138 n., 161 n. 56
(PII) identity of indiscernibles 151
Leplin, J. 77, 78, 81 n., 86
Lewis, D. 9, 13 n. 19, 41, 62, 134 n. 11, 142,
153, 154, 188 n.100
cost–beneﬁt analysis 12
gunk 13 n. 12
Humean supervenience 19, 54, 148–51
internal/external relations 20, 149–51
Lewis, P. 85 n. 14
Lipton, P. 6, 74, 99 n.
Litt, A. 208 n. 17
locators 121–2, 158, 221–3, 239, 244, 295
Locke, J. 20, 101–2, 241
primary qualities 11
Lockwood, M. 177 n. 80
Lowe, J. 22, 151 n. 41, 139 n., 151 n. 41,
against naturalized metaphysics 6, 7,
13–14, 15–16,
Loewer, B. 39 n. 37, 177 n. 80, 194 n. 5
logical depth 218–20, 231–2, 240
logical empiricism 63
fa ll of 7–8, 290–1
logical positivism 8–9 see also logical
empiricism
demarcation problem 7
and veriﬁcationism 8, 27, 30, 63
Loux, M. 12
Lovtrup, S. 217 n.
Lyre, H. 94, 128, 132 n. 1, 140, 147, 154
Lyell, C. 78, 203
Magnus, P. D. 74, 79, 85 n. 14
Malebranche, N. 227 n. 47
M¨aki U. 198
many minds theory 177 n. 80 also see quantum
mechanics, Everett interpretation
Markosian, N. 17, 18, 39 n. 37, 178
Marras, A. 18 n. 21, 48, 49, 192, 197
material mode of discourse 119, 120
materialism 60, 62
Maudlin, T. 142, 151 n. 40, 153, 162 n. 58,
165, 188
Maxwell, J. C.
Maxwell’s Demon 217
electrodynamics 85, 88–9, 90 n. 18, 91,
93–4
Maxwell, G. 125–8
McIntyre, L. 43 n. 42
McLaughlin, B. 41 n. 41
Melnyk, A. 39, 55 n. 53, 197 n. 8, 266 n. 10,
304, 305, 306, 310
core-sense reductionism 52–3, 233
realization physicalism 41–2
Merricks, T. 5, 15, 22–3, 252, 253
meta-induction
t heory c ha n ge 83–93
metaphysics

--- Page 356 ---

Index 343
and contemporary science 2
ha bi t u a l 2–5
individuation 11, 13–14, 44, 132–40
intuitions and common sense 10–15, 132,
247–9, 252–4, 260, 268
levels 53–7, 178–80, 193, 197, 229 see also
scale relativity of ontology
matter 3, 20–3
methodology 60–2 see also ap r i o r i
metaphysics
n a t u ra li st i c 1–7, 23–4, 53, 59–60
failure to follow 17, 22
as philosophy of science 24
neo-scholastic 7–27, 61, 194, 196
a priori 15–17, 57
pseudo-scientiﬁc 17–27
realism 290–7, 305
relations 148–54
revival of 9–10
uniﬁcation of 6, 16, 45, 65, 234–8, 260–1,
272
value of 27, 58–60
mere patterns 231
Merm i n , D . 187–8
metric essentialism 142
Michelson Morley experiment 85
microgovernance 55–6, 203
Mill, J. S. 43, 255, 261, 266
modality 132, 130, 153, 186–8
Møller, A. P. 50
Montero, B. 39 n. 37
Monton, B. 99, 107 n. 33, 111, 173 n.
Moore, C. 203
Morowitz, H. 217 n.
Morris, M. W. 10, 268
Minkowski metric 141
Muller, F. 107 n. 33
Muller, S. 240
Mustgrave, A. 76
Myrvold, W. 165 n. 65
Nagel, E. 46–53, 111
bridge laws 49–50
Nagelian reductions 47 – 53
Nagel, J. 98 n. 30
n a t u ra l k i n ds 294–7
naturalism 5–7, 9, 44, 62, 288
c on st ra i n t s on m et a physi c s 30–5, 300–2,
303–10
and the primacy of physics 40–2
pseudo-naturalist philosophy 7, 27
Needham, P. 191
N e w m a n ,M .H .A .
cardinality objection 126, 127 n. 52, 128,
147 n. 33
Newton, I. 25, 42, 49, 59
Ney, A. 18, 39 n. 37, 41 n. 40, 127 n. 53
Nickles, T. 48, 49 n. 47
Nielsen, M. 183
Nolan, D. 20 n., 33 n.
nominalism 159–61
no-miracles argument 69–76, 84–5, 298
circularity 75
Norton, J. 94, 142, 143, 191, 265, 269 n. 11,
272, 274, 276, 277, 278 n.
Nottale, L. 204
observability 107–11
Ontological Physicalism see physicalism
(OSR) ontic structural realism 67, 151 – 4,
251–2
objec t i on s 154–9
ontological implications 228 – 9
and philosophy of physics 130–89
q u a n t u m m ec ha n i c s 175–80
open set 155
Oppenheim, P. 50, 197, 207, 237
physicalism 40, 41, 46, 47, 49
Orzack, S. 249
Pais, A. 43
Papineau, D. 38, 39, 41, 44, 56, 75, 156
particularism 148–9
Past Hypothesis 166
Paul, L. A. 13, 21 n. 25
Peirce, C. S. 27, 28, 29, 63, 255
modality 129
Penrose, R. 166, 171 n. 73, 173
Peres, A. 184, 212–13, 214, 216, 227
Perry, J. 248
perspective 220–1, 224–6, 308
Pettit, P. 40, 41
philosophy of mind 15, 18
physicalism
naturalist defence 40
objec t i on s t o 39–40
part–whole 41
physics 275–9, 281–90
Big-Bang 29 – 30
classical 134
ideal gas laws 48
information theory 210–20
naïve see also metaphysics, intuitions and
common sense
obsolete 19–20, 44
special status of 42
uniﬁcation of 42
Pietroski, P. 281
Plato 10, 61, 152
Platonism 236 –7
Poincar´e, H. 93, 100, 123–4, 125, 155
Poisson bracket 95 n. 24

--- Page 357 ---

344 Index
Ponce, V. 191
Pooley, O. 141 n. 24, 143–4, 161 n. 57
P ot rc , M. 253–4
Poundstone, W. 201
positivism 7–10, 26–32
neo-positivism 303–10
pragmatism 27–8
Prescott, E 92 n.
(PPC) Primacy of Physics Constraint 38 – 45,
191–2, 275
arguments for 43
formulation of 44
(PNC) principle of naturalistic closure 27–38,
39, 66, 90, 121
constraints on metaphysics 190–6, 301
stipulations of 37
projectibility 220–1, 223, 227–32, 236
Psillos, S. 67 n., 68 n., 69, 75, 76, 86–91
caloric theory 91
‘upward path’ to structural realism 125 n.
psychology 208–10
Putnam, H. 163 n. 60, 241
against anti-realism 70
dem a rc a t i on 27–8
metaphysical realism 290–1
no-miracles argument 69
reference relations 9, 91, 92–3
unity of science 40, 41, 45–53, 197, 207,
237
quantum gravity 167–75, 219
causal set theory 170–1
causal triangulation 171
loop quantum gravity 170
problem of time 167–70
quantum mechanics 9, 95, 145
arrow of time 165, 219
Bell’s theorem 26, 73, 149 n. 36, 175,
186–8
collapse of the wave function 165, 175–80,
181–3, 218–19
decoherence theory 176–8, 219 n.
entanglement 19, 25–6, 41 n. 40, 57, 73,
135–7, 149–51, 175, 183–8, 196,
204
Everett interpretation 131–2, 165, 173,
175–80, 181–3, 194–5, 219
preferred basis problem 176
hidden variables 165, 213
individuality 132 – 40
locality 26
measurement problem 26, 53, 177, 180–3,
200
ontic structural realism 175 – 80
permutation of particles 132–6
pilot wave model see Bohm, D.
quantum ﬁeld theory 138–40, 171
Fock space 158
Schr¨odinger time evolution 180–1
singlet state 137, 149–51, 187–8
superposition 180–3, 203–4
quantum information theory 183 – 9
( C B H) C li ft on–B u b–Ha lv orson
t heorem 184–5
quantum logic 236 n.
Quine, W. V. 29, 62, 207, 234, 237, 255, 310
destruction of positivism 8
naturalization of epistemology 2, 305
(RR) Rainforest Realism 220–38, 251–2, 256
causation 279–80
veriﬁcationism 230–4
Ramsey, F. P. 157
Ramsey sentence 123, 125–8
Ramsey sentence 125–7
R ea , M. 301–2
real patterns 118–22, 177–9, 218, 220–38
compressibility 220–1, 226
Dennett, D. 196–210
n a t u ra l k i n ds 290–7
pattern-reality 36, 226–9, 233, 236 see also
projectibility
Redhead, M. 90 n. 19, 131–2, 139, 144 n.
26, 154, 186, 191, 204 n.
causation in physics 211, 264, 274, 276,
277, 283, 289
identity of particles 132, 134 n. 10
reductionism 19, 26, 196–210
core-sense reductionism 52–3, 233
micro-reduction 46 – 54
multiple realization argument 49 – 51
Nagelian reductions 47 – 53
thermodynamics to statistical mechanics 48
type reductionism 49–54
and the unity of science 45 – 53
referen c e 85–8, 92, 290–2
relationalism 141–5
representation 242–5
Resnik, M. 159–60, 161 n. 56
Rey, G. 281
Reichenbach, H. 26, 111, 163, 211, 219, 263
illata and abstracta 178, 207–8, 228
(PCC) principle of common cause 72 – 3,
163
Rickles, D. 170, 175
Roberts, J. 256–7, 281–8
Rorty, R. 198, 200 n. 10
Rosenberg, A. 85, 198
Ross, D. 2, 6, 8 n. 6, 8 n. 7, 31, 53, 200, 203,
207, 228 n. 48, 239, 249, 265
causal glue 262 – 3
individualism 191, 192, 197

--- Page 358 ---

Index 345
pattern reality 226–7, 231, 233 see also
Rainforest Realism
Rowlands M. 209 n. 19
Rovelli, C. 172, 188 n. 99
Russell, B. 8, 22, 24, 26, 27, 100, 123, 127,
137–8
causal theory of perception 125–6, 132 n. 2
eliminativism on causation 44 n., 191, 211,
258–66
Rutherford, E. 43
Ruttkamp, E. 118 n. 44
Saatsi, J. 90 n. 18, 127 n. 52
Salmon, W. 71 n., 211, 273, 274, 291
causal process theory 263, 265–6, 273,
277–8, 280
Santa Fe Institute 56, 211–12, 216, 237
Saunders, S. 94, 131, 158 n. 54, 159, 188,
200, 220 n., 228 n. 28
Everettian physics 175–80, 182
(PII) principle of identity of
indiscernibles 137–8, 151–3
scale relativity of ontology 193–6, 199–204,
234, 237–8, 252
S c e r r i ,E .R . 4 3n .4 2
S c ha f fer, J. 54–7, 178
Schlick, M. 123
Schr¨odinger, E. 19, 132, 146, 211
time evolution 180–1, 213
science
epistemic reliability 37
error-ﬁlter 58
intuition 15 – 16 see also metaphysics,
intuitions and common sense
non-actual 18–19, 24–5
scientiﬁc progress 63
semantic approach 111–18, 159
syn t a c t i c v i ew 111–18
unanswerable questions in 29 – 30
scientism 303
defen se of 1–65
scientiﬁc realism 67–83, 95–6
n ov el predi c t i on 76–9
theory conjunction 70 – 1
Second Law of Thermodynamics 165–7,
211–18, 250, 252
Seife, C. 213 n. 24
self-organizing systems 214–15, 217
Seligman, J. 224, 307 n.
Sellars, W. 1
semantic approach to scientiﬁc
theories 111–18, 159
sense datum 8, 29
Shalizi, C. 203
Shannon, C. 220
Shannon entropy 183, 213, 214, 216–17
Shenker, O. 213 n. 23
Sider, T. 13, 16
Skinner, Q. 12
Sklar, L. 49 n. 47, 141 n. 23, 142 n., 164 n.
61, 212 n.
Smart, J. 52 n., 69
Smolin, L. 133 n. 5, 166–73, 275–7
string theory 168–9
Sober, E. 228, 249
Sorrell, T. 9
(SR) Special Relativity 9, 17, 94 – 5
Lorentz transformations 94
time 163–4, 175
violation of the action– reaction
principle 141
special sciences 190–6, 238–57, 298–300
deﬁnition of 195
laws 256–7, 281–90, 285–9
Spelke, E. S. 11, 267
Spurrett, D. 8 n. 6, 18 n. 21, 39 n. 37, 44 n.
43, 192, 197, 265
causal glue 262 – 3
Stachel, J. 132 n. 1, 140 n. 21, 143, 151–4,
170 n., 175, 228 n. 28
Stamp, P. 165 n. 64, 219 n.
Stein, H. 124, 143, 147, 163 n. 60
Stent, G. 264 n.
Strawson, P. 9, 229
string theory 167, 168
M-theory 169
structural empiricism 95–100
structuralism see also OSR; ESR; ITSR
mathematical 159 – 61
physical 159–61
structural realism 67, 92–129, 122–9, 148
continuity of structure 93 – 4
Suarez, F. 117 n. 43, 134 n. 9
substantivilism 141–5
supervenience 38, 41–2, 54–5
Humean 19, 54, 148–51, 175
Suppe, F. 114–17
S w o y e r ,C . 1 7n .1 8
symmetry 145–7
syntactic view of scientiﬁc theories 111 – 18
Teller, P. 99 n., 132 n. 4, 139, 148, 149
tensed universe 172, 215, 219–20
Thagard, P. 27, 32, 46
Thales 3
Thompson, F. W. 38–9
t heory c ha n ge 83–93 also see meta-induction
thermodynamics
arrow of time 166, 212–13
biological thermodynamics 217 – 18
irreversibility 214–15, 217 see also
Landauer’s Principle

--- Page 359 ---

346 Index
thermodynamics ( cont.)
reduction to statistical mechanics 48
Second Law of Thermodynamics 165–7,
211–18, 250, 252
thermodynamic depth 218–20, 240
t i m e 162–7, 172–3
problem of time 167–70 see also quantum
gravity
temporal asymmetry 165, 212–213, 219,
268, 274, 277 see also causal asymmetry
thermodynamic arrow 166, 212–13
Timpson, C. 165, 183 n. 87, 184 n. 91, 185
Tooley, M. 17 n. 20, 33, 35
transcendent individuality 134, 135
transduction 225–7, 307
Tversky, A. 268
Underdetermination 79–83, 100
strong form 81
w ea k form 79–80
universals 152
Valentini, A. 185 n. 93
Van Brakel, J. 21 n. 26
van Dyck, M. 82 n.
van Fraassen, B. 10, 81–2, 116, 123, 124 n.,
157–8, 253, 306
against no-miracles argument 72 – 4
constructive empiricism 95–107, 198, 227
Darwinian explanation of predictive
success 79
empirically surplus factors 136
naturalism and metaphysics 58–65, 304–5
observability 107–11
scientiﬁc realism 67–74, 95–6
van Inwagen, P. 19, 20, 22, 253
veriﬁcationism 61, 112, 130–1, 303–4
Hume 64
informational connection 307 – 10
logical positivism 8, 27, 30, 63
(PNC) principle of naturalistic
closure 29–38
(RR) Rainforest Realism 230–4
Vienna Circle 26
von Neumann, J. 146, 183, 213, 216–17
Vorbeij, G. 239
Votsis, I. 67 n., 125 n.
Wallace, D. 25 n., 167 n., 174 n., 199, 203,
228 n. 28, 253
Everett interpretation 131, 175–9, 181 n.,
182
Ward, J. 260
Weaver, W. 213, 214, 216–17, 220
Weyl, H. 100, 132, 145–6, 147 n. 34, 151 n.
42
Wheeler, J. A. 186, 188 n. 100, 212, 227
Wheeler–DeWitt equation 170, 219
Whiten, A. 2
Wicken, J. 214–15, 216–18
Wiley, E. O. 217, 240, 250 n. 65
Witten, E. 169 n. 70
Wittgenstein, L. 9
Wolpert, L. 11, 12
Worrall, J. 76, 77, 89, 123, 124
structural realism 67, 93–129
Zahar, E. 123, 124, 125 n., 127 n. 52, 128
Z eh, H. 218–19
Zimmerman, D. 12
Zurek, W. 211, 227
physical entropy 213–17
