=== PAGE 1 ===




=== PAGE 2 ===

Explaining the Brain


=== PAGE 3 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 4 ===

Explaining the Brain
Mechanisms and the Mosaic Unity
of Neuroscience
Carl F. Craver
CLARENDON PRESS · OXFORD


=== PAGE 5 ===

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thail and Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Craver 2007
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2007
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Craver, Carl F.
Explaining the brain : mechanisms and the mosaic unity of neuroscience / Carl F. Craver.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN– 13: 978– 0– 19– 929931– 7 (alk. paper)
ISBN– 10: 0– 19– 929931– 5 (alk. paper)
1. Neurosciences—Philosophy. 2. Brain—Philosophy. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Neurosciences. 2.P h i l o s o p h y .W L100 C898e 2007]
QP356.C73 2007
612.8—dc 22 2006103230
Typeset by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
Biddles Ltd., King’s Lynn, Norfolk
ISBN 978–0–19–9299317
1 0987654321


=== PAGE 6 ===

For Pamela


=== PAGE 7 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 8 ===

Preface
There are neurophilosophers, and there are philosophers of neuroscience.
Neurophilosophers use ﬁndings from neuroscience to address traditional
philosophical puzzles about the mind. Philosophers of neuroscience study
neuroscience to address philosophical puzzles about the nature of science.
Philosophers of neuroscience are interested in neuroscience because it has
distinctive goals, methods, techniques, and theoretical commitments. In
this book, I propose a uniﬁed framework for the philosophy of neu-
roscience. Because neuroscience is like other special sciences in many
respects, this framework contains lessons for the philosophy of science
generally.
I develop this framework by addressing the following question: what is
required of an adequate explanation in neuroscience? Debates frequently
arise among neuroscientists and philosophers about whether a proposed
explanation for a given phenomenon is, in fact, the correct explanation.
Does Long-Term Potentiation (LTP) explain episodic memory? Do size
differences in hypothalamic nuclei explain differences in sexual preference?
Does the deposition of beta-amyloid plaques in the hippocampus explain
memory deﬁcits in Alzheimer’s disease? Do 40 Hz oscillations in the
cortex explain feature-binding in phenomenal consciousness? While the
answers to these questions depend in part on speciﬁc details about these
diverse phenomena, they also depend on widely accepted though largely
implicit standards for determining when explanations succeed and when
they fail. My goal is to make those standards explicit and, more importantly,
to show that they derive from a systematic and widespread view about
what explanations are, namely, that explanations in neuroscience describe
mechanisms.
My project is both descriptive and normative. My descriptive goal is
to characterize the mechanistic explanations in contemporary neuroscience
and the standards by which neuroscientists evaluate them. This cannot
be accomplished without attention to the details of actual neuroscience. I
illustrate my descriptive claims with case studies from the recent history
of neuroscience. For neuroscientists, I present enough detail to make the


=== PAGE 9 ===

viii preface
philosophical views concrete. For philosophers, I limit myself to the details
required to demonstrate that the view corresponds to real neuroscience.
This descriptive goal helps to keep the philosophical discussion targeted on
issues relevant to the neuroscientists building the explanations.
The goal of searching for mechanistic explanations is now woven through
the fabric of neuroscience: it is taught through examples in classrooms and
textbooks; it is propagated in introductions, discussion sections, and book
chapters; and it is enforced through peer review, promotion, funding, and
professional honors. To understand contemporary neuroscience, one has
to understand this form of explanation. A second reason to pursue this
descriptive project is that questions often arise about the adequacy of widely
accepted strategies of explanation in neuroscience (see, for example, Uttal
2001; Bennett and Hacker 2003). We can address the question of whether
the norms of neuroscience are justiﬁed only when we have an idea of what
the norms are and of how they can be defended.
The descriptive project, in other words, is the ﬁrst step in a normative
project: to clarify the distinction between good explanations and bad. As
the body of neuroscience research continues to expand, it is worth pausing
periodically to reﬂect on the goals of explanation and on the standards by
which explanations should be evaluated. Similarly, as neurophilosophers
learn more about neuroscience and seek to apply neuroscientiﬁc explana-
tions to philosophical problems, they also need to learn to reﬂect critically
on the standards for evaluating the explanations that they adopt. Here the
philosopher of neuroscience can help. They can use the long tradition
of philosophical literature about the nature of scientiﬁc explanation (see,
e.g., Salmon 1989) to reveal crucial features of explanation in neuroscience
speciﬁcally, and they can use neuroscience to reveal previously unrecog-
nized features of explanation across the sciences (or at least the special
sciences) generally.
The relation between the descriptive and normative projects is complex,
however. One cannot simply read off the norms of explanation in neuro-
science from a description of what neuroscientists actually do when they
form and evaluate explanations. Neuroscientists sometimes make mistakes.
They sometimes disagree about whether a proposed explanation is adequate
and even about what it would take to show that it is adequate. Explanatory
standards change over time, and it is possible that the standards endorsed


=== PAGE 10 ===

preface ix
now might some day be rejected as inadequate. What role, then, can
descriptions of explanations play in the search for norms of explanation?
First, even if scientists often disagree about particular explanations, there
are nonetheless clear-cut and uncontroversial examples of successful and
failed explanations. Almost everyone (among scientists and philosophers)
can agree that action potentials are explained by ionic ﬂuxes, that some forms
of neurotransmitter release are explained by calcium concentrations in the
axon terminal, and that protein sequences are explained, in part, by DNA
sequences. And almost everyone (scientists and philosophers) can agree
that memory is not explained by the vibration of vital ﬂuids through the
cerebral ventricles, that the shape of a person’s skull does not explain their
artistic talents, and that memory loss does not explain the deposition of beta
amyloid in the cortex. Philosophical analyses of explanation should deliver
the correct verdicts on these clear and uncontroversial examples unless there
is compelling reason to suspect that the judgments of science are wrong.
It is open to deny my verdict on these standard examples and to abandon
widely accepted scientiﬁc ideas about what does and does not count as an
explanation, but only at the risk of stretching the term ‘‘explanation’’ so
far that it no longer looks at all like the scientiﬁc phenomenon that we are
trying to characterize in the ﬁrst place. Of course, people disagree about
problem cases, but disagreement need not prevent one from using the
agreed-upon examples as touchstones in formalizing an adequate account
of explanation. The controversial cases can then be decided according to
the account that best accommodates the central and uncontroversial cases.
I argue (in Chapter 2) that many of the standard accounts of explanation in
the philosophy of science fail to accommodate even the central and widely
held examples of successful and failed explanation in science. In contrast,
my account accommodates them directly.
Second, in neuroscience, and in other sciences as well, explanations
are not developed merely for the explainer’s intellectual satisfaction?—the
ineffable ‘‘a ha’’ feeling that comes with understanding something. Such
emotions and feelings are terrible indicators of how well someone under-
stands something (see Keil and Wilson 2000; Trout 2002). Explanations
in neuroscience are frequently developed with an eye to possibilities for
manipulating the brain. The widespread goal of ﬁnding mechanistic expla-
nations in neuroscience is a consequence of the fact that the discovery


=== PAGE 11 ===

x preface
mechanisms provides scientists with new tools to diagnose diseases, to cor-
rect bodily malfunctions, to design pharmaceutical interventions, to revise
psychiatric treatments, and to engineer strains of organisms. One way to
justify the norms that I discuss is by assessing the extent to which those
norms produce explanations that are potentially useful for intervention
and control. While this is not the only touchstone that one might use,
it is nonetheless one, and it is objective. This aspect of my account is
introduced through my view of causation in Chapter 3 and my view of
interlevel relevance in Chapter 4.
Third, although norms of explanation should not be identiﬁed with
historical regularities in scientiﬁc practice, analysis of the history of neuro-
science provides a rich source of compiled hindsight about which kinds of
explanatory projects work and which do not (Darden 1987). The science
has collectively, if implicitly, thought about the nature of, and standards
for, explanation. One goal of the book is to make these norms explicit.
This involves not merely reporting what neuroscientists do, but looking at
what they do for clues of the norms of explanation they endorse. Those
clues can be found in exemplars of successful and unsuccessful explanation.
They can be found in the kinds of arguments that neuroscientists use to
argue for and against particular explanations. They can be found in the
experimental practices that neuroscientists use to evaluate explanations.
They can be found in scientists’ historical reﬂections on what they were
trying to do and how they failed. Occasionally they can be found in
scientists’ explicit statements about the goals and standards of neuroscience.
There is now a large set of exemplars of successes and failures that students
of neuroscience must learn: the Hodgkin and Huxley model, the neuron
doctrine, Broca’s localization of the language faculty, Gall’s organology,
McConnell’s purported demonstration of cannibalistic learning in planaria,
and Eccles’s electrical models of synaptic transmission. The philosopher
of neuroscience must learn them too because they embody the collective
wisdom in neuroscience about what constitutes an acceptable explanation.
Paradigmatically successful explanations reveal features of successful expla-
nations, and paradigmatic failures of explanation reveal the norms by which
bad explanations are rejected.
Finally, I intend this book to be part of the process of formulating
explanatory norms for neuroscience. It is an entry to a conversation rather
than its end. I present my view of these norms of explanation, I systematize


=== PAGE 12 ===

preface xi
them, and I show that they are justiﬁed. This opens the door to a more
precise debate about what the norms of explanation in neuroscience ought
to be and about the limits of mechanistic explanation. In the ﬁnal analysis,
even if it is false to state that all explanations must describe mechanisms,
many of them do. This book can be read as an instrumental guide to
discovering and evaluating mechanistic explanations.
This book is primarily for neuroscientists, philosophers of science,
philosophers of mind, and students of these subjects. There are inher-
ent difﬁculties in writing to address such different audiences, but this is
a difﬁculty that any adequate philosophy of neuroscience must face. The
philosophy of neuroscience lies at the intersection of the philosophy of sci-
ence, neuroscience, and the philosophy of mind. It will show its worth only
to the extent that it recognizes the distinctive concerns of these three ﬁelds
and to the extent that it constructs the bridges required to connect them.
My neuroscience adviser once said of philosophy that he could not
see how anyone could think without data. This view of philosophy
is widespread among neuroscientists. I conjecture that this is in part
because neuroscientists have mostly encountered philosophers of mind and
metaphysicians. In many cases, these philosophers come to neuroscience
with a set of concerns and a technical vocabulary that is out of touch with
the way that neuroscientists think about their own work. Many metaphys-
ical projects are fascinating, but the most interesting metaphysical disputes
are often irrelevant to building explanations in neuroscience. One goal
of this book is to convince neuroscientists and neurophilosophers that the
philosophy of science can contribute meaningfully to how they think about
the goals of their work and about the strategies for reaching those goals.
A philosophy of neuroscience constructed by reference to the goals and
strategies of contemporary neuroscience can create a bridge between the
way that neuroscientists think about science and the way that philosophers
think about causation, explanation, and levels. This point of agreement
can then be the starting place for evaluating how, and if, neuroscien-
tists and neurophilosophers can explain what they hope to explain with
the tools that the explanatory framework of contemporary neuroscience
affords.
I have wrestled with this book for roughly a decade. It began as my
dissertation in the Department of History and Philosophy of Science at the
University of Pittsburgh. The central ideas ﬁrst came into view, though


=== PAGE 13 ===

xii preface
darkly, during a three-year stretch in the Department of Neuroscience at
the University of Pittsburgh. Patrick Card, Jon Johnson, Robert Moore,
Steven Small, Edward Stricker, Alan Sved, Floh Thiels, and Nathan Urban
introduced me to different aspects of experimental and theoretical neuro-
science. Peter Machamer, Wesley Salmon, Kenneth Schaffner, and Lindley
Darden deeply inﬂuenced my approach to the philosophy of science.
I worked on aspects of this book during my two years at Florida
International University, but I did not think of writing a book until I moved
to Washington University in St Louis in 2001. At Washington University,
I have worked with scholars in philosophy, neuroscience, and psychology.
Gualtiero Piccinini and Eric Schliesser each read the entire manuscript
and inspired me, chapter by chapter, to keep writing. Red Watson also
read the entire book while trying to teach me to write. Other colleagues
at Washington University who have impacted directly or indirectly on
this book include Adele Abrahamsen, Garland Allen, Joel Anderson, Bill
Bechtel, Jos ´e Berm ´udez, Eric Brown, Sara Bernal, Dennis Des Chene,
John Doris, Stan Finger, Marilyn Friedman, Jonathan Halverson, John
Heil, Marcus Raichle, Steve Peterson, Philip Robbins, Mark Rollins,
Walt Schallick, Witt Schoenbein, Paul Stein, J. R. Thompson, Kurt
Thoroughman, Joe Ullian, Dan Weiskopf, Wayne Wright, Alison Wylie,
and Jeff Zacks. I would also like to thank the students in my Philosophy
of Neuroscience seminar in Spring 2006, especially Santiago Amoya, Don
Goodman, Juan Montana, and Sarah Robbins.
I owe a special debt to the Department of Philosophy at the University of
Cincinnati. John Bickle taught an early draft of this book in his Philosophy
of Neuroscience class, the students of which provided detailed comments.
Chris Gauker, Larry Jost, Tony Landreth, Tom Polger, Bob Richardson,
and Rob Skipper have provided years of conversation and feedback.
I have also had extended conversations about the topics in this book
with Ken Aizawa, Anna Alexandrova, Jim Bogen, Keith Dougherty, Phil
Dowe, Paul Draper, Chris Eliasmith, Carl Gillett, Stuart Glennan, Valerie
Hardcastle, Eric Marcus, Robert Northcott, Stathis Psillos, Adina Roskies,
Marcel Weber, Ken Waters, Rob Wilson, Jim Woodward, and Arno
Wouters. Per Andersen, Carole Barnes, Tim Bliss, Bruce McNaughton,
and Lynn Nadel have been especially helpful in thinking about the history
of LTP. One anonymous referee provided detailed and very helpful
feedback.


=== PAGE 14 ===

preface xiii
Work on Chapter 7 was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under grant number SBR-981792 and by a small research grant
from the McDonnell Center for Higher Brain Research. Any opinions,
ﬁndings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the National
Science Foundation.
Kim Haddix, Phil Valko, and Youngee Choi each provided editorial
assistance. Pamela Speh designed and polished the ﬁgures. Tamara Casano-
va, Kimberly Mount, and Mindy Danner have provided administrative
assistance. Finally, I would like to thank Darlene Valot Craver for helping
to care for Anna in Fall 2004, a crucial stage in the preparation of this
manuscript.


=== PAGE 15 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 16 ===

Contents
Detailed Contents xvi
List of Figures and Tables xix
1. Introduction: Starting with Neuroscience 1
2. Explanation and Causal Relevance 21
3. Causal Relevance and Manipulation 63
4. The Norms of Mechanistic Explanation 107
5. A Field-Guide to Levels 163
6. Nonfundamental Explanation 196
7. The Mosaic Unity of Neuroscience 228
Bibliography 272
Index 293


=== PAGE 17 ===

Detailed Contents
List of Figures and Tables xix
1. Introduction: Starting with Neuroscience 1
1. Introduction 1
2. Explanations in Neuroscience Describe Mechanisms 2
3. Explanations in Neuroscience are Multilevel 9
4. Explanations in Neuroscience Integrate Multiple Fields 16
5. Criteria of Adequacy for an Account of Explanation 19
2. Explanation and Causal Relevance 21
1. Introduction 21
2. How Calcium Explains Neurotransmitter Release 22
3. Explanation and Representation 28
4. The Covering-Law Model 34
5. The Uniﬁcation Model 40
6. But What About the Hodgkin and Huxley Model? 49
7. Conclusion 61
3. Causal Relevance and Manipulation 63
1. Introduction 63
2. The Mechanism of Long-Term Potentiation 65
3. Causation as Transmission 72
3.1. Transmission and causal relevance 78
3.2. Omission and prevention 80
4. Causation and Mechanical Connection 86
5. Manipulation and Causation 93
5.1. Invariance, fragility, and contingency 99
5.2. Manipulation and criteria for explanation 100
5.3. Manipulation, omission, and prevention 104
6. Conclusion 105


=== PAGE 18 ===

detailed contents xvii
4. The Norms of Mechanistic Explanation 107
1. Introduction 107
2. Two Normative Distinctions 112
3. Explaining the Action Potential 114
4.T h e Explanandum Phenomenon 122
5. Components 128
6. Activities 133
7. Organization 134
8. Constitutive Relevance 139
8.1. Relevance and the boundaries of mechanisms 141
8.2. Interlevel experiments and constitutive relevance 144
8.2.1. Interference experiments 147
8.2.2. Stimulation experiments 149
8.2.3. Activation experiments 151
8.3. Constitutive relevance as mutual manipulability 152
9. Conclusion 160
5. A Field-Guide to Levels 163
1. Introduction 163
2. Levels of Spatial Memory 165
3. A Field-Guide to Levels 170
3.1. Levels of science (units and products) 172
3.2. Levels of nature 177
3.2.1. Causal levels (processing and control) 177
3.2.2. Levels of size 180
3.2.3. Levels of composition 184
3.2.3.1. Levels of mereology 184
3.2.3.2. Levels of aggregativity 186
3.2.3.3. Levels of mere material/spatial
containment 187
3.3. Levels of mechanisms 188
4. Conclusion 195
6. Nonfundamental Explanation 196
1. Introduction 196
2. Causal Relevance and Making a Difference 198
3. Contrasts and Switch-points 202


=== PAGE 19 ===

xviii detailed contents
4. Causal Powers at Higher Levels of Mechanisms 211
5. Causal Relevance at Higher Levels of Realization 217
6. Conclusion 227
7. The Mosaic Unity of Neuroscience 228
1. Introduction 228
2. Reduction and the History of Neuroscience 233
2.1. LTP’s origins: not a top-down search but
intralevel integration 237
2.2. The mechanistic shift 240
2.3. Mechanism as a working hypothesis 243
3. Intralevel Integration and the Mosaic Unity of
Neuroscience 246
3.1. The space of possible mechanisms 247
3.2. Speciﬁc constraints on the space of possible
mechanisms 248
3.2.1. Componency constraints 249
3.2.2. Spatial constraints 251
3.2.3. Temporal constraints 253
3.2.4. Active constraints 254
3.3. Reduction and the intralevel integration of ﬁelds 255
4. Interlevel Integration and the Mosaic Unity of
Neuroscience 256
4.1. What is interlevel integration? 256
4.2. Constraints on interlevel integration 258
4.2.1. Accommodative constraints 259
4.2.2. Spatial and temporal interlevel constraints 261
4.2.3. Interlevel manipulability constraints 264
4.3. Mosaic interlevel integration 266
5. Conclusion: The Epistemic Function of the Mosaic
Unity of Neuroscience 267
Bibliography 272
Index 293


=== PAGE 20 ===

List of Figures and Tables
Figures
1.1. A phenomenon and its mechanism 7
2.1. The action potential 50
2.2. Predicted and observed action potentials 52
2.3. Predicted and observed rising phases of action potentials 53
3.1. Potentiation displayed 67
3.2. A sketch of the synaptic mechanism of LTP 71
3.3. Two aspects of causal-mechanical explanation 74
3.4. An ideal intervention on X with respect to Y 97
4.1. The equivalent circuit model of the neuronal membrane 115
4.2. The action potential superimposed on a graph of changes in the
membrane’s conductance for Na+ and K+ 116
4.3. Hille’s how-possibly mechanisms for gating channels 118
4.4. Transmembrane regions of the Na + channel 120
4.5. A plausible mechanism for activating Na + channels 120
4.6. A phenomenon and its mechanism 121
4.7a. Abstract representation of an e xperiment for testing etiological
(causal) relevance 145
4.7b. Abstract representation of experiments f or testing constitutive (or
componential) relevance 146
5.1. Levels of spatial memory 166
5.2. A textbook depiction of LTP 168
5.3. A taxonomy of levels 171
5.4. Wimsatt’s branching diagram of levels 174
5.5. Churchland and Sejnowski’s classic diagram of levels in
neuroscience 180
5.6. Levels as local maxima of regularity and predictability 181
5.7. Three levels of mechanisms 189


=== PAGE 21 ===

xx list of ﬁgures and tables
5.8. Levels are deﬁned locally within decomposition hierarchies 194
7.1. Integrating levels of mechanisms 257
Tables
4.1. Common ﬁller terms in neuroscience 113
7.1. Intralevel and interlevel constr aints on multilevel mechanisms 249


=== PAGE 22 ===

1
Introduction: Starting with
Neuroscience
Summary
Explanations in neuroscience describe mechanisms, span multiple levels,
and integrate multiple ﬁelds. I articulate and defend these descriptive claims.
I also describe a set of criteria of adequacy for an acceptable account of
explanation in neuroscience.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
Neuroscience is driven by two goals. One goal—the primary focus of
this book—is explanation. Neuroscientists want to know how the brain
develops from infancy to adulthood, how the visual system gives rise to the
perception of color, and how the vestibular system helps to keep us upright.
In the popular press (but also in textbook introductions), one frequently
ﬁnds claims that neuroscientists are on the verge of explaining the mysteries
of consciousness, the illusion of free will, the frailty of human memory, and
the nature of the self. If neuroscience succeeds in these explanatory goals,
it will revise our self-conception as radically as Copernicus’ decentering of
the earth and Darwin’s humbling vision of our origins.
The second goal of neuroscience is to control the brain and the cen-
tral nervous system. Neuroscience is driven in large part by the desire
to diagnose and treat diseases, to repair brain damage, to enhance brain
function, and to prevent the brain’s decay. This goal is evident in the many
designer pharmaceuticals promising to ameliorate psychiatric and physio-
logical symptoms, in the skill of the brain surgeon, and in the conﬁdence
of behavioral and psychiatric geneticists. If neuroscience succeeds in this


=== PAGE 23 ===

2 starting with neuroscience
second goal, it will open medical possibilities that now seem like science
ﬁction, and it will provide human beings (for good or ill) with new and
powerful forms of control over the human condition.
These two goals of neuroscience are complementary. Explaining the
brain is one way to ﬁgure out how to manipulate it, and manipulating the
brain is one way to discover and test explanations.
My aim in this book is to construct a model of explanation that
reﬂects, rather than merely accommodates, the structure of explanations in
neuroscience. I do not start with a philosophical view of explanation in
mind and then attempt to graft it onto what I ﬁnd in the discussion sections,
review articles, and textbooks of neuroscience. Instead, I develop a view of
explanation that does justice to the exemplars of explanation in neuroscience
and to the standards by which these explanations are evaluated. Starting
with neuroscience, as opposed to physics or chemistry, three main features
of explanation demand attention: (i) explanations describe mechanisms; (ii)
explanations span multiple levels; and (iii) explanations integrate ﬁndings
from multiple ﬁelds. In this overview chapter, I show that explanations in
neuroscience typically have these features. I thus prepare the ground for
the normative theory to be developed in the rest of the book.
2. Explanations in Neuroscience Describe
Mechanisms
Judging from the literature in contemporary neuroscience, the brain is
composed of mechanisms.¹ Here are some titles:
Disinhibition of Ventrolateral Preoptic Area Sleep-active Neurons by Adeno-
sine: A New Mechanism for Sleep Promotion (Morairty et al. 2004)
Neural Mechanisms of Cortico–Cortical Interaction in Texture Boundary
Detection: A Modeling Approach (Thielscher and Neumann 2003)
Mechanisms and Regulation of Transferrin and Iron Transport in a Model
Blood–Brain Barrier System (Burdo et al. 2003)
¹ Clifford Morgan and Eliot Stellar, whose textbook deﬁned the ﬁeld of physiological psychology
through the mid-twentieth century, say that, ‘‘The primary goal of physiological psychology is to
establish the physiological mechanisms o f normal human and animal behavior’’ ( 1950: vii). Gordon
Shepherd, whose neurobiology textbook was a late twentieth-century introduction to the ﬁeld, writes
that, ‘‘The main aim of neurobiology, therefore, and the main aim of this book, is to identify the
principles underlying the mechanisms throughwhich the nervous system mediates behavior’’ (1994: 4).


=== PAGE 24 ===

starting with neuroscience 3
Coordinate Synaptic Mechanisms Contributing to Olfactory Cortical Adapta-
tion (Best and Wilson 2004).
GPCR-Mediated Transactivation of RTKs in the CNS: Mechanisms and
Consequences (Shah and Catt 2004).
Central Sensitization and LTP: Do Pain and Memory Share Similar
Mechanisms? (Ji et al. 2003)
Na+ Channel Na v1.9: In Search of a Gating Mechanism (Delmas and
Coste 2003)
Neuroscientists sometimes use other terms to describe their explanatory
achievements. They say that they are searching for the neural bases, the
realizers, and the substrates of a phenomenon.² They say that they discover
systems and pathways in the ﬂow of information, and molecular cascades,
mediators,a n dmodulators. The term mechanism could do the same work.
But what is a mechanism? History cannot answer this question. The
term mechanism has been used in too many different ways, and most
of those uses no longer have any application in biology. ³ No single,
coherent mechanical philosophy passed from Archimedes or Democritus
(via Descartes, Huygens, and Boyle) to the present. Those who have been
called mechanical philosophers differ from one another, for example, about
whether mechanisms are abstract or concrete, about the activities that
can legitimately appear in explanations, about the relationship between
mechanism and teleology, and about whether the doctrine of mechanism,
however that is to be understood, is advocated as a scientiﬁc method or as a
metaphysical thesis (see, for example, Allen2005; Craver and Darden 2005;
Des Chene 2005). Few if any contemporary neuroscientists are committed
to a world that contains nothing but geometrical properties (as Descartes
recommends) or to the idea that everything must be explained in terms of
attraction and repulsion (as du Bois Reymond requires⁴).
² Wimsatt (1976b) points out that scientists rarely use the term ‘‘reduction’’ in the strict philosophic
sense, but use this term merely to describe the search for lower-level mechanisms.
³ Crane’s (1995) claim that the contemporary conception of a ‘‘mechanical mind’’ is continuous
with those of the seventeenth century is true only in the very broadest sense of continuous.
⁴ In a letter to a friend, du Bois Reymond (1831– 96) wrote ‘‘Br¨ucke and I pledged a solemn oath to
put into power this truth: no other forces than th e common physical-chemical ones are active within
the organism. In those cases which cannot at the ti me be explained by these forces one has either to
ﬁnd the speciﬁc way or form of their action by means of the physical-mathematical method, or to
assume new forces equal in dignity to the chemical-physical forces inherent in matter, reducible to the
force of attraction and repulsion’’ (in Sulloway 1979: 14).


=== PAGE 25 ===

4 starting with neuroscience
Nor is it helpful to note that mechanisms are machines, or that they
are machine-like. For what is a machine? The concept can be made more
precise in a variety of ways: one can restrict the class of machines to
heroic simple machines (levers, pulleys, and screws), or to extended things
colliding (as in Cartesian mechanism), or to things that attract and repel one
another (as du Bois Reymond held). Each of these restrictions makes the
concept of a mechanism too narrow to accommodate the diverse kinds of
mechanism in contemporary neuroscience. ⁵Second, machines often have
easily identiﬁable parts contained within well-deﬁned boundaries. We look
into a clock and readily identify the pendulum, the counterweights, its
ratchets and gears. The parts of neural mechanisms are in many cases not
so visible, not so readily distinguished from their surroundings; in some
cases, they are widely distributed and dynamically connected, defying any
attempts to localize functions to particular parts. In that case, the machine
analogy provides a misleadingly simplistic view of the mechanisms in
nature. Finally, machines and mechanisms are in most cases individuated
according to different criteria. Automobiles, for example, are composed
of many distinct mechanisms—one for shifting gears, one for cleaning
windshields, one for lighting the road, and one for signaling an empty tank.
Automobiles also have a number of nonmechanical parts. The hubcaps, the
mud ﬂaps, and the fuzzy dice are features of a ﬁne machine, but none of
these is a part of any of its mechanisms. If these features are removed, the
machine changes, but the mechanisms remain the same.
Rather than starting with the machine analogy, it is better to start thinking
about mechanisms with the help of an example. Consider the mechanism
by which a neuron releases neurotransmitters (S ¨udhof 2000, 2004). The
mechanism begins, we can say, when an action potential depolarizes the
axon terminal and so opens voltage-sensitive calcium (Ca
2+) channels in
the neuronal membrane. Intracellular Ca 2+ concentrations rise, causing
more Ca 2+ to bind to Ca 2+/Calmodulin dependent kinase. The latter
phosphorylates synapsin, which frees the transmitter-containing vesicle
⁵ Compare Brandon: ‘‘But what is a mechanism? Here I cannot be precise. Sometimes old-fashioned
spring-wound clocks and watches are called mechanical devices. Clearly I cannot use ‘mechanism’ in
such a narrow sense. Mechanisms may consist of springs and gears, they may consist of computer chips
and electrical pulses, they may consist of small peripheral populations and geographic isolating barriers.
I cannot delimit all possible mechanisms because it is thebusiness of science to discover the mechanisms
of nature. At best I could list the sorts of mechanisms that science, or more speciﬁcally, biology has
discovered’’ (Brandon 1985).


=== PAGE 26 ===

starting with neuroscience 5
from the cytoskeleton. At this point, Rab 3Aa n dR a b3C target the freed
vesicle to release sites in the membrane. Then v-SNARES (such as VAMP),
which are incorporated into the vesicle membrane, bind to t-SNARES
(such as syntaxin and SNAP- 25), which are incorporated into the axon
terminal membrane, thereby bringing the vesicle and the membrane next
to one another. Finally, local inﬂux of Ca 2+ at the active zone in the
terminal leads this SNARE complex, either acting alone or in concert
with other proteins, to open a fusion pore that spans the membrane to the
synaptic cleft. There is room for debate about aspects of this description,
but this explanation nonetheless displays the general form of mechanistic
explanation that is my focus.
This is a mechanism in the sense that it is a set of entities and activities
organized such that they exhibit the phenomenon to be explained. ⁶ In
this case, the phenomenon to be explained is the vesicular release of neu-
rotransmitters. This phenomenon is multifaceted. One wants to explain,
for example, why depolarization leads to neurotransmitter release, why
neurotransmitter release is blocked by calcium chealators, why neurotrans-
mitters are released in quanta, and so on. The explanation includes various
entities (N-type Ca
2+ channels, Ca2+ ions, active zones, a host of intracel-
lular molecules such as Rab3A, Rab3C, VAMP/synaptobrevin, SNAP-25,
and syntaxin, vesicles containing neurotransmitters, fusion pores, and neu-
ral membranes) and their various activities (opening, clamping, diffusing,
docking, fusing, incorporating, phosphorylating, and priming). Entities are
the components or parts in mechanisms. They have properties that allow
them to engage in a variety of activities. They typically have locations, sizes,
structures, and orientations. They are the kinds of things that have masses,
⁶ I borrow extensively from a long tradition ofinterest in mechanistic models of explanation. Herbert
Simon ( 1969) described this explanatory strategy as the search for nearly decomposable systems and
inspired others to write about this style of explanation (Fodor 1968;H a u g e l a n d1998;W i m s a t t1974;
1976b; Kauffman 1971;L y c a n1987). Peter Railton ( 1978) appeals to mechanisms in his deductive-
nomological model of probabilistic causation, but he says little about what constitutes a mechanism.
Wesley Salmon ( 1984) argues forcefully for a causal-mechanical approach to explanation, although
he pays little attention to constitutive mechanisms. Robert Cummins ( 1975, 1983) emphasizes the
importance of explanation by functional analysis in psychology. Dennett ( 1978) stresses the role of
‘‘reverse engineering’’ in building explanations. I discuss these latter two in Chapter 4. More recent
discussions of mechanisms trace back to Bechtel and Richardson’s ( 1993) account of decomposition
and localization. There have been numerous attempts to say what mechanisms are (Glennan 1996;
Machamer et al. 2000; Skipper 1999;T h a g a r d1998; Woodward 2002), and to explore how they are
discovered (Bechtel 2006;B u r i a n1996; Craver and Darden 2001;D a r d e n2002, 2006;D a r d e na n d
Craver 2002;T h a g a r d1999), but there is so far no univocal account of mechanisticexplanation (although
see Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005; Glennan 2002; and Thagard 2003 for important steps forward).


=== PAGE 27 ===

6 starting with neuroscience
carry charges, and transmit momentum. They also act in a variety of ways,
by binding to other objects, opening and closing, and diffusing. Activities
are the causal components in mechanisms. I use the term ‘‘activity’’ here
and throughout the book merely as a ﬁller term for productive behaviors
(such as opening), causal interactions (such as attracting), omissions (as
occurs in cases of inhibition), preventions (such as blocking), and so on. In
saying that activities are productive, I mean that they are not mere correla-
tions, that they are not mere temporal sequences, and, most fundamentally,
that they can potentially be exploited for the purposes of manipulation and
control (see Chapter 3). I do not require in my account that mechanisms
must be composed of some restrictive set of activities; I do not require that
causes act on contact, or that activities must involve transmission, or that all
activities involve attraction or repulsion. There are many kinds of activity,
and it is the task of science rather than philosophy to sort them out. The
mechanism of neurotransmitter release includes different forms of chemical
bonding, conformation changes, diffusion, attraction and repulsion. These
are familiar and accepted activities that the entities in this mechanism are
known to exhibit.
Finally, the entities and activities in mechanisms are organized together
spatially, temporally, causally, and hierarchically such that transmitters are
released when the axon terminal depolarizes. ⁷ The voltage-sensitive ion
channels are located in the terminal, they span the membrane, and they open
to expose a channel. Biochemical cascades in the cytoplasm have sequences
or cycles of interactions, they are organized in series and in parallel, and
their steps have different orders, rates and durations. The components in
the mechanism often stand in mechanism/component relations, a species of
part–whole relation. As a result the mechanism is hierarchically organized.
The behavior of the mechanism as a whole requires the organization of its
components (see Wimsatt 1997;C r a v e r2001).
So I begin with this skeletal description: mechanisms are entities and
activities organized such that they exhibit theexplanandum phenomenon.T h e
components of this most abstract sketch of a mechanism are illustrated in
Figure 1.1. At the top is the phenomenon to be explained. For economy,
I often refer to the phenomenon, the property or behavior explained by
⁷ Not all forms of organization are important in every mechanism, and different kinds of organization
predominate in different forms of mechanisms.


=== PAGE 28 ===

starting with neuroscience 7
Phenomemon
Sψ -ing
X1φ1-ing
X3φ3-ing
X2φ2-ing
X4φ4-ing
Mechanism
Figure 1.1. A phenomenon (top) and its mechanism (bottom).
the mechanism, as ψ (pronounced psi, as in psychological), and I use S
(English pronunciation) to refer to the mechanism as a whole. Beneath
S’s ψ-ing are represented the entities (circles) and activities (arrows) that
are organized together in the mechanism. For economy, I use X (English
pronunciation) to describe the component entities in the mechanism andφ
(pronounced phi, as in physiological) to refer to the component activities
in the mechanism. S’s ψ-ing is explained by the organization of entities
{X1,X 2, ..., Xm} and activities {φ1,φ2, ... ,φn}.⁸
It is not clear why mechanistic explanations of this sort have been
neglected in the philosophy of science. One reason is the long-term
dominance of the covering-law (CL) model of explanation. According
to that model, explanations are arguments. One explains an event by
showing that it was to be expected on the basis of (that is, can be predicted
from) the laws of nature plus antecedent or background conditions. The
CL model states clear criteria for success in explanation: the premises
of the argument must be true, some of them must be laws, and the
occurrence of the phenomenon must follow from the premises according
to well-deﬁned rules of inference. Philosophers of the special sciences,
⁸ Jon Elster has developed two senses of ‘‘mechanism’’ fordiscussions in the social sciences. According
to one sense (1983), mechanisms are the working components revealed by opening black boxes. This
idea is roughly the sense of ‘‘mechanism’’ that I have in mind. More recently, Elster (1989) describes
‘‘mechanisms’’ as irregular but intelligible kinds of change that ground explanation but do not allow
prediction. This latter notion involves features (especially irregularity and the failure of prediction) that
are not built into my view of mechanisms.


=== PAGE 29 ===

8 starting with neuroscience
such as neuroscience, have often embarked by ﬁrst asking whether the
covering-law model of explanation can be made to work in that science.
Debates inevitably arise as to whether there are laws of nature in these
sciences and about whether ceteris paribus laws (asserting that the regularity
holds unless something prevents it from holding) are truly explanatory (as
opposed to trivial or vacuous). But the discussion only rarely pulls back
far enough to question whether the logic of mechanistic explanation is
most perspicuously described as a relationship between law statements and
descriptions of phenomena.
The clearest alternative to the CL model of explanation, the causal-mech-
anical view espoused by Salmon ( 1984, 1998) among others, emphasizes
that explaining a phenomenon is not a matter of showing that it was to
be expected on the basis of the laws of nature (or suitable generalizations).
Rather, it is a matter of showing how a phenomenon is produced by its
causes. To explain neurotransmitter release, one shows that the depolariza-
tion opens the Ca
2+ channels, that opening the Ca2+ channels allows Ca2+ to
diffuse into the cell, that vesicles dock to the membrane by forming SNARE
complexes, and that the inﬂux of Ca2+ triggers the formation of a fusion
pore. But Salmon, and most of the others who have paid attention to causal
explanation, have focused exclusively on etiological causal explanation, that
is, explanation of some event by its antecedent causes (as when a virus
causes the ﬂu). The variety of explanation that I am interested in is constitu-
tive (or componential)⁹causal-mechanical explanation: the explanation of a
phenomenon, such as the opening of a Ca2+ channel, by the organization
of component entities and activities.
In Chapter 2, I argue that analyses of explanation must include refer-
ence to causal relationships if they are to distinguish good explanations
from bad. The difﬁculties that noncausal models of explanation (such as
the CL model (Hempel 1965), Philip Kitcher’s ( 1989) uniﬁcation model,
and Paul Churchland’s ( 1989) representational model) have in delivering
the right verdicts on standard test cases argue collectively for a causal
approach to explanation in neuroscience. Those who are already con-
vinced of the shortcomings of the covering-law model, Kitcher’s uniﬁcation
⁹ Salmon (1984) spoke of a ‘‘constitutive aspect’’ ofcausal-mechanical explanation. Metaphysicians
reserve the term ‘‘constitutive’’ for a speciﬁc relation that has more entanglements than I intend. The
word ‘‘componential’’ is more apt, but I will occasionally use ‘‘constitutive’’ in Salmon’s sense (and
never in any other).


=== PAGE 30 ===

starting with neuroscience 9
model, and Churchland’s representational model, or who already believe
that explanation in neuroscience crucially involves describing causes, can
skim this chapter. In Chapter 3, I ground the distinction between pro-
ductive activities and pseudo-activities in relationships of manipulability
(see Woodward 2003), thus adding a crucial normative component to the
analysis of mechanisms. I develop that account in Chapter 4, and I show
how it constitutes a signiﬁcant improvement over, for example, Robert
Cummins’s account of explanation by functional analysis (1975, 1983)a n d
William Lycan’s (1987) homuncular functionalism.
3. Explanations in Neuroscience are Multilevel
Explanations in neuroscience refer to the behaviors of organisms, the pro-
cessing functions of brain systems, the representational and computational
properties of brain regions, the electrophysiological properties of nerve
cells, and the structures and conformation changes of molecules.
Consider, as a simple and uncontroversial example, Edward Stricker’s
and Joseph Verbalis’s sketch of the explanation for ﬂuid homeostasis:
An increase in plasma osmolality, as occurs after one eats salty foods or after body
water evaporates without being replaced,stimulates the release of vasopressin [from
the pituitary], increasing the conservation of water and the excretion of solutes in
urine. This is accompanied by increased thirst, with the result of making plasma
osmolality more dilute through the consumption of water. (Stricker and Verbalis
1988: 261)
This explanation sketch oscillates among multiple levels to link such diverse
phenomena as the behaviors of organisms (drinking), drives (thirst), the
working of bodily organs (conservation of urine in the kidneys), the ﬂux of
bodily molecules (such as the pituitary’s release of vasopressin), and swarms
of ions (the concentration of salt in the blood). If one views neuroscience
through the lens of explanation in physics and chemistry, one is tempted
to organize multilevel explanations by sorting the different components
into complete explanations at each level and then relating the levels to
one another by deduction. But this explanation of the osmoregulatory
system is more local and fragmentary than that. There is no need for
a complete theory of organisms, organs, cells, molecules, and atoms to
understand enough about the activities of the entities at each level to


=== PAGE 31 ===

10 starting with neuroscience
explain, in sketch, how ﬂuid and solute levels are regulated. The expla-
nation oscillates up and down in a hierarchy of mechanisms to focus on
just the items that are relevant to different phenomena or different aspects
of the same phenomenon. Food consumption, perspiration, and breathing
explain the changes in plasma osmolality. Changes in plasma osmolality
explain the pituitary’s release of vasopressin. Vasopressin concentrations
explain the kidney’s ﬁltration of the blood. In Chapters 4 and 6,Id e v e l o p
a notion of relevance that shows why different levels are explanatorily rele-
vant to different phenomena and so shows why this explanatory oscillation
among levels is often necessary for adequate explanations.¹⁰
Some neuroscientists explicitly deﬁne neuroscience as a multilevel sci-
ence. Gordon Shepherd, for instance:
From these considerations we can deduce a basic premise, that an understanding
of nervous function requires identifying the elementary units at different levels
of organization and understanding the relations between the different levels. We
can summarize this view with a more precise deﬁnition of the subject matter
of contemporary neurobiology and of this book: Neurobiology is the study
of nerve cells and associated cells and the ways that they are organized into
functional circuits that process information and mediate behavior. (Shepherd1994:
4– 5)
Donald Perkel agrees:
Theoretical neurobiology, in parallel with its experimental counterpart and in
similarity with the theoretical aspects of other sciences, operates simultaneously at
a number of levels. The hierarchy of levels is governed by the organization of the
nervous system itself. (Perkel 1990: 39)
The suggestion (one that I defend in Chapter 6) is not merely that the
central nervous system can be explained at different levels, but that an
adequate explanation of many phenomena in the central nervous system
must bridge phenomena at multiple levels. ¹¹ Judging from statements of
this sort, there is no single neural level, or neurophysiological level, or
neuroscientiﬁc level of explanation. Neuroscientiﬁc phenomena span a
¹⁰ How many levels there are and which levels are relevant depends on what phenomenon is being
explained and on facts about the organization ofthe portion of the world relevant to that phenomenon.
I do not require that all explanations span multiple levels, but many do.
¹¹ I argue for the necessity of higher-level explanations in Chapter 6.


=== PAGE 32 ===

starting with neuroscience 11
hierarchy of levels from the activities of molecules to the behaviors of
organisms.¹²
In this respect, neuroscience is typical of other sciencesi nt h em i d d l er a n g e
between elementary particles and astronomical phenomena. As Schaffner
notes, such explanations are, ‘‘typically interlevel in the sense of levels
of aggregation, containing component parts which are often speciﬁed in
intermingled organ, cellular, and biochemical terms’’ (Schaffner 1993b:
321). This is an apt description of most explanations in contemporary
neuroscience. This descriptive point makes a strong, albeit prima facie, case
against fundamentalism.¹³
Fundamentalists demand that neuroscientiﬁc explanations bottom out
in some privileged set of entities or causal relations. Some fundamentalists
believe that neuroscientiﬁc explanations bottom out in the behavior of
neurons. Gold and Stoljar ( 1999) catalogue a number of such claims. For
example, Patricia Churchland and Terrance Sejnowski, who stress the
importance of levels elsewhere (1992: 11– 27), nonetheless claim that:
in the last analysis, the heart of the problem [of memory] is to explain the global
changes in a brain’s output, on the basis of orderly, local changes in individual cells
(1992: 239; emphasis in original)
In 1972, Horace Barlow wrote that:
A picture of how the brain works, and in particular how it processes and represents
sensory information, can be built up fr om knowledge of the interactions of
individual cells. (1972: 384)
Other fundamentalists—molecularists—ground neuroscientiﬁc explana-
tions in molecules. Consider how Samuel Barondes describes the relation-
ship between molecules and mental illness:
¹² Lycan, the foremost advocate of a multilevel view of psychological explanation, objects to
‘‘two-levelism’’ in the philosophy of psychology: ‘‘Very generally put, my objection is that ‘soft-
ware’/‘hardware’ talkencourages the idea of a bipartite N ature, divided into two levels, roughly the
physicochemical and the (supervenient) ‘functional’ or higher-organizational—as against reality, which
is a multiple hierarchy of levels of nature, each level marked by a nexus of nomic generalization and
supervenient on all those levels below it on the continuum’’ (in Lycan 1999: 50). Lycan’s discussion is
similar to the distinction be between levels of mechanisms and levels of realization that I introduce in
Chapters 5 and 6.
¹³ The term ‘‘fundamentalism’’ is meant to pick out those who think that good explanations can
be formulated only at the most fundamental level, be that the physical level or some other level.
Fundamentalists are often called reductionists, physicalists, and smallists (Wilson 2004), but the term
fundamentalism captures the central conviction that these individuals have in common without begging
any questions against them.


=== PAGE 33 ===

12 starting with neuroscience
molecules are the chemical machinery of our brains, so that to study them is to
study the actual brain components involved in feeling and remembering, instead
of contemplating them at a higher level of abstraction. (1999: 46)
John Bickle (2003) agrees, insisting that higher levels are merely of heuristic
value and that all real causes and explanations are ultimately to be found
at the cellular and molecular levels. Most fundamentalist philosophers do
not stop at neurons or molecules but descend to the most fundamental
phenomena of the physical world. Wherever the bottom is, that is where
the real explanations are to be found.
Ian Gold and Eliot Stoljar ( 1999) argue that fundamentalism (in the
form of what they call the ‘‘neuron doctrine’’) is both widely accepted
in contemporary neuroscience and philosophy and completely lacking in
evidential support. They explain this fact by appealing to an ambiguity
between the trivial neuron doctrine (that is, the doctrine that some theory
of cognitive neuroscience is the best explanation for the mind and brain)
and the radical neuron doctrine (that is, the doctrine that some exclusively
biological theory of cognitive neuroscience is the best explanation for the
mind and brain). The trivial doctrine is a wise bet, given that some theory
in cognitive neuroscience will almost surely explain aspects of the mind.
But the explanatory success of neuroscience provides no support for the
thesis that this explanatory theory will be exclusively biological, neural,
molecular, or physical. The successful explanations in neuroscience today
typically span multiple levels.
Radical fundamentalism, then, is the claim that the only real explanations
are to be found at some fundamental level (for example, the biological,
neural, molecular, or atomic level). Gold and Stoljar are right to point
out that the radical doctrine is implausible. It is not supportable by appeal
to the best explanations in contemporary neuroscience, which tend to
be multilevel; ¹⁴ nor is it supportable by the structure of theories and
explanations elsewhere in the biological and physiological sciences. Why
then is fundamentalism so common? There are many reasons, of course.
Sometimes scientists assert fundamentalism as a matter of disciplinary
pride. Scientists in one ﬁeld are convinced that they know more about
¹⁴ Bickle ( 2003) argues that there are good explanations that are exclusively molecular. I believe
that close examination of those cases reveals more signiﬁcant multilevel explanation than Bickle
acknowledges. Compare his discussion of LTP with mine in Chapter 7.


=== PAGE 34 ===

starting with neuroscience 13
the world than scientists in other ﬁelds. They are convinced that their
techniques are more useful for intervening to change the brain than are the
techniques used by other ﬁelds, and they believe that they have identiﬁed
the items that are most explanatorily relevant to the phenomenon to be
explained. Debates about the relevance of different ﬁelds and levels are part
of the sociology of neuroscience. To defend such disciplinary isolationism,
however, one must have a principled reason for accepting one set of items
as privileged over all others. In this book, I defend theexplanatory relevance of
nonfundamental items. I leave open the question of whether metaphysical
arguments can be mustered to support a principled ontological fundamen-
talism. The most potent metaphysical arguments, as clearly formulated by
Jaegwan Kim over the last quarter century, will not settle disciplinary dis-
putes among nonfundamental disciplines. Rather, those arguments, if they
work, would show that there are no nonfundamental objects or properties
full stop. (There are no brains, no cells, and no receptors either). The meta-
physical fundamentalist argues that nonfundamental things have no causal
powers over and above fundamental things. They believe, roughly, that
everything has a complete cause at the fundamental level (the principle of
the causal completeness of the physical) and that nothing has more than one
complete cause (the principle of non-overdetermination). If so, it follows
that no nonfundamental things are causes.¹⁵There might be predicates that
describe nonfundamental goings-on, says John Heil, but it is a classic mis-
take to assume that there must be some thing to which such predicates refer.
The metaphysical arguments that drive philosophers to fundamentalism,
in short, lead one to abandon commitment to the existence of nonfunda-
mental properties and nonfundamental causal powers generally. Given that
no neuroscientists work at the fundamental level, such arguments provide
little solace to those who would wish to establish that one nonfundamental
level is metaphysically privileged over another nonfundamental level. My
focus is therefore on the question of whether nonfundamental phenomena
are causally and explanatorily relevant, and this issue is independent of how
and whether these metaphysical arguments resolve.
Fundamentalism sometimes is presented as science itself. Gerald Edelman
says that the goal of neuroscience is to:
¹⁵ Some defend the thesis that nonfundamental items are explanatorily, but not causally, relevant. I
will defend the view that they are explanatorily relevant because they are causally relevant.


=== PAGE 35 ===

14 starting with neuroscience
construct a scientiﬁc theory of the mind based directly on the structure and
workings of the brain. By ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ in this context, I mean a description based
on the neuronal and phenotypic organization of an individual and formulated solely
in terms of physical and chemical mechanisms giving rise to that organization.
(Edelman 1989: 8– 9)
Francis Crick endorses a similar fundamentalist attitude:
The scientiﬁc believe that our minds—the behavior of our brains—can be
explained by the interactions of nerve cells (and other cells) and the molecules
associated with them. (1994: 7)
Neither Edelman nor Crick argues for this fundamentalist view of science.
Few philosophers of science recognize a hard and fast criterion of demar-
cation between science and non-science anymore, and none that I am
aware of draw the line at cells or molecules. According to most attempts at
demarcation, science is distinctive by virtue of its attitudes toward nature
and its policies of belief formation, not by virtue of its subject matter.
Furthermore, as I noted above, many scientists endorse multilevel explana-
tions. For example, Gordon Shepherd deﬁnes neurobiology as multilevel
science: ‘‘Neurobiology is the study of nerve cells and associated cells and
the ways that they are organized into circuits that process information
and mediate behavior’’ ( 1994: 5). In fact, the vast majority of scientists
working in contemporary science are working well above the fundamental
level—or at least well above what we now think that the fundamental
level is. At any rate, it will require a very strong argument to show that
those who study economics, or animal behavior, or cerebral blood ﬂow,
or physiological systems of any sort have, by virtue of their chosen subject
matter, ceased to do real science.
Some argue for fundamentalism on historical grounds. They believe
that science exhibits a trend toward explanation in terms of ever more
fundamental ontological units. Social phenomena are explained in terms of
psychological phenomena, psychological phenomena in terms of neurons,
neural phenomena in terms of molecules, and molecular phenomena in
terms of particle physics (Oppenheim and Putnam 1958). But these claims
are generally based on historical reconstructions of a few examples and not
on statistical data adequate to deﬁne a trend (see, for example, Bickle2003).
Even granting that a few examples might serve as evidence for a trend
in recent neuroscience, one could just as easily choose different examples,


=== PAGE 36 ===

starting with neuroscience 15
or—as I demonstrate in the closing chapter of this book—ﬁnd evidence
of contrary trends in the same examples. Most importantly, though,
historical trends indicate nothing about whether explanations ought to be
multilevel. Even if all neuroscientists were to embrace the techniques and
explanations of molecular biology or to formulate explanations exclusively
in terms of patterns of action potentials—and they do not, as the prevalence
of, for example, neuroimaging studies, multiunit recording studies, and
psychological experiments attests—it could turn out in retrospect that they
were wrong.
Finally, some endorse fundamentalism as a reaction to a fear of the
dark (cf. Haugeland 1998: 116). Some think that higher-level entities and
activities are akin to ghostly entelechies (that is, vital forces), souls, or
‘‘spooky’’ emergent properties. But the comparison is unfair. There is
no evidence that souls or entelechies exist. They cannot be detected by
measuring devices, let alone with multiple methods embodying different
theoretical perspectives. There are no clear criteria for determining when
souls and entelechies are present or absent, and there are no clear criteria
for individuating souls and entelechies (that is, clear and objective criteria
according to which one could count them). We cannot intervene with
predictable outcomes to change souls and entelechies, and we cannot use
them to intervene in other states of affairs. For all these reasons, we are
justiﬁably suspicious of claims that such things exist. But none of these
reasonable criteria fails for higher-level items in neuroscience. Molecules,
neurons, brain regions, and brain systems all clearly satisfy these standards.
Fear of the dark, extended beyond its reasonable domain of application, can
seem to justify fundamentalism. But nonfundamental levels in neuroscience
should not spook us in this way.
In short, fundamentalism cannot be justiﬁed as deﬁnitive of science, as a
ﬁnding of science, as a scientiﬁc trend, or as a unique antidote to souls. One
goal in this book (Chapter 6) is to argue for the causal, and so explanatory,
relevance of phenomena at multiple levels in a hierarchy of mechanisms
and to show why nonfundamental explanations are required for most
phenomena. This argument depends upon a view of causal and explanatory
relevance (see Chapter 3) and on the assumptions that justify the use of
controlled experiments to test causal and explanatory claims (see Chapter6).
Let me be perfectly clear: my reason for being an explanatory antifunda-
mentalist is not because I believe that there are gods or goblins. There are


=== PAGE 37 ===

16 starting with neuroscience
not. Nor am I an explanatory antifundamentalist because I believe that there
are ‘‘emergent properties.’’ I agree with the fundamentalist (although I will
not argue for it) that talk of ‘‘emergence’’ or ‘‘irreducible complexity’’ is in
many cases unintelligible. My argument for explanatory antifundamentalism
is premised on nothing but well-established facts about the material world
and on the assumptions underlying the use of controlled experiments to test
claims about causal and explanatory relevance. In Chapter5, I disambiguate
several senses of the term ‘‘level’’ in order to clarify the sense in which I
think that the mechanisms in neuroscience are multilevel. In Chapter 6,I
present positive arguments for accepting multilevel explanations. I do not
pretend to defend nonfundamental explanations against all metaphysical
challenges. Instead, I content myself with presenting a positive view of
levels, causal relevance, experimentation, and explanation that allows one
to accept the explanatory relevance of nonfundamental phenomena.
4. Explanations in Neuroscience Integrate Multiple
Fields
Neuroscience has always been an explicitly multiﬁeld discipline. The Soci-
ety for Neuroscience (SfN), which came into existence with 500 members
in 1970 and has over 37,000 as of 2006, is a menagerie of researchers
with different explanatory goals, different concepts and vocabularies, and
different techniques and methods. ¹⁶ Neuroscience includes and draws
upon aspects of anatomy, behavioral psychology, biophysics, cognitive and
developmental psychology, computer science, evolutionary and molecular
biology, endocrinology, ethology, immunology, neurology, neurophysiol-
ogy, mathematics, pharmacology, physics, physiology, and psychiatry. One
explicit aim of the SfN is to integrate these ﬁelds in the common goal
of understanding the central nervous system. ¹⁷ In the ﬁrst edition of his
Neurobiology text, Gordon Shepherd writes:
¹⁶ These are the distinguishing features ofﬁelds as described by Darden and Maull (1977). One should
not expect sharp boundaries for ﬁelds in sciences such as neuroscience, where interﬁeld interaction is so
diffuse and multidirectional. The boundaries of ﬁ elds are also ﬂuid and depend as much on sociological
factors (e.g., who talks, publishes, and travels with whom) as they do on theoretical, technical, and
explanatory differences. Despite the fuzziness of these b oundaries, I use the term ‘‘ﬁeld’’ to group
researchers with overlapping interests, perspectives, techniques, and languages.
¹⁷ See the mission statement of the SfN at <www.sfn.org>.


=== PAGE 38 ===

starting with neuroscience 17
many ﬁelds of learning involve the nervous system. We may think of them
as overlapping spheres of interest, and where they overlap deﬁnes the ﬁeld of
neurobiology or neuroscience. Some of its features may be pointed out immediately. It
is a relatively new ﬁeld, reﬂecting the fact that many component disciplines had not
advanced far enough to intersect signiﬁcantly until fairly recently. It is obviously a
multidisciplinary ﬁeld; this means that no one approach has a corner on the truth,
and we need to correlate the results from several methods in order to understand
any particular brain function. Finally, it is a ﬁeld without distinct boundaries .J u s ta s
students in other ﬁelds may be drawn to the nervous system, so, when investigators
start with a problem in the nervous system,they soon ﬁnd themselves dealing with
fundamental aspects of other ﬁelds. (Shepherd 1983: 4; emphasis in original)
More recently, Churchland and Sejnowski write:
There is now a gathering conviction among scient ists that the time is right for a
fruitful convergence of research from hitherto isolated ﬁelds. The research strategy
developing in cognitive neuroscience is neither exclusively from the top down nor
exclusively from the bottom up. Rath er it is a coevolutionary strategy, typiﬁed
by interaction among research domains, where research at one level provides
constraints, corrections, and inspiration for research at other levels. (In Gazzaniga
2000: 14)
Neuroscientists emphasize the extent to which their best explanations
integrate or unify ﬁndings from several different ﬁelds, the way that
different ﬁelds constrain such explanations, and the way that techniques and
vocabularies in different ﬁelds co-evolve (that is, change to accommodate
one another) under the pressure of those constraints (see, for example,
Nadel and O’Keefe 1974).
What does the unity of neuroscience amount to in practice? Oppenheim
and Putnam argue that the unity of science consists in a chain of reductive
explanations that link phenomena at the highest levels (for example, the
behaviors of societies) to phenomena at the lowest levels (for example,
elementary particles). Most philosophers of neuroscience have followed
Oppenheim and Putnam in using reduction models to describe the multi-
level structure of neuroscientiﬁc explanation (Schaffner 1967, 1993a, 1993b;
Hooker 1981; P. S. Churchland 1986;B i c k l e1998). Although these later
models differ in details, each descends from Nagel’s ( 1949, 1961) classical
reduction model. ¹⁸ According to this model, reduction is achieved by
¹⁸ Oppenheim and Putnam explicitly reject Nagel’ s view of reduction in favor of the Kemeny-
Oppenheim model of reduction, which can be thought of as explanatory subsumption.


=== PAGE 39 ===

18 starting with neuroscience
identifying the kind of terms in higher-level theories with those of lower-
level theories and deriving the higher-level theories from the lower-level
theories. On the assumption that different ﬁelds of science have their
own theories, and on the assumption that their theories describe differ-
ent levels, the reduction model then provides a view of the unity of
neuroscience.
If Nagel had started with neuroscience as his example, however, it is very
unlikely that he would have developed this model of the unity of science.
Neuroscience textbooks contain few, if any, explicit derivations (I consider
the best example of such—the Hodgkin and Huxley model of the action
potential—in Chapter 2). More to the point, however, debates about the
adequacy of an explanation almost never turn on whether it is possible to
derive a description of a phenomenon at one level from its description at
another. Because of this mismatch between reduction and the practice of
building explanations, Schaffner defends his model merely as a ‘‘regulative
ideal,’’ an ideal end point that guides the search for explanations even if that
end point is never achieved in practice. He admits that reduction is largely
‘‘peripheral’’ to the practices of historical and contemporary neuroscientists,
who typically content themselves with partial and fragmentary descriptions
of mechanisms (Schaffner 1974, 1993a). Churchland and Crick likewise
claim that reduction in Nagel’s sense can be achieved, if ever, only after
most of the interesting science has been completed (Churchland 1986:
285). I argue in Chapter 7 that reduction is so peripheral to the practice
of neuroscience that it is misleading to think of it as a regulative ideal for
integrating neuroscience.¹⁹
As I argue in Chapter 7, the unity of neuroscience is effected when
researchers collaborate to build multilevel mechanistic explanations. Differ-
ent ﬁelds approach a mechanism from different perspectives using different
techniques. Their ﬁndings place constraints on the mechanism. It is not the
case that theories at one level are reduced to theories at another. Rather,
different ﬁelds add constraints that shape the space of possible mechanisms
for a phenomenon. Constraints from different ﬁelds are the tiles that ﬁll
¹⁹ Wimsatt (1976b) and Sarkar (1992) recommend that the term ‘‘reduction’’ be used to describe the
explanation of a phenomenon by its mechanism. Peter Smith ( 1992) suggests that the reductive ideal
can be maintained by appeal to ‘‘modest reductions.’’ Manyscientists use the term ‘‘reduction’’ in this
way. The notion of ‘‘weak reduction’’ has yet to be fully explicated, and I hope that defenders of weak
reduction will ﬁnd my view of mechanisms congenial.


=== PAGE 40 ===

starting with neuroscience 19
in the mechanism sketch to produce an explanatory mosaic. To the extent
that different ﬁelds have independent perspectives and techniques, the
ability of a hypothesized mechanism to satisfy their diverse constraints
simultaneously counts as an impressive epistemic success. The explanation
is more likely to be correct if it is consistent with multiple theoretically
and causally independent techniques and perspectives. The collaborative
nature of explanation building in neuroscience, in other words, provides
the kind of multiple-points-of-view robustness discussed by, for example,
Culp ( 1994, 1995), Salmon ( 1984), and Wimsatt ( 1981). I describe this
view of the unity of science as a mosaic unity in which distinct ﬁelds
contribute piecemeal to the construction of a complex and evidentially
robust mechanistic explanation.
5. Criteria of Adequacy for an Account
of Explanation
In the rest of the book, I develop my model of explanation. I hold the
account to the following criteria of adequacy.
First, the account of explanation should be descriptively adequate. Hempel
insists that his models of explanation, ‘‘constitute ideal types or theoretical
idealizations and are not intended to reﬂect the manner in which working
scientists actually formulate their explanatory accounts. Rather they are
meant to provide explications, or rational reconstructions, or theoretical
models, of certain modes of scientiﬁc explanation’’ ( 1962). This is simi-
lar to Schaffner’s claim that his reduction model is merely a ‘‘regulative
ideal.’’ Descriptive failures are not, by themselves, decisive against a nor-
mative account of explanation. Nonetheless, as the number of descriptive
inadequacies mounts, one begins to wonder whether the model actually
reﬂects what science is like or whether it reﬂects a philosopher’s idea of
what science should be like. Such descriptive inadequacies can perhaps be
accommodated by the standard models of explanation, I argue, but only at
the risk of losing the elegance, simplicity, and unity that made those models
so attractive in the ﬁrst place. By paying close attention to these descriptive
inadequacies, one can develop new rational reconstructions—models that
reﬂect the ideals of explanation implicit in the practice of neuroscience.
The account of explanation that I give is idealized and normative, but it is


=== PAGE 41 ===

20 starting with neuroscience
modeled upon the ideals of neuroscientists rather than those of philosophers
and physicists.
Second, the account of explanation should demarcate explanation from
other kinds of scientiﬁc achievement. ²⁰For example, an account of expla-
nation should make sense of the difference between simulating or modeling
a phenomenon and explaining it. Ptolemeic models can be used to simulate
and predict planetary motion across the night sky but they do not explain
it; the epicycles, deferents, and equants are merely mathematical tools in
the models with no basis in the structure of the heavens. An explanation,
in contrast, shows why the planets move as they do and allows one to say
how they would move if conditions were different. Similarly, the account
should distinguish explanation from categorization. Merely sorting neurons
or glial cells into different subtypes, or carving the brain into different
spatial regions (for example, frontal, occipital, parietal, temporal), while
certainly useful, is not explanatory. Explanation is a distinctive scientiﬁc
achievement. In the account of explanation developed in this book, I show
what is so distinctive about it.
Third, the account of explanation should reveal criteria for assessing
explanations. The account should not merely describe the form of expla-
nation in neuroscience. It should prescribe norms of explanation as well. In
what follows, I develop a view of what counts as an acceptable mechanistic
explanation.
²⁰ Although the word ‘‘demarcation’’ is sometimes usedto distinguish science from pseudoscience,
I am not doing that here.


=== PAGE 42 ===

2
Explanation and Causal
Relevance
Summary
I defend a causal-mechanical view of explanation in neuroscience by argu-
ing against three other philosophical accounts of scientiﬁc explanation: Paul
Churchland’s representational account, Carl Hempel’s covering-law (CL)
model, and Philip Kitcher’s uniﬁcation model. Each of these models strug-
gles to recover commonly accepted constraints on explanations, constraints
that are easily satisﬁed by the causal-mechanical view. To illustrate this
point, I consider two examples: the explanation of neurotransmitter release
and the explanation of the action potential. The ﬁrst example reveals sev-
eral common constraints on acceptable explanations. The second example
shows that even the most compelling example of covering-law explanation
in neuroscience is, in fact, more accurately understood as an example of
causal-mechanical explanation.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
All scientists are motivated in part by the pleasure of understanding.
Unfortunately, the pleasure of understanding is often indistinguishable
from the pleasure of misunderstanding. The sense of understanding is at
best an unreliable indicator of the quality and depth of an explanation.
In this chapter, I argue that good explanations in neuroscience show how
phenomena are situated within the causal structure of the world (Salmon
1984). There are other ways of thinking about explanation. One can think


=== PAGE 43 ===

22 explanation and causal relevance
of explanation as a psychological process in which a representation or
a prototype is applied to a phenomenon (Section 3). One can think of
explanation as a logical relation by which a description of a phenomenon
follows from premises describing laws of nature and antecedent conditions
(Section 4). And one can think of explanation as the uniﬁcation of disparate
phenomena within a given argument schema (Section5). I argue, however,
that these approaches fail to articulate a core set of norms for, or constraints
upon, acceptable explanations in neuroscience. I draw out these core
constraints by examining the claim that neurotransmitter release is explained
by an inﬂux of Ca 2+ into the pre-synaptic axon terminal (Section 2).
One might object that other explanations in neuroscience are, in fact,
most clearly reconstructed as arguments or instances of uniﬁcation. The
most compelling example of such is the Hodgkin and Huxley model
of the action potential. In Section 6, I show that the example, properly
understood, shows that complete explanations in neuroscience describe the
causal structure of the world.
2. How Calcium Explains Neurotransmitter Release
To draw out some scientiﬁc commitments about explanation, consider the
crucial role of Ca2+ in the mechanism of neurotransmitter release. This is
an example of etiological explanation, in which an effect is explained by
its causes. An action potential arrives at the cell’s axon terminal, raising
the membrane voltage sufﬁciently to open Ca 2+-speciﬁc ion channels.
The resulting inﬂux of Ca 2+ initiates a cascade of intracellular reactions
that terminates in the creation of a pore between a transmitter-containing
vesicle and the membrane. The explanandum (the thing to be explained) is
the release of one or more quanta of neurotransmitters into the synaptic
cleft. The explanans (the thing that does the explaining) is the mechanism
linking the inﬂux of Ca 2+ into the axon terminal. Ca 2+ inﬂux is only
part of the explanation, of course, but for now I focus on the evidence
used to justify this step of the explanation. Several norms of explanation
are implicit in this evidence (see Bennett 2001 for a detailed review of the
primary literature).
Bernard Katz and Ricardo Miledi did much of this experimental and
theoretical work. In one experiment, they took a motor nerve and a muscle


=== PAGE 44 ===

explanation and causal relevance 23
and put them in a controlled ﬂuid bath designed to mimic the extracellular
ﬂuid environment of the synapse in vivo. They delivered current to the
nerve and recorded a change in the electrical potential of the muscle. Then
they varied the Ca2+ concentration in the bath. They found that as Ca 2+
levels drop, neurotransmitter release diminishes and ultimately stops. In
some synapses, the quantity of neurotransmitter released with an action
potential varies as the fourth power of external calcium concentrations.
They then used a micropipette to deliver a puff of Ca 2+ onto the
synapse in a Ca 2+-free bath. The puff of extracellular Ca 2+ alone does
not cause the neuron to release neurotransmitters. Nor does the neuron
release transmitters if the puff of Ca 2+ is applied during the short time-
window starting after the action potential reaches the terminal and ending
when the muscle responds (or would normally respond). However, if
t h ep u f fo fC a2+ is applied just before the action potential reaches the
terminal, the neuron releases neurotransmitter. Fluorescent Ca 2+ markers
and electrophysiological evidence show that Ca2+ diffuses into the terminal
with each action potential (Ashley and Ridgway 1968). If one blocks the
inﬂux of Ca 2+ by raising the extracellular Mg 2+ concentration (which
blocks Ca2+ channels), the neuron releases no neurotransmitter. However,
one can induce cells to release neurotransmitters by injecting Ca2+ directly
into the post-synaptic terminal and by freeing caged sources of Ca2+ within
the terminal (Miledi 1973), thus circumventing the Mg2+ block.
Other factors are explanatorily irrelevant. Action potentials are partly
constituted by the diffusion of large quantities of sodium (Na +) into the
cell. When the action potential reaches the terminal, intracellular Na +
concentrations rise. If one blocks the Na+ channels at and near the terminal
with tetrodotoxin (TTX), one blocks the release of neurotransmitters.
This ﬁnding is consistent with the possibility that the inﬂux of sodium into
the terminal causes transmitter release. This ﬁnding is also consistent with
the possibility that depolarization is the relevant variable, Na
+ being only
one means to that end. One can decide between these possibilities by
depolarizing the TTX-treated cell by some other current. Katz and Miledi
(1967) demonstrated that the rise in Na + concentration is not, per se,
explanatorily relevant to the release of neurotransmitters. Depolarization
explains transmitter release. Similar experiments (using TTX together with
a tetraethyl ammonium, TEA, a K + blocker) show that K + ions are not
relevant for neurotransmitter release either.


=== PAGE 45 ===

24 explanation and causal relevance
This brief example contains a number of implicit norms about what
does and does not count as an acceptable explanation in neuroscience.
These norms of explanation have been used by defenders of the causal-
mechanical account to challenge the sufﬁciency of alternative models of
scientiﬁc explanation (Salmon 1984, 1989). A ﬁrst step toward a normative
account of explanation in neuroscience is to make these norms explicit.
One reliable but fallible guide to explanatory relevance is statistical
relevance. One expects explanatorily relevant phenomena to make a dif-
ference to the explanandum, and statistical relevance is one way of making
a difference. Explanatory factors sometimes fail to raise the probability of
the explanandum. In some cases there are two independent possible expla-
nations, one of which will be true if the other is false. There might, for
example, have been two independent release pathways such that preventing
Ca2+ inﬂux would trigger the other as a failsafe. Ca 2+ inﬂux would, in
those conditions, still be said to cause neurotransmitter release even if its
behavior does not raise its probability over what it would be if the other
pathway had been activated. Sometimes explanatory factors reduce the
probability of the explanandum. Philosophers discuss examples of ‘‘making
it the hard way’’ in which an event comes about through a sequence of
improbable events that, taken together, make the event to be explained less
likely than it would otherwise have been (see Salmon 1977 for a lengthy
discussion).
Not all correlations are explanatory. The rise in intracellular Na +
concentration and the subsequent efﬂux of K + during the action potential
are correlated with the release of neurotransmitters, but the rise in Na +
concentration and the drop in K + concentration are not explanatorily
relevant to neurotransmitter release. The rise in membrane voltage explains
why neurotransmitters are released (via the opening of Ca
2+ channels).
For these reasons, it seems best to say that although correlation is perhaps
a reliable indicator of explanatory relationships, such simple statistical
measures do not pick out the set of all and only relevant factors.
This example also illustrates the norm that in order to establish that a
factor is explanatorily relevant, it is not sufﬁcient to show that the factor
regularly precedes the explanandum event. To use Aristotle’s example, the
rooster’s crowing and the sunrise are sequential, and they are sufﬁciently
regular that one could predict the sunrise from an occurrence of crowing,
but the crowing is explanatorily irrelevant to the sunrise. No doubt, it is


=== PAGE 46 ===

explanation and causal relevance 25
an important piece of evidence that Ca 2+ inﬂux precedes the release of
neurotransmitters. If the Ca 2+ inﬂux occurred after the neurotransmitter
release, it would not be considered part of its explanation. This idea is
implicit in the logic of Katz and Miledi’s experiment. Application of Ca2+ to
the cell after the terminal depolarizes but before the post-synaptic response
has no effect on the post-synaptic response. Even if there are domains
of physics within which it is possible to explain present or past events
by reference to future or present events, there are no such explanations
in neuroscience.¹ In etiological explanations, the factors in the explanans
generally precede (or at least, do not follow) explanandum factors.² Bad
explanations mistake effects for causes. Bromberger’s (1966)e x a m p l eo ft h e
shadow and the ﬂagpole is the classic philosophical example, and one that
I discuss further below. One can derive the length of a ﬂagpole’s shadow
from the height of the ﬂagpole, the elevation of the sun, and laws about
the rectilinear propagation of light, and one can also derive the height of
the ﬂagpole from the length of the shadow, the elevation of the sun, and
laws about the rectilinear propagation of light. The point of this example
is that explanation follows the direction of causal inﬂuence: light from the
sun travels past the ﬂagpole and on to the ground. This norm is clearly
enforced in the evidence for the Ca
2+ hypothesis. The empirical fact that
most explanations in neuroscience run from earlier to later is explained by
the hypothesis that these explanations track causal relationships and by the
fact that causal relationships in the domain of neuroscience tend (as far as is
now known) to run from earlier to later.
Another norm of explanation implicit in this example is that one cannot
explain one effect of a common cause by reference to another effect. Hans
Reichenbach’s ( 1956) classic example is that of the barometer and the
¹ I do not claim that all explanations or causes work from earlier to later. There might be certain
areas of physics in which backwards causation remains a live possibility (see Dowe 2000), and it might
be that bona ﬁde backwards causes are rare (owing to the absence of initial or boundary conditions)
rather than impossible (see Price1996). The account of causal relevance I develop in Chapter3 does not
prohibit backwards causation. For my purposes, what matters is not temporal asymmetry in explanation
per se, but rather the asymmetry of causal relevance that explains it.
² This can be difﬁcult to tease apart in practice. The brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease
regularly contain dense plaques of a substance known as β-amyloid and with pockets of withered
neuronal processes known as neuroﬁbrillary tangles. Suppose one believes that the presence of tangles is
explained by the deposition ofβ-amyloid in the brain. One should abandon this explanatory hypothesis
if one discovers that neuroﬁbrillary tangles appear in the brain long before β-amyloid is deposited. But
in a stain on a microscope slide, it is impossible to establish which factor precedes the other. This was
the source of considerable debate at one time in the history of research on Alzheimer’s disease.


=== PAGE 47 ===

26 explanation and causal relevance
weather. Despite the regularity obtaining between falling barometers and
storms, changes in barometers do not explain storms. Instead, falling baro-
metric pressure explains both the stormy weather and the falling barometric
readings. A surprising number of operations in cells depend on the Ca 2+
concentration. Changing the intracellular Ca + concentration is likely to
impact several different reaction rates, only some of which are directly
relevant to neurotransmitter release. It is crucial for understanding such
biochemical cascades, however, that one understand what causes what and
what is merely correlated with what for some other reason (such as the exis-
tence of a common cause). Good explanations explain effects with causes.
One last feature of this example deserves attention: the relationship
between action potentials and the release of neurotransmitters is stochastic.
Only 10– 20 percent of action potentials (and instances of Ca 2+ inﬂux)
eventuate in release events. It is clearly not required of this explanatory
relationship that all action potentials eventuate in release events. Nor is
it required that no release events occur without action potentials. Nor is
it required that action potentials make release events probable, for they
evidently do not (see Bogen 2005). Action potentials are reminiscent of
the case of Mr. Jones, whose untreated syphilis terminates in paresis despite
the fact that only one in ﬁve cases of untreated syphilis do so. His bout of
syphilis is relevant to his paresis despite the fact that one would not expect
him to develop paresis on the basis of knowing that he has syphilis.
No other norms of explanation could be illustrated with this example.
I have said nothing, for instance, about the complexities of designing and
conducting these experiments. However, the main points can now be
summarized as follows:
(E1) mere temporal sequences are not explanatory (temporal sequences);
(E2) causes explain effects and not vice versa (asymmetry);
(E3) causally independent effects of common causes do not explain one
another (common cause);
(E4) causally irrelevant phenomena are not explanatory (relevance); and
(E5) causes need not make effects probable to explain them (improbable
effects).
Salmon (1984) uses constraints (E1)–(E 5) to attack the once-dominant CL
model of explanation and to argue in favor of his causal-mechanical view.
Salmon’s most penetrating insight was to abandon the idea—explicit in


=== PAGE 48 ===

explanation and causal relevance 27
the CL model and Kitcher’s U-model—that explanations are arguments.
Instead, he defended an ontic view, according to which explanations are
objective features of the world. This idea can be brought out by considering
an ambiguity in the term, ‘‘explanation.’’ Sometimes explanations are
texts—descriptions, models, or representations of any sort that are used to
convey information from one person to another. Explanatory texts are the
kinds of things that are spoken, written, and drawn. They are the kinds of
things that can be more or less complete and more or less accurate. They
are representations. Other times, the term explanation refers to an objective
portion of the causal structure of the world, to the set of factors that bring
about or sustain a phenomenon (call them objective explanations). What
explains the accident? The ice on the road, the whiskey, the argument,
the tears, and the severed brake cables. What explains the release of
neurotransmitters? The action potential, Ca 2+ inﬂux, vesicular binding,
and fusion. There are mechanisms (the objective explanations) and there
are their descriptions (explanatory texts). Objective explanations are not
texts; they are full-bodied things. They are facts, not representations. They
are the kinds of things that are discovered and described. There is no
question of objective explanations being ‘‘right’’ or ‘‘wrong,’’ or ‘‘good’’
or ‘‘bad.’’ They just are.
Objective explanations, the causes and mechanisms in the world, are
the correct starting point in thinking about the criteria for evaluating
explanatory texts in neuroscience. The normative criteria expressed in
(E1)–(E 5) are embodied in the idea that good explanatory texts reveal
the causal structure of the world. Good mechanistic explanatory texts
(including prototypes) are good in part because they correctly represent
objective explanations. Complete explanatory texts are complete because
they represent all and only the relevant portions of the causal structure
of the world. ³ Explanatory texts can be accurate enough and complete
enough, depending on the pragmatic context in which the explanation is
requested and given. Objective explanations are not variable in this way.
³ See Coffa (1974) and Salmon ( 1989) for discussion of the ‘‘ontic approach’’ to explanation as I
intend it here. At times, I will switch back to usin g the word ‘‘explanation’’ to describe explanatory
texts or explanatory models. I will sometimes talk about explanations as describing mechanisms. My
limited point here is that there are objective explanations and that good explanatory texts describe
those objective explanations. There are perhaps many interesting things to be said about explanatory
texts, but one crucial aspect of their adequacy has to do with whether explanatory texts accurately
characterize the causal structure of the world.


=== PAGE 49 ===

28 explanation and causal relevance
In order to display the virtues of this ontic and causal-mechanical view of
explanation, I now consider three popular views of scientiﬁc explanation.
Each has difﬁculty satisfying E 1–E 5.
3. Explanation and Representation
According to one large family of views, explanations explain by subsum-
ing a phenomenon under a general representation, prototype, or schema
(see Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005; P. M. Churchland 1989;M a c h a m e r
et al. 2000). The representations can be understood as mental representa-
tions, as diagrams or models, or as textual descriptions or equations. My
concern is with the minimal suggestion that the explanatory relationship
between an explanandum and an explanans should be conceived as a case of
bringing an abstract representation to bear on an explanandum phenomenon,
for example, as activating a mental representation, as applying a diagram
to an example, and as using equations to derive the phenomenon to be
explained. While this idea is an intriguing hypothesis about the psychology
of understanding and about how scientists represent the world to themselves
and to one another, it is too weak to serve as a guide to the norms that
distinguish good explanations from bad and complete explanations from
incomplete.
To see this, consider Paul Churchland’s ( 1989) parallel distributed
processing (PDP) account of explanation. Churchland uses a broadly
connectionist framework (see Rummelhart and McClelland 1986) to con-
struct a neurally inspired theory of understanding. He then applies that
theory to traditional philosophical discussions of explanation. On his view,
explanation is prototype activation in a connectionist network, or in a brain
that works like one:
Explanatory understanding consists in the activation of a particular prototype vector
in a well-trained network. It consists in the apprehension of the problematic case
as an instance of a general type, a type for which the creature has a detailed and
well-informed representation. (P. M. Churchland 1989: 210)
This pattern of activation, Churchland emphasizes, is not merely a ‘‘label’’:
The vector has structure, a great deal of structure, whose function is to represent
an overall syndrome of objective features, relations, sequences and uniformities. Its


=== PAGE 50 ===

explanation and causal relevance 29
activation by a given perceptual or other cognitive circumstance does not represent
a loss of information. On the cont rary, it represents a major and speculative gain
in information, since the portrait it embodies typically goes far beyond the local
and perspectivally limited information that may activate it on any given occasion.
(P. M. Churchland 1989: 212; emphasis in original)
Explanations assimilate a phenomenon to a prototype and thereby generate
novel features of the item from a few input features.
Churchland emphasizes that there are many different types of under-
standing that have different kinds of prototype in different domains (see
P. M. Churchland 1989: 212– 18). His taxonomy of explanatory prototypes
includes: property-cluster prototypes, such as ‘‘Jadeite’’ or ‘‘pyramidal cell’’;eti-
ological causal prototypes, such as the explanation of neurotransmitter release
by Ca 2+ inﬂux; means–ends prototypes , such as procedures or functional
explanations; superordinate prototypes, such as those invoked to explain why
the interior angles of a triangle sum to 180 degrees; social interaction proto-
types, such as those involving ethical, legal, or etiquette-involving norms;
and motivation prototypes of the sort in folk-psychological explanations. I
add constitutive causal prototypes to this list to accommodate, for example, the
explanation of the Ca2+ channel opening in terms of the underlying mecha-
nism within the channel. (Perhaps this is a species of means–ends prototype,
but it is different from many other kinds of functional explanation). The
account of mechanistic explanation that I develop in this book shows what
etiological and constitutive mechanistic prototypes would have to represent.
Churchland’s general approach to scientiﬁc explanation involves two
steps. The ﬁrst is to construct a neural model of understanding. The second
is to apply the model to scientiﬁc explanation.
As to the ﬁrst, Churchland does not say how those instances of prototype-
activation that constitute understanding are different from those that do not.
Prototype activation vectors are widespread in the functioning of the brain.
Populations of neurons also control balance, posture, and reaching; they
produce and direct saccadic eye movements; and they regulate endocrine
release and body ﬂuid homeostasis. The systems responsible for such
phenomena can be explained by appeal to state spaces and activation
vectors in populations of neurons. However, it is a strain to see these
systems as understanding (or having explained) anything at all.
To focus on cognitive systems in a more narrow sense, consider the
distinction between recognizing a phenomenon and understanding it. One


=== PAGE 51 ===

30 explanation and causal relevance
can recognize Ike ⁴ in a crowd without explaining anything about him. ⁵
Suppose that one wants to understand why Ike is a bookie, or why Ike has
only a junior high education. One cannot answer these questions by merely
recognizing Ike. This is because Ike’s surface features (his gait, his hair line,
his shape) are in most cases not explanatorily relevant to his professional and
educational status. The distinction between recognition and understand-
ing is supported by empirical evidence. Experimental psychologists, for
example, recognize different levels of processing in memory, distinguished
(in part) by different encoding procedures (see Craik and Tulving 1975).
Lower levels of processing encode memories of visually presented words
by, for example, representing surface features of the printed word (does
it contain an ‘‘e’’?), or by representing its phonological properties (does it
rhyme with cat?), or by making semantic associations (what could one do
with it?). Each of these is a case of prototype activation on the PDP view,
but only the latter contains information that is explanatorily relevant to the
phenomenon that the word describes.
In the years since Churchland ﬁrst made this suggestion, cognitive
scientists have learned more about causal understanding. For example, some
models treat explanation as a matter of tracking the unobservable structure
of the world (Povinelli 2000), or picking up on statistical dependency
relationships (Cheng 1999; Glymour 2001; Rescorla and Wagner 1972),
or making inferences to the best explanation (Ahn and Kalish 2000),
or mentally modeling the behavior of a mechanism (Hegarty, Just, and
Morrison 1988;T h a g a r d1999; Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005). Perhaps
Churchland can meet some of the above-mentioned challenges by building
further constraints into his model.
Suppose, then, that we accept Churchland’s PDP model as an ade-
quate account of the neuropsychology of human understanding. Can this
neuropsychological account do double-duty as an account of the norms
of scientiﬁc explanation? Churchland is explicit that his interests are not
primarily normative (P. M. Churchland 1989: 198). However, the goal of
⁴ The example is a reference to McClelland (1981).
⁵ Recognition and explanation can begin to blur if one endorses the idea that perception is a kind
of inference to the best explanation. The size, shape, and pattern of movement of that person are
best explained by the hypothesis that the person is Ike, and the image of a triangular cell body is best
explained by positing that I am looking at a pyramidal cell. Granting that this is a form of explanation,
however, what is explained in such cases is the set of stimulus features, not anything about the object
itself.


=== PAGE 52 ===

explanation and causal relevance 31
thinking more clearly about what is required of an adequate neuroscientiﬁc
explanation cannot be satisﬁed without thinking about norms for evalu-
ating explanations. Consider Churchland’s description of etiological causal
prototypes:
An etiological prototype depicts a typical temporal sequence of events, such as
cooking of food upon exposure to heat, the deformation of a fragile object during
impact with a tougher one, the escape of liquid from a tilted container, and so on.
These sequences contain prototypical elements in a prototypical order, and they
make possible our explanatory understanding of the temporally extended world.
(P. M. Churchland 1989: 213)
But as the example of neurotransmitter release suggests, some temporal
sequences are explanatory, and some are not. An account of explanation
should help one to distinguish the two. Churchland acknowledges this
limitation: ‘‘Now just what intricacies constitute a genuine etiological
prototype, and how the brain distinguishes between real causal processes
and mere pseudoprocesses, are secondary matters I shall leave for a future
occasion’’ (P. M. Churchland 1989: 214).⁶ Those who would develop a
normative account of explanation, however, cannot avoid this question.
The way to understand how brains distinguish causes from temporal
sequences is to start by considering how causes differ from temporal
sequences—that is, by examining the objective explanations in the world
rather than the way that they are represented in the mind/brain.
A separate problem arises in accounting for explanatory relevance (E 4).
Grant that explanatory texts are prototypes and that explanation involves
activating such prototypes. Different features of the phenomenon are
relevant for different explanatory purposes. Suppose that Ike is a Shark (a
member of the gang, the Sharks); he is single and thirty years old; he weighs
210 pounds; he has a junior high education; he is a bookie; he idolizes
Johnny Thunders; and he plays guitar. To explain why he is a bookie, it
would be relevant to note that he is a member of a gang and perhaps that
he has a junior high education, but it would not be relevant to note that
he weighs 210 pounds or that he plays guitar. To explain why he plays
guitar, it might be relevant to note that he is a single, thirty-year-old male
who idolizes Johnny Thunders, but not (I suppose) that he is a bookie or
⁶ Churchland (1995) repeats the same account of the etiological prototype without amendment.


=== PAGE 53 ===

32 explanation and causal relevance
that he has a junior high school education. All of these features are in the
Ike prototype (which, if we know him well, contains innumerable other
features of varying degrees of explanatory relevance). All of these features
are activated in the Ike prototype. Yet only some of these features are
relevant to Ike’s being a bookie, only some are relevant to his playing
guitar, and possibly no feature is relevant to both.
What goes for Ike goes for the categories of neuroscience. Ca2+ channels
can be characterized along a number of dimensions: molecular weight, pri-
mary structure, voltage sensitivity, maximum conductance values, primary
structure, and so on. Different features of the Ca2+ channel are relevant for
different explanatory purposes. An account of explanation that can be used
to sort good explanations from bad should help to sort explanatorily rele-
vant information from explanatorily irrelevant information. But the PDP
account cannot be so used unless the activation-vector story is supplement-
ed with an account of explanatory relevance. Perhaps the PDP account
can be supplemented to resolve this difﬁculty. However, to supplement
it, one will have to begin by assessing what explanatory relevance is, and
this thrusts our attention away from representation and out onto the causal
structures that good explanations describe.
Churchland discusses some normative conclusions that follow from the
PDP account. In particular, he stresses that good explanations are rich,
warranted, correct, and as uniﬁed as possible. The ﬁrst three of these virtues
are not particular to explanations; any representation should be at least
sufﬁciently detailed, warranted, and accurate for the purposes at hand. So I
f o c u so nu n i t y .
Churchland justiﬁes his appeal to unity on instrumental grounds: uniﬁed
prototypes are the best predictors. Churchland draws this conclusion from
the behavior of connectionist networks. If they contain too many hidden
nodes, or if they have too many connections for a given task, standard
training algorithms will conﬁgure the network such that it stores each
trial stimulus as its own separate representation. If so, it fails to generalize
to novel cases. If, alternatively, one places computational limits on the
network by reducing the number of hidden nodes and connections, the
same algorithms conﬁgure the network so that it readily generalizes to novel
input patterns. Churchland concludes, ‘‘Conceptual uniﬁcation, evidently,
is a cognitive virtue of enormous importance, at least as conceived on the
present model of cognition. It is important for the very good reason that


=== PAGE 54 ===

explanation and causal relevance 33
cognitive conﬁgurations having that virtue do much better at generalizing
their past experience to new cases’’ (Churchland 1989: 221).
One might reasonably wonder at this point how the value of unity
is to be weighed against the value of generating explanations that satisfy
constraints such as (E 1)–(E 5). Grant that more uniﬁed theories afford
better predictions. The question is whether prototypes that merely unify
diverse phenomena will be better predictors than those that, in addition ,
satisfy (E 1)–(E 5). There are long-standing philosophical arguments that
one good way to build theories that make accurate novel predictions is to
build theories that accurately describe hidden causal mechanisms (see Psillos
1999). Prototypes of temporal sequences, correlations, and irrelevant factors
are not as useful for this purpose. I return to the discussion of uniﬁcation
as a virtue in Section 5.
A ﬁnal point serves to underscore the importance of shifting attention
away from the representations used in explanations and toward the causal
structure of the world. Some phenomena might be so complex that
they overwhelm our limited cognitive systems. Perhaps a mechanism
has so many parts with so many interactions that it is impossible to
understand. Felleman and Van Essen’s ( 1991) ‘‘subway map’’ of the visual
cortex in the macaque monkey, for example, contains thirty-two distinct
brain regions and over 300 connections among them. Biochemical cascades
and gene regulation often involve a bewildering number of molecules
and interactions. For very complex mechanisms, human working memory
is so limited that it cannot entertain all of the explanatorily relevant
information at one time (compare Rosenberg 1985, 1994). Mary Hegarty
shows that even simple mechanisms overwhelm our processing capacities
if they have over a handful of parts or if the interactions among them
cannot be represented in two dimensions (Hegarty, Just, and Morrison
1988). For this reason, neuroscientists who revel in the complexity of the
brain are increasingly using computational tools and databases (such as Van
Essen’s SuMS database and the Genome Database) that allow them to
make explanatory connections that would escape them if they relied only
on their unaided cognitive abilities. ⁷ It would be wrong to say that the
⁷ One might develop an externalist view of explanati on, in which this computational scaffolding,
as Clark (1997) would call it, is included in the cognitive account of understanding. Perhaps Church-
land’s model could be combined with Clark’s active externalism. I do not pursue that possibility
here.


=== PAGE 55 ===

34 explanation and causal relevance
phenomena produced by such complex mechanisms have no explanation.
The explanations exist even if we cannot represent them cognitively.⁸
4. The Covering-Law Model
One way to strengthen representational models would be to place restric-
tions on what can appear in explanatory representations and on how the
representation can be applied to the explanandum phenomenon . According
to the CL model (Hempel and Oppenheim 1948; Hempel 1965), scientiﬁc
explanations are arguments from premises describing laws of nature and
antecedent conditions to a conclusion describing the phenomenon to be
explained.
Explanations explain, on this view, by showing that the phenomenon
described in the conclusion was to have been expected on the basis of the
laws of nature (Hempel 1965: 336). The relevant sense of ‘‘expectation’’ is
not psychological but epistemic: the explanandum is the conclusion of a
sound argument with premises that state laws of nature and the relevant
antecedent and background conditions. For deductive explanations, expec-
tation means that a description of the phenomenon follows with certainty
from universal laws (plus the relevant antecedent and background con-
ditions). For inductive explanations, expectation means that a description
of the phenomenon follows with high probability (that is, P > 0.5) from
statistical laws. Advocates of the CL model frequently claim that prediction
and explanation are symmetrical; the only difference is that in explanations
the conclusion of the argument is presumed true (or well-conﬁrmed). The
CL account of explanation is sometimes called an epistemic or inferential
model (by, for example, Coffa 1974;S a l m o n1989) to highlight its reliance
on this sense of expectation. This is the central point of contrast with the
ontic view that I recommend.
Hempel develops variants of the CL account to accommodate expla-
nations of singular events, such as the occurrence of a particular action
⁸ A similar point can be made by appeal to the soci al nature of science. Scientiﬁc explanations
need not be housed in the minds of individual cogni tive agents but might be distributed across many
researchers or entire traditions. Many papers have multiple authors, and each author understands some
aspect of the posited explanation more than the other co-authors. This is why the authors share the
intellectual burden of the paper. (See Keil and Wilson 2000.)


=== PAGE 56 ===

explanation and causal relevance 35
potential, and general regularities, such as the characteristic waveform of the
action potential. Classical theory reduction is the CL account of explanation
for general regularities. A special case of such reduction is the explanation
of macro-regularities in the behavior of wholes in terms of the micro-
regularities in the behaviors of components. Advocates of classical theory
reduction (and many of its opponents) are thus among those who at least
tacitly endorse the CL account. Reduction is then understood as an explana-
tory relationship between a basic theory, T B, and a reduced theory, T R.
The explanandum,T B, reduces TR if and only if: (i) the predicates in TR are
deﬁned in terms of the predicates in TB; (ii) TR is derivable from TB by use
of such deﬁnitions together with sentences specifying boundary conditions
and limiting assumptions; and (iii) T B contains at least one law of nature.
Requirement (i) links the vocabularies in the two theories, requirement (ii)
expresses the derivability requirement, and requirement (iii) ensures that
the explanation contains at least one law, as the CL account demands.
In Chapter 1, I claim that the CL account performs poorly as a description
of explanations in neuroscience, which are more likely to be explanations
in terms of underlying mechanisms. The primary virtue of the CL account,
however, is not as a description but as a regulative ideal. According to that
account, explanations are arguments. When the argument is a good argu-
ment—when the premises are true, when at least one nontrivial premise
states a law of nature, and when the inference is warranted—the explana-
tion is a good explanation. Likewise, explanations are complete when it is
possible to write out the argument without suppressing premises. Here I
focus on the CL model’s shortcomings as a regulative ideal for explanations.
The CL model suffered sustained attack well into the1980s (see especial-
ly Lewis 1983;S a l m o n1984). It is now widely regarded among philosophers
of science as a relic of logical positivism (even though this tradition traces
back at least as far as Aristotle). There are many reasons for this attitude. I
discuss three: (i) the problem of distinguishing laws of nature from accidents
and other non-explanatory generalizations; (ii) the problem of providing
an account of explanatory relevance; and (iii) the fact that one need not
show that a phenomenon was to be expected in order to explain it. These
objections are familiar to many, so I keep the discussion short.
(i) One central challenge for the CL model is to account for the dis-
tinction between laws of nature, which are genuinely explanatory, and


=== PAGE 57 ===

36 explanation and causal relevance
accidental generalizations, which are not. (E 1)–(E 3) address three ways
that a generalization can fail to be explanatory. It can describe mere
temporal sequences (E 1). It can describe mere correlations (E 2). And it
can describe non-explanatory effect-to-cause relations (E 3). It will not
do, for example, to adopt the na ¨ıve regularity view that laws are uni-
versal generalizations of unrestricted scope because relationships violating
(E1)–(E 3) can easily be formulated within this restriction (see Armstrong
1983;R u b e n1999;S a l m o n1984). Nor will it do to add that the universal
generalizations must support counterfactuals (as Weber2005 recommends).
There are true counterfactuals, for example, asserting that if the cell were
to release neurotransmitters then it is likely to have generated an action
potential and asserting that if the cell had not increased its intracellular
Na+ concentration, then it would not have released a neurotransmit-
ter. For this reason, Lewis ( 1983) requires that explanatory generalizations
support ‘‘non-backtracking’’ counterfactuals, that is, those that cannot be
used to describe the relationship between an effect and its cause. The
CL model’s strength as a regulative ideal depends, in large part, on the
availability of a satisfactory account of laws, and much of the normative
force of the CL model is contained within the restrictions placed on the
notion of a ‘‘law.’’ For this reason, in Chapter3, I defend one strategy for
meeting this challenge (though not as a defense of the CL model, which
I reject).
(ii) A second problem for the CL model is to provide an account of
explanatory relevance (E4). The rise in membrane voltage rather than the
rise in intracellular Na + concentrations explains the opening of the Ca 2+
channels. Nonetheless, there is a generalization to the effect that if the Na+
concentrations had been high, then the cell would be more likely to release
neurotransmitters.
To use a philosopher’s example, consider an experiment in which
neurons are ﬁrst blessed by an ordained parson (for example, by sprinkling
them with isotonic holy water) and then stimulated with a 10-nanoampere
(nA) current for one second. This experiment would no doubt conﬁrm
the general regularity that blessed neurons produce action potentials when
stimulated with a 10 nA current. From this regularity, one could conclude
that when a given cell has been blessed and stimulated with a 10 nA
current, it will generate an action potential. But the blessing is not part of


=== PAGE 58 ===

explanation and causal relevance 37
the explanation.⁹ It is irrelevant. Note here a crucial difference between
arguments and explanations (stressed by Salmon 1984). The strength of an
argument is not diminished one bit by the addition of any number of
irrelevant premises. The strength of an explanation, on the other hand,
depends crucially upon whether the factors described in the explanatory
text are relevant.
No neuroscientists believe that blessing neurons makes any difference,
but all neuroscientists are confronted at some point with the task of
discerning which of a number of competing possible variables explains a
phenomenon. One might legitimately wonder, for example, whether an
action potential was caused by the injection of current, or the injection
of a volume of ﬂuid, or the physical disruption of the membrane. Such
considerations are part of the reason why neuroscientists run controlled
experiments. They try to determine which factors make a difference and
which do not. Mere correlations are insufﬁcient to establish that an item
is explanatorily relevant. Instead, one seeks evidence that the correlation is
underwritten by a causal relationship between the explanatory factor and
the event to be explained.
Although constraints (E 1)–(E 4) raise serious problems for the CL
account, and although others argue that the problems are fatal (for
example, Salmon 1989), one might preserve the CL account by rejecting
these constraints. Causal skeptics treat (E 1)–(E 4) as folk notions that have
been abandoned in the mature sciences and will (or should) be abandoned in
other sciences as they mature. Bertrand Russell (1913), for example, would
no doubt embrace the Hodgkin and Huxley model (discussed in Section5)
as a developmental milestone for neuroscience—a ﬁrst step toward
abandoning causal explanations in favor of explanations that subsume phe-
nomena under differential equations. John Norton ( 2003) follows Russell
in treating causation as a ‘‘folk notion’’ on par with caloric or phlogiston.
Talk of causation, he claims, can be retained in ‘‘hospitable environments,’’
such as certain areas of biology and physiology, because many phenomena
in those domains are sufﬁciently regular to evoke the illusion of a causal
relation. But such apparently causal relationships are ultimately nothing but
regularities sustained by noncausal laws at the most fundamental level.
⁹ This example parallels Kyburg’s (1965) classic case of ‘‘hexed salt,’’ which always dissolves in water.


=== PAGE 59 ===

38 explanation and causal relevance
I cannot rule out a priori the possibility that neuroscientists will some
day follow in the path of physicists and reject (E 1)–(E 4) (if this is really
what physicists have done). Nonetheless, two considerations argue against
taking the skeptical path.
First, even if the skeptics are right, biology appears to be one of those hos-
pitable environments in which some occurrences depend upon others and in
which not every correlation is equally explanatory. Where the phenomena
of fundamental physics can perhaps exhaustively be explained by differential
equations, there is more to learn in neuroscience about why variables are
correlated. Neuroscientists search for mechanisms because in their domain
there are mechanisms to be found. In fact, physicists use mechanistic expla-
nations when they descend levels, for example, from particle physics to
strings or branes. Unlike fundamental physicists, neuroscientists can look to
a ﬁner grain to understand how the regularities described in such equations
are sustained. Norton and Russell argue from the structure of the best
physics to conclusions about causation generally. One might just as easily
argue from the structure of the best neuroscience to conclusions about the
importance of causation in neuroscience. There is no reason (absent separate
metaphysical arguments) to take the developmental trajectory of physics as
a projectable trend to be read onto the development of all sciences.¹⁰
Second, unlike some areas of fundamental physics, the search for neu-
roscientiﬁc explanations is driven by goals of treating illnesses, improving
brain function, preventing cognitive decline, and developing new ways to
manipulate and record from the brain in the laboratory. Explanation is a
tool for determining how to intervene into the brain and manipulate it for
our various purposes. Intervening to change a mere temporal predecessor,
a mere correlate, or an irrelevant factor will, at least in most cases, do
nothing to control and manipulate the brain. In such contexts, the notion
of ‘‘cause,’’ its asymmetry, and its difference from correlations and mere
temporal sequences are simply indispensable. The fact that physicists can
do without this distinction (if, in fact, they can) is not germane.
Short of endorsing causal skepticism, one could defend the CL account
by ﬁne-tuning the notion of a law of nature to accommodate (E 1)–(E 4).
¹⁰ Pearl (2000) argues that the notion of causation cannot really get a grip in an open system, but
applies only once one has drawn boundaries around a system and imagined an intervention imposed
from outside the system.


=== PAGE 60 ===

explanation and causal relevance 39
Doing so would move the CL account in the direction of the causal model
of explanation developed here.¹¹ However, it will not do to simply stipulate
that laws satisfy (E1)–(E 4). The ad hoc character of this stipulation would
stand out all the more because, as Salmon ( 1984) argues, (E 1)–(E 5)a r e
readily addressed if one views explanation not as a matter of showing that a
phenomenon ﬁts within the nomic nexus but rather as a matter of showing
how a phenomenon ﬁts into the causal nexus. Causal dependencies satisfy
the restrictions that (E 1)–(E 4) place on a model of explanation: earlier
events explain later events only when they are causally connected (E 1).
Later events do not cause earlier events (E 2).¹² The effects of a common
cause are not causally related to one another, although each is caused by a
common ancestor event (E3). Explanatorily relevant features are those that
are causally related to the explanandum effect (E4). In Chapter 3, I defend a
view of causal relevance, and I show that it satisﬁes these basic constraints
on a model of explanation.
(iii) The ﬁnal problem with the CL account as a regulative ideal strikes
at the heart of the nomic expectability thesis : that to explain an event is
to show that it was to be expected on the basis of the laws of nature
(and the antecedent and background conditions). As I note above in
connection with E 5, only 10– 20 percent of action potentials eventuate
in the release of neurotransmitters. Ion channels (such as Ca2
+ channels)
can (and frequently do) open under conditions in which their opening is
improbable. Mr. Jones’s syphilis terminates in paresis despite the fact that
only one in ﬁve cases of untreated syphilis do so. Each of these examples
illustrates that explaining a phenomenon need not require showing that it
was to be expected (see Salmon 1984).¹³
In response to examples of this sort, Peter Railton ( 1978) devel-
ops a deductive-nomological-probabilistic (DNP) model of explanation.
Although Railton retains several features of the CL account (such as its
¹¹ Lewis proposes to do this by demanding that the lawsunderwriting causal truths be axioms in the
simplest and most systematized axiomatic system. There are questions whether this requirement can
in fact capture the norms expressed in (E 1)–(E 5). My discussion of Kitcher’s view of uniﬁcation casts
some doubt on whether such a solution can be worked out in detail.
¹² If there were backwards causes, then later events would explain earlier events, but, at least in this
world, the causal relations described in neuroscientiﬁc explanations seem to run from earlier to later.
¹³ Valerie Hardcastle (personal communication) correctly point s out that the probability of getting
paresis is much greater if you have syphilis than if you do not. However, having syphilis does not make
getting paresis probable, as required by the nomic expectability thesis. See also below the discussion of
Kitcher’s treatment of this problem case.


=== PAGE 61 ===

40 explanation and causal relevance
appeal to laws), he rightly rejects the nomic expectability thesis for explana-
tions of improbable events. If the event is irreducibly improbable, meaning
that there is nothing more to learn about the set-up that would raise
one’s expectations, then it would be wrong to insist that explanations must
show the event to be expected. Explanations proceed, according to the
DNP model, by describing a mechanism that gives rise to a probability
distribution over possible outcomes and by showing that the explanandum
event is an instance of one of those possible outcomes. For Railton, then,
to explain unexpected phenomena one must describe the mechanisms that
produce them—here the mechanisms of transmitter release, and the mech-
anisms by which syphilis crosses the blood–brain barrier. When it comes
to providing an account of mechanisms, however, Railton says only that
he will ‘‘not have much to say here by means of demystiﬁcation’’ (Railton
1978: 208). The account of mechanisms I develop in this book makes
Railton’s proposal concrete. In neuroscience (and, in fact, also in physics,
chemistry, and almost everywhere else) improbable things happen, and
when they do, mechanisms can explain them as well (if, in fact, there are
mechanisms to be found). The CL model functions as a regulative ideal for
explanation because of the nomic expectability thesis. Good explanations
lead one to expect the explanandum phenomenon. This requirement cannot
be relinquished without abandoning the CL model’s central motivation.
Railton’s suggestion is therefore more congenial to a causal-mechanical
account of explanation than to Hempel’s inferential account.
For these three reasons, the CL model of explanation has generally faded
from philosophical currency. Also for these three reasons, the CL model
is not an especially useful starting place for thinking about the norms of
explanation in neuroscience.
5. The Uniﬁcation Model
According to the uniﬁcation model of explanation (henceforth, U-model),
explanation is not a matter of deriving the explanandum phenomenon from
laws but a matter of unifying diverse beliefs under a few simple argument
patterns (compare Friedman 1974; Kitcher 1989). The appeal of the U-
model derives from the fact that many of the most successful explanations


=== PAGE 62 ===

explanation and causal relevance 41
in the history of science (such as Newton’s laws, Maxwell’s equations, and
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection) encompass large domains
of phenomena within the purview of few basic argument patterns. Philip
Kitcher expresses the uniﬁcationist ideal succinctly:
Science advances our understanding of nature by showing us how to derive
descriptions of many phenomena, using the same pattern of derivation again and
again, and in demonstrating this, it teaches us how to reduce the number of facts
that we have to accept as ultimate. (Kitcher 1989: 423).
¹⁴
More formally: start with a set K of accepted beliefs at a time. Scientists
construct argument patterns that allow one to derive some members of
K from others. Argument patterns contain schematic sentences in which
nonlogical terms (terms other than ‘‘and,’’ ‘‘or,’’ ‘‘not,’’ ‘‘if,’’ etc.) are
replaced by variables. Some of the schematic sentences are premises, and
some are conclusions. The variables in schematic sentences are ﬁlled in
accordance with ﬁlling instructions , constraints on the values these variables
can take. One systematizes K by developing one or more argument patterns
that can be used to derive some members of K from others. Explanatory
systematizations are those that have the smallest available set of argument
patterns that is adequate for deriving the other members of K. Kitcher calls
this minimal set the explanatory store, or E(K). Progress toward uniﬁcation
is made to the extent that the systematization of one’s beliefs approaches
E(K). Good explanations have argument patterns in the explanatory store.
One could unify K trivially with vacuous argument patterns. Wondering
why any given thing happens, one might appeal to the schematic sentence,
‘‘all things happen because God wills them,’’ and to the undemanding
ﬁlling instructions for ‘‘things,’’ to infer the conclusion that this given
thing happens. To block examples of this sort, Kitcher requires that
explanations be stringent. One argument pattern is more stringent than
another if that pattern ‘‘sets conditions on instantiations that are more
difﬁcult to satisfy than those set by another pattern’’ (Kitcher 1989: 433).
¹⁴ K i t c h e rb u i l d so na ne a r l i e rs u g g e s t i o nb y F r i e d m a n(1974), who expresses the uniﬁcationist
intuition as follows: ‘‘Science increases our understanding of the world by reducing the total number of
independent phenomena that we have to accept as ultimate or given. A world with fewer independent
phenomena is, other things equal, more comprehensible than one with more’’ ( 1974: 15). Friedman
has technical difﬁculties deﬁning th e metric of uniﬁcation. Kitcher develops his version of uniﬁcation
to address these difﬁculties.


=== PAGE 63 ===

42 explanation and causal relevance
These conditions include both the accepted rules of inference (Kitcher calls
them ‘‘classiﬁcations’’) and the ﬁlling instructions. Stringency is a condition
of adequacy on unifying explanations.
In what follows, I argue that the uniﬁcationist model cannot satisfy the
explanatory ideals implicit in the practices of neuroscientists unless it is
supplemented with attention to the causal structure of the world. First, I
argue that the model is insufﬁcient to distinguish explanation from other
varieties of scientiﬁc achievement (such as justiﬁcation and categorization).
Second, I argue that Kitcher’s model does not satisfy the above constraints
on an account of explanation.
Nonexplanatory Uniﬁcation : several kinds of scientiﬁc achievement uni-
fy without explaining (see Woodward 2003: 363– 5). Taxonomies are one
example. The Linnaean taxonomic system systematizes the biological world,
but few believe that categorizing an organism within that taxonomy consti-
tutes an explanation. The periodic table shows elements sorted according to
atomic number, molecular weight, and the like, but it is not an explanation
of the elements. The development of a taxonomy of kinds is crucial for
building scientiﬁc explanations. Taxonomies are often useful because they
arrange items according to explanatorily relevant features. By recognizing
a molecule as dopamine, one learns its molecular weight, its mode of
synthesis, the enzymes that break it down, its molecular structure, and so
on. These features of dopamine can then be deployed in explanations. But
merely slotting items into a category, even systematically, is not explanatory.
Instead, one gives an explanation by using the relevant features in the taxon-
omy to explain speciﬁc properties and activities of the dopamine molecule.
Sorting is preparatory for, rather than constitutive of, explanation.¹⁵
Justiﬁcatory argument patterns can also unify phenomena without
explaining them (see Barnes 1992: 566– 70). Suppose one infers the shape
of a Neanderthal brain from the shape of its fossilized cranium. One might
begin with a schematic sentence asserting that fossils of a given type indicate
the existence of a Neanderthal with a brain shape of a certain type. One
could then infer from the discovery of a given fossilized cranium that a
Neanderthal with a given brain shape once existed. Call this the fossil
pattern. Assume that K is relatively silent about the antecedent factors
¹⁵ Kitcher would not accept these taxonomies as uni ﬁcations in his rigorous sense. I do not see,
however, how he can avoid accepting the justiﬁcatory arguments discussed in the next paragraph.


=== PAGE 64 ===

explanation and causal relevance 43
leading up to Neanderthals having this particular brain shape rather than
some other. Given the current state of knowledge concerning the evolution
of the brain, this assumption is plausible. It is also plausible that even as
K develops, certain facts about the past (if not the fact under discussion)
will remain forever outside of K, the past being somewhat opaque to
access from the present. If so, there is unlikely to be a comparably precise
argument pattern linking factors prior to the appearance of Neanderthals to
the fact that Neanderthals have this particular brain shape rather than some
other possible shape. The fossil pattern, in comparison, allows one to infer
the shape of the brain with far greater (although not perfect) precision.
The fossil argument pattern systematizes beliefs about the shape of the
Neanderthal brain better than facts about its development and phylogeny.
The point is that argument patterns for justifying beliefs about some feature
of the world (exempliﬁed here by beliefs about brain casts) sometimes unify
more than do the argument patterns that explain those features.
Uniﬁcation and Causation : given the similarities between Kitcher’s U-
model and the CL account, one might expect Kitcher’s model to have
analogous difﬁculties accommodating (E1)–(E 5). Kitcher’s range of options
is further restricted by his earlier ¹⁶ commitment to the idea that the
world does not, strictly speaking, contain causal relations. ¹⁷ Nonetheless,
Kitcher accepts (E 1)–(E 5) as important constraints on explanation, and
he acknowledges that it would be a blow to the U-model if there were
maximally unifying yet non-explanatory argument patterns. Accordingly,
he argues that the most uniﬁed systematization of K must include argument
patterns that satisfy such constraints.
Take (E2), for example. This is the constraint that etiological explanations
run from earlier to later and not vice versa. Kitcher addresses Bromberger’s
ﬂagpole and shadow example explicitly (see Kitcher 1989: 484– 7). Causal
¹⁶ In The Advancement of Science , and more recently, Kitcher allows that he could either endorse
antirealism about causes or an anti-Humean strand of causal realism ( 1993). My arguments here are
intended to show that the causal structure of the world is not necessarily revealed in the search for
unifying explanations.
¹⁷ It should be noted, however, that Kitcher includes explicitly causal sentences in his argument
schemata for various phenomena. For example, his argument schema for the Watson and Crick model
includes reference to ‘‘Details of transcription, post-transcriptional modiﬁcation ,a n d translation’’ (1989:
441; emphasis added), and his argument schema for natural selection includes reference to the fact that
at r a i tenables an organism to obtain complex beneﬁts and advantages, contributing to reproductive success
(1989: 444; emphasis added). Words for activities have snuck into these argument schemata. Thanks to
Rob Skipper for calling my attention to this fact.


=== PAGE 65 ===

44 explanation and causal relevance
models of explanation are ready-made to deal with this sort of case: the
relations of causal dependency run from the sun and its angle of elevation
past the ﬂagpole to the shadow, and not from the shadow’s length past the
ﬂagpole to the sun and its elevation.
Kitcher’s treatment is more creative than this but less direct. He compares
two possible systematizations of K. One, call it S C for common sense,
includes an ‘‘origin-and-development’’ (O-and-D) pattern of explanation.
The O-and-D pattern explains the dimensions of objects in terms of their
origins and subsequent histories. The ﬂagpole was created by a ﬂagpole
designer to be a certain length, it has been heated and cooled, it was set
in the ground, and so on. The alternative systematization (S 0) contains an
argument pattern that allows one to infer the dimensions of objects from
their shadows (Kitcher calls this the shadow pattern). Either S 0 includes
the O-and-D pattern or it does not. If it does, then S 0 contains an extra
pattern (the shadow pattern) with no gain in the number of systematized
phenomena. So S0 would fare worse than S C on uniﬁcationist criteria. If,
on the other hand, S0 does not contain the O-and-D pattern in addition to
the shadow pattern, then S0 allows one to derive fewer consequences than
SC.S 0, for example, would not allow one to derive conclusions about the
dimensions of objects in the dark, perfectly transparent objects, objects that
give off their own light, and objects that are too small to cast shadows. In
either case, S0 is worse than S C on the criteria Kitcher sets for maximally
uniﬁed explanations.
However, as Eric Barnes ( 1992) argues, in this response Kitcher relies
crucially on contingent facts about the world. By imagining how those
contingent features might change (in ways that might hold for examples
in our world), one can use the U-model to give retroactive explanations.
Suppose that our world were a world in which all objects had the disposition
to cast shadows. In that world, there would be no difference in the unifying
strength of the O-and-D pattern and the shadow pattern, and Kitcher,
against his stated inclinations, would have to accept that the two patterns
are equally explanatory. Alternatively, suppose that the competitor to the
O-and-D pattern is a dispositional shadow pattern (DS) with which one can
infer the dimensions of objects from the shapes of all of the shadows that
they are disposed to produce in the right circumstances (see Kitcher 1989:
485– 6). Unilluminated objects might be illuminated, translucent objects
might be coated with black paint, and light sources can take on any angle.


=== PAGE 66 ===

explanation and causal relevance 45
If our world were one in which all objects cast shadows, or one in which
all objects have the disposition to cast shadows if treated properly, then
the shadow and dispositional shadow patterns would have unifying power
equal to that of the O-and-D pattern. In those worlds, Kitcher would have
no way to rule out the shadow or dispositional shadow patterns in favor of
the O-and-D pattern.
In response, Kitcher claims that the predicates of DS are not projectable
(see 1989: 486– 7). The central predicate of DS could be analyzed as some-
thing like this: ‘‘x has the disposition to produce a shadow if illuminated,
or x has the disposition to produce an absorption pattern if is covered
with silver and irradiated, or x has the disposition to produce shadows
if painted black and illuminated ... and so on.’’ ¹⁸ Such mongrel predicates
are the traditional target in discussions of projectability (Goodman 1955).
However, Kitcher does not say what makes a predicate projectable within
his uniﬁcationist framework. He cannot assume that appeals to projectabil-
ity are benign additions to his uniﬁcationist world-view. One plausible
way to understand projectability is in terms of natural kinds: projectable
predicates are those that refer to natural kinds, where natural kinds are
kinds that exhibit a stable cluster of properties and are capable of partic-
ipating in regular causal interactions by virtue of a common underlying
mechanism (compare Boyd 1991;G r i f ﬁ t h s1997; Kornblith 1993). Clearly,
Kitcher’s aversion to causality prevents him from endorsing this account of
projectability. If Kitcher does appeal to such causal notions in his account
of projectability, then he might as well have endorsed a causal solution to
the asymmetry problem in the ﬁrst place. One uniﬁcationist alternative to
this approach is to hold that the projectable predicates with respect to K are
those predicates featured in E(K). ¹⁹However, the point of comparing DS
to O-and-D is that they equally unify K. Considerations of projectability
are supposed to favor O-and-D over DS despite the fact that they equally
unify K.
A parallel example, in which problems concerning projectability do
not arise, is that of the motions of the planets. Newton’s laws are time
symmetrical. They can be used both to derive future positions of the planets
¹⁸ Note that the ﬁlling instructi ons for ‘‘objects,’’ ‘‘origins,’’ and ‘‘histories,’’ are also complicated
and disjunctive. It is not clear that these predicates are projectable.
¹⁹ In The Advancement of Science , Kitcher writes ‘‘To say that a particular predicate picks out a natural
kind is to claim that marking out the extension of that predicate would ﬁgure in the ultimate (ideal)
practice’’ (1993: 172– 3).


=== PAGE 67 ===

46 explanation and causal relevance
from the past, and past positions of the planets from the future. Either way,
one can (I suppose) derive the same number of phenomena from the same
number of laws. The predictive and the retrodictive argument patterns are
equally stringent, and neither contains intuitively unprojectable predicates.
The only difference between the two is in temporal constraints on the
ﬁlling instructions. Still, one of these arguments is explanatory, and the
other is not, and Kitcher’s framework does not mark the difference. If this
is true, then even if the contingent state of the world does allow Kitcher to
dismiss some classic examples of asymmetry, it does not allow him to avoid
them all.
The foregoing discussion has gotten a bit abstract and complex but the
point is concrete and simple. The U-model deploys elaborate machinery
to make it turn out that effects do not explain their causes. And there are
real questions about whether this machinery actually succeeds. In contrast,
this fact about explanation is a trivial consequence of the view that expla-
nations show how a phenomenon is situated within the causal structure of
the world.
Similar difﬁculties arise for the U-model’s handling of the constraint
that there can be explanations for low-probability effects (E 5), such as
the opening of an ion channel and the release of neurotransmitters. As
a ‘‘deductive chauvinist,’’ Kitcher is challenged to describe a deductive
argument pattern that explains such low probability events. Here is how
Kitcher responds:
We cannot explain why the mayor [Jones], rather than other syphilitics, contracted
paresis ... However, the statement that the mayor had syphilis may answer a different
why-question. Suppose that the why-question has an explicit presupposition:
‘‘Given that one of the townspeople contracted paresis, why was it the mayor?’’
Only syphilitics get paresis, and he was the only syphilitic in town. Notice that in
this case, we can deduce the explanandum from the presupposition of the question
and the information given in the answer.
Sometimes we show that a system is in state X by presupposing that it is in one
of the states {X, Y
1, ... , Yn} and demonstrating that it cannot be in any of the Yi.
(Kitcher 1989: 457)
But, as Woodward (2003) notes, this argument schema depends on explana-
torily irrelevant information. Generalize the pattern slightly by assuming
that K includes beliefs that several people in town {X, Y1, ... , Yn} have
syphilis and that at least one of them has paresis. Assume further that K


=== PAGE 68 ===

explanation and causal relevance 47
includes beliefs that none of the people {Y1, ... , Yn} have paresis and that
only syphilitics get paresis. From these premises, it is possible to derive
that Jones, X, has paresis. Although this argument provides good reason
to believe that Jones has paresis, it does not explain his paresis. Most of
the crucial information in the premises is explanatorily irrelevant to Jones’s
health. For example, the fact that other people in the town have syphilis is
explanatorily irrelevant to Jones’s case. Likewise, it is irrelevant to Jones’s
case that other members of the town do not have syphilis. Yet all of these
explanatorily irrelevant facts are included in Kitcher’s argument schema.
So it is difﬁcult to accommodate some of the basic constraints on
neuroscientiﬁc explanation with the U-model. One might defend the
U-model either by revising it to accommodate these constraints or by
rejecting the constraints. The ﬁrst response cannot be assessed in the
absence of concrete proposals. However, it should be noted that there
is a difference between merely accommodating criteria of adequacy once
they have been found and ﬁnding those criteria of adequacy in the ﬁrst
place. One advantage of a causal and mechanistic approach to explanation
(developed in Chapters 3 and 4) is that it focuses critical attention on the
kinds of considerations that neuroscientists use to sort good explanations
from bad. The alternative response is to reject the above constraints.
However, to reject these constraints is to divorce the project of ﬁnding
explanations from the goals of manipulation and control. Explanations that
do not satisfy (E1)–(E 5) would be of so little use to us that it is difﬁcult to
see why so much energy should be spent discovering them.
Assessing Explanations : the U-model offers little guidance for neurosci-
entists who want to build good explanations and to distinguish good (and
valuable) explanations from bad. To assess explanations, one must make
judgments about whether a given argument pattern will be part of E(K).
But what seems now to be progress toward E(K) might appear otiose from
the perspective of future science. Concerning the shadow and the ﬂagpole,
for example, perhaps E(K) could make up for the complexity involved in
accepting the dispositional shadow pattern by offsetting gains in simplicity
elsewhere in the system of beliefs. Kitcher provides no argument that
the most uniﬁed system must satisfy these causal constraints. He argues
only that on his best assessment of the available options for E(K), E(K)
will accommodate these constraints. The task of envisioning E(K) is made
complicated by the fact that K includes every belief; it is not restricted to a


=== PAGE 69 ===

48 explanation and causal relevance
given domain of knowledge. The set of beliefs, and the adequacy of those
beliefs, is sufﬁciently holistic that one cannot readily wall scientiﬁc beliefs
off from all others (especially, for example, beliefs about mathematics,
metaphysics, and epistemology). Furthermore, what one believes about
neuroscience cannot be insulated from facts about, for example, physics,
molecular biology, and ecology. Repeatedly in the history of science,
changes in one such domain have been shown to ramify through the
others. According to the U-model, assessing an explanation of the action
potential requires assessing not only the best systematization of all of our
beliefs about neurons, or about the brain, but all of our beliefs.
Contra Kitcher’s stated view, one might adopt a more local evaluative
strategy and assess individual explanations in terms of the extent to which
they unify some non-global domain of phenomena. One unwelcome
consequence of this local application of the U-model, however, is that
explanations for uncommon phenomena are less explanatory than those
for common phenomena. Compare the explanation for Parkinson’s disease
(involving the death of neurons in the substantia nigra) with the explanation
for Kuru (involving ingestion of prion proteins from the brains of cadavers).
Parkinson’s disease is relatively common worldwide. Kuru was largely
conﬁned to the residents of New Guinea and has now been eradicated.
Suppose complete explanations for each of these diseases are available.
Given that more people get Parkinson’s disease each year than have ever
had Kuru, the explanation for Parkinson’s disease will count as a better
explanation than the explanation for Kuru. The former explains more
individual phenomena than the latter.²⁰Examples of this sort warn against
equating the claim that a given explanation explains more with the claim
that it is a better explanation. Explanations in neuroscience vary widely
in their scope, but this scope variance does not correlate with explanatory
strength.
To summarize, the U-model can be used to assess explanations either
globally or one by one. If globally (as Kitcher prefers), then it cannot be
used to assess individual explanations in the here and now without relying
²⁰ One might object that I have inappropriately saddled Kitcher with explaining individual cases
of the disease rather than the disease itself. The example can be reformulated, however, so that it
focuses on diseases with different numbers of symptoms, or different manifestations in different climatic
environments. At any rate, there is a question about how to countexplanandum phenomena, and this is a
crucial question for the U-model, not for the mechanistic model.


=== PAGE 70 ===

explanation and causal relevance 49
on intuitive judgments concerning the best systematization of all our beliefs.
The problem with this option is not merely that it rests on intuitions about
uniﬁcation that may turn out to be false, but that it rests on intuitions
about, for example, projectability, that are most commonly guided by a
prior understanding of the causal structure of the world. If, on the other
hand, the U-model is used to assess explanations locally, then it leads
to the counterintuitive conclusion that large-scope explanations are more
explanatory than small-scope explanations. Perhaps one could ﬁnd a way
to avoid either conclusion, but a viable mechanistic account of explanation
would allow one to sidestep the dilemma entirely. Criteria (E 1)–(E 5),
which causal accounts readily satisfy, help to sort good explanations from
bad, and the scope of causal mechanical explanations is not germane to
their explanatory value in a given case.
I do not mean to suggest that uniﬁcation and mechanistic explanation
are exclusive. In fact, discovering mechanisms is one important way to
unify beliefs. Mechanisms explain the diverse aspects of the explanandum
phenomenon, and so unify them by relating them to an underlying causal
structure (compare Salmon 1998; Glennan 2002). Mechanistic explana-
tions also unify diverse ﬁelds of science as scientists in different ﬁelds
work together to place constraints on the shape of the space of possible
mechanisms for a given kind of phenomenon (see Chapter 7).
6. But What About the Hodgkin and Huxley Model?
Despite these considerations, it is hard to deny that some of the most
powerful explanations in the history of neuroscience look as if they were
designed to exemplify the CL model or the U-model. A classic example
is Hodgkin and Huxley’s model of the action potential (the HH model).²¹
In this section, I argue that on closer inspection, this example shows why
adequate explanation in neuroscience must show how a phenomenon is
situated within the causal structure of the world.
²¹ Weber ( 2005) uses the Hodgkin and Huxley model to illustrate his heteronomy thesis that
explanations in systems biology (including neuroscience) ar e merely applications of physico-chemical
theories and laws to a speciﬁc kind of system ( 2005: 25, 28). All of the explanatory force in such
explanations is provided by physico-chemical laws (see 2005: 29– 32). Here I show that derivation of
laws is insufﬁcient for explanation. I implicitly ar gue against this reductionist thesis and its motivation
in Chapters 3 and 6.


=== PAGE 71 ===

50 explanation and causal relevance
The HH model is a model of the action potential. Action potentials
consist of rapid and ﬂeeting changes in the electrical potential difference
across a neuron’s membrane (shown in Figure 2.1). This potential differ-
ence, known as the membrane potential (V m), consists of a separation of
charged ions on either side of the membrane. In the neuron’s resting state,
positive ions line up against the extracellular surface of the membrane,
and negative ions line up on the intracellular surface. In typical cells, this
arrangement establishes a polarized resting potential (V rest)o f − 60 mV to
− 70 mV (shown on the left side of Figure 2.1). In an action potential, the
membrane becomes ﬂeetingly permeable to sodium (Na +) and potassium
(K+) ions. This allows the ions to diffuse rapidly across the cell membrane.
This ﬂux changes V m. The action potential consists of (i) a rapid rise in Vm
to a maximum value of roughly+35 mV, followed by (ii) a rapid decline in
Vm to values below Vrest, and then (iii) an extended after-potential during
which the neuron is less excitable (known as the refractory period).
Hodgkin and Huxley developed their model from the results of electro-
physiological experiments in the squid giant axon. In those experiments,
they used a voltage clamp to keep the membrane voltage constant as
Action Potential
EK
Membrane Potential (mV)
50
0
−70
1 msec
II I
III
Figure 2.1. The action potential ∗
∗ Consisting of (I) a rapid rise in Vm to a maximum value of roughly +35 mV, followed by (II) a rapid
decline in Vm to values below Vrest, and then (III) an extended after-potential during which the neuron
is less excitable (known as the refractory period)


=== PAGE 72 ===

explanation and causal relevance 51
ion currents through the membrane varied. ²² These experiments allowed
Hodgkin and Huxley to infer how membrane permeabilities for Na + and
K+ change at different displacements of V m. Their crowning theoretical
achievement was to represent the time-course of permeability changes as
a function of V m. They characterized the action potential in terms of the
following features (modiﬁed from Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952: 542– 3):
(a) the form, amplitude, and threshold of an action potential;
(b) the form, amplitude, and velocity of a propagated action potential;
(c) the form and amplitude of the resistance changes during an action
potential;
(d) the total movement of ions during an action potential;
(e) the threshold and response during the refractory period (iii above);
(f) the existence and form of subthreshold responses;
(g) the production of action potentials after sustained current injection
(known as ‘‘anodal break’’); and
(h) the subthreshold oscillations seen in the axons of cephalopods.
Hodgkin and Huxley devised the total current equation
I = CMdV/dt + GKn4(V − VK) + GNam3h(V − VNa) + Gl(V − Vl)
to account for (a)–(h). ²³ In this equation, I is the total current crossing
the membrane. That current has four components: the capacitative current
CMdV/dt, the potassium current G Kn4 (V − VK), the sodium current
GNam3h( V − VNa), and the ‘‘leakage current’’ G l(V − Vl), which is a
sum of smaller currents for other ions. G K,G Na and Gl are the maximum
conductance values for the different ionic currents. V is displacement of Vm
from Vrest.A n dVK,V Na,a n dVl are the differences between equilibrium
potentials for the various ions (that is, that voltage at which diffusion and
the driving force of voltage are balanced such that there is no net current
ﬂow) and V m. The capacitance, CM, of the membrane can be understood
as the ability of the membrane to store opposite charges on the intra- and
extra-cellular sides. Finally, there are three coefﬁcients, h, m, and n, the
values of which vary with voltage and time. Hodgkin and Huxley’s primary
²² For now, I neglect the importance of the space clamp, which was crucial for eliminating voltage
gradients along the axon.
²³ This is how Hodgkin and Huxley ( 1952) write the equation. Contemporary textbooks use
different formulations.


=== PAGE 73 ===

52 explanation and causal relevance
accomplishment (by their own lights) involved generating the equations
for these variables and determining the powers that they would take in the
total current equation. I discuss these further below.
Hodgkin and Huxley show that each of (a)–(h) follows from the total
current equation under speciﬁable conditions. Figures 2.2 and 2.3 show
comparisons of the predicted values of the HH equations for feature
(a) to the values observed in the squid giant axon. Figure 2.2 shows
the comparison between predicted (top) and observed (bottom) action
potentials for initial depolarizations of 90 mV, 15 mV, 7 mV and 6 mV
at 6◦C. Their amplitudes, time-courses, and overall forms are roughly
identical. Figure 2.3 shows the comparison between predicted (top) and
observed (bottom) values for the rising phase of the action potential.
Hodgkin and Huxley proceed in this manner through all of the features
((a)–(h)). In doing so, they provide a compelling example of explanation
by deductive subsumption under laws of nature. The total current equation
is derived from laws of nature (such as Ohm’s law, the Nernst equation, and
110−V (mV)
100
90 90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
15 7 6
92
20
12 9.8
0
110 110
mV
−V (mV)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0123456
msec
0123 45 6
msec
Figure 2.2. Predicted (top) and observed (bo ttom) action potentials∗
∗ For initial depolarizations of 90, 15, 7 and 6 mV at 6oC
Source: Reprinted with permissi on from Hodgkin and Huxley (1952, 525)


=== PAGE 74 ===

explanation and causal relev ance 53
−V (mV)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0 0 5 15 20 msec
−V (mV)
100 100mV
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0 0 5 15 msec
10
10
Figure 2.3. Predicted (top) and observed (bottom)rising phases of action potentials
Source: Reprinted with permissi on from Hodgkin and Huxley (1952: 526).
Coulomb’s law), and it shows how those laws work in a given biological
context to explain the action potential.
Important as these equations are, the HH equations are a mathematical
description of a mechanism sketch (see Bogen 2005). They summarize
decades of experiments. They embody a rich temporal constraint on any
possible mechanism for the action potential. They allow neuroscientists to
predict how current will change under various experimental interventions.
They can be used to simulate the electrophysiological activities of nerve
cells. They permit one to infer the values of unmeasured variables. And they
constitute potent evidence that a mechanism involving ionic currents could
possibly account for the shape of the action potential. However, Hodgkin
and Huxley ( 1952) insist that their model of conductance changes is not
explanatory:
The agreement [between the model and the voltage clamp data] must not be
taken as evidence that our equations are anything more than an empirical description
of the time-course of the changes in permeability to sodium and potassium. An
equally satisfactory description of the voltage clamp data could no doubt have been achieved
with equations of very different form, which would probably have been equally successful
in predicting the electrical behaviour of the membrane. It was pointed out in Part II


=== PAGE 75 ===

54 explanation and causal relevance
of this paper that certain features of our equations were capable of a physical
interpretation, but the success of the equations is no evidence in favour of the mechanism of
permeability change that we tentatively had in mind when formulating them. (1952: 541;
italics added)
One could dismiss this passage as scientiﬁc modesty if it were not for the
fact that Hodgkin and Huxley argue for their conclusions.
First, they insist that the equations provide nothing more than an
empirical description of the time course of permeability changes. Here
they are alluding to the coefﬁcients n, m, and h. The current equation for
K+ involves the coefﬁcient n. The current equation for Na + involves the
coefﬁcients m and h. Discussing the equation for the Na+ current, Hodgkin
and Huxley say that although they could have used a single variable, they
found it easier to ﬁt the curves with two. After the failure of one of their
earlier hypothesized mechanisms, Hodgkin and Huxley realized that the
techniques of electrophysiology would not sufﬁce to pick out a uniquely
correct characterization of the mechanism. Hodgkin writes:
We soon realized that the carrier model could not be made to ﬁt certain results,
for example the nearly linear instantaneous current voltage relationship, and that it
had to be replaced by some kind of voltage-dependent gate. As soon as we began
to think about molecular mechanisms it became clear that the electrical data would
by themselves yield only very general information about the class of system likely
to be involved. So we settled for the more pedestrian aim of ﬁnding a simple set of
mathematical equations that might plausibly represent the movement of electrically
charged gating particles. (Hodgkin 1992)
Their model of current changes is in this respect more analogous to Ptole-
my’s planetary models, which neither involve nor imply any commitment
to the existence of the epicycles, deferents, and equants from which they
are constructed, than it is to Newton’s gravitational model of planetary
motion, which Newton presents to show how and why the planets move
as they do. The total current equation embodies no commitments as to
the mechanisms that change the membrane conductance, that allow the
ionic currents to ﬂow, and that coordinate conductance changes so that the
action potential has its characteristic shape. In the HH model, commitments
about underlying mechanisms are replaced by mathematical constructs that
save the phenomena (a)–(h) of the action potential much as Ptolemy’s
epicycles and deferents save the apparent motion of the planets through


=== PAGE 76 ===

explanation and causal relevance 55
the night sky. The equations do not show how the membrane changes
its permeability. As they said in 1952, the ‘‘Details of the mechanism will
probably not be settled for some time’’ ( 1952: 504). Kenneth Cole, a col-
laborator of Hodgkin and Huxley, made the same point more dramatically
when he said that the HH model merely ‘‘summarized in one neat tidy
little package the many thousands of experiments done previous to 1952,
and most subsequent ones’’ (1992: 151).
One might object to the judgment of these scientists on the grounds that
the equations represent dependency relations among the variables in the
equation. For example, the equations represent membrane conductance
(permeability) as dependent upon voltage, and they describe the resulting
changes in currents across the membrane. But mathematical dependencies
cannot be equated with causal or explanatory dependency relations. The
equations must be supplemented by a causal interpretation: one might,
for example, agree by convention that the effect variable is represented
on the left, and the cause variables are represented on the right, or one
might add ‘‘these are not mere mathematical relationships among variables
but descriptions of causal relationships in which this variable is a cause
and this other is an effect, and not vice versa,’’ but the point is that one
will have to specify which variables represent causes and which represent
effects, and one will have to specify which of the myriad mathematical
relationships expressible within the equations are causal and which are mere
correlations.²⁴Of course, mere correlations and effects of common causes
can be represented as mathematical dependencies of one variable upon
another, and equations can always be rewritten to put any variable that
one likes on the left or the right. Absent a causal interpretation in terms
of the underlying causal structure, such mathematical dependencies do not
specify the causal dependencies that produce the time course of the action
potential.
To be sure, Hodgkin and Huxley knew a good deal more about action
potentials than they included explicitly in their model. Adding this detail
helps to ﬂesh out the mathematical model into a description of a mechanism.
²⁴ I am not making the absurd claim that no explanation can be represented in mathematical form.
Equations are one convention among many for specifying causal relations. My point, rather, is that the
mathematical expressions, as such, are consistent with a variety of different causal interpretations, many
of which embody spurious causal claims. The same equation allows one to represent the length of a
pendulum as a cause or as an effect of its period, yet only the ﬁrst gets the causal relationship right. The
equation, absent causal interpretation, does not provide an explanation.


=== PAGE 77 ===

56 explanation and causal relevance
Hodgkin and Huxley developed their model within a long tradition of
electrophysiological research that had uncovered many of the compo-
nents of the electrophysiological mechanisms in neurons. They knew, for
example, that the action potential is produced by changes in membrane
permeability, and they knew that ions ﬂux across the membrane toward
their equilibrium potentials; they also knew that this ﬂux of ions constitutes
a transmembrane current. This background sketch of a mechanism does
provide a partial explanation (an explanation sketch) for how neurons
generate action potentials because it reveals some of the components of
the mechanism, some of their properties, and some of their activities.
The HH equations supplement this background knowledge with explicit
temporal constraints on the mechanism. The equations include variables
that represent important components in the explanation. And the equations
provide powerful evidence that a mechanism built from those components
could possibly explain the action potential. Supplemented with a diagram
of the electrical circuit in a membrane, and supplemented with details
about how membranes and ion channels work, the equations carry consid-
erable explanatory weight. The equations without such interpretation—an
interpretation that is difﬁcult for those who know the mechanism of the
action potential to imagine away—do not constitute an explanation. In
order to explain, the equations of the model must be supplemented by an
understanding of the mechanisms of the action potential—by an under-
standing of how the entities and activities in and around the membrane
are organized together to produce the action potential.²⁵The equations for
conductance in the HH model are explanatory only to the extent that it
describes aspects of that mechansm.
²⁵ Consider Hille’s framing of this problem in his classic book: ‘‘The HH model certainly demon-
strates the importance of Na and K permeability changes for excitability and describes their time
course in detail. But does it say how they work? In one extreme view, the model is mere curve-
ﬁtting of arbitrary equations to summarize experi mental observations. Then it could say nothing
about molecular mechanisms. According to a view at the opposite extreme, the model demon-
strates that there are certain numbers of independent h, m, and n particles moving in the electrical
ﬁeld of the membrane controlling independent Na and K permeabilities. In addition, there are
intermediate views. How does one decide?’’ ( 1992: 52– 3). Hille’s intermediate position is simi-
lar to my own. First, the model, ‘‘has important general properties with mechanistic implications
that must be included in future models,’’ such as the reversal potentials for the different currents,
the fact that the ions move without metabolic input, that the channels activate and inactivate
with an S-shaped time-course ( 1984: 55– 6). Second, ‘‘ﬁtting of models can disprove a suggest-
ed mechanism but cannot prove one. There are always other models that ﬁt ... . Therefore the


=== PAGE 78 ===

explanation and causal relev ance 57
Hodgkin and Huxley insist that they have no evidence whatsoever in
favor of the model that they ‘‘tentatively had in mind’’ when formulating
their equations for conductance changes. According to that model, the
membrane’s permeability to Na + is regulated by the position of four
particles in the membrane: three ‘‘activation molecules’’ that move from
the outside of the membrane to sites on the inside, and one ‘‘inactivation
molecule’’ that can block either the activation molecules or the ﬂow of Na+
through the membrane. The expression m3h can then be interpreted as the
joint probability that all three activation molecules are in their open state
(with m being the probability that any one molecule has moved) and that
no inactivation molecule is bound (h). When Hodgkin and Huxley say that
they have no evidence for their hypothesized mechanism, they are referring
to these variables in the current equations. The choice of a different strategy
for building the equation (for example, using a single variable, or three
rather than two) might suggest an entirely different physical interpretation
(or mechanism) or none at all.
At most, this simple model of the activation and inactivation of sodium
channels provides a ‘‘how possibly’’ sketch of the action potential. Hodgkin
and Huxley take an explicitly instrumentalist stance toward their model:
‘‘It was clear that the formulation we had used was not the only one that
might have ﬁtted the voltage clamp results adequately’’ (Huxley 1963: 61).
Indeﬁnitely many equations could be used to predict the action potential’s
time-course equally well. And these different mathematical equations might
be given any number of biological interpretations such as the activation
model sketched above. Hodgkin and Huxley had no reason to privilege this
one possible model above the others as the correct model. To explain the
action potential required further details about the molecular mechanisms
underlying the permeability changes. Bertil Hille describes the origins of
this research program:
In the next decade, Clay and Armstrong and I began our independent research. In
our ﬁrst papers, we brought a clear list of ‘‘molecular’’ assumptions to the table.
strictly kinetic aspects of the HH model, such ascontrol by a certain number of independent h, m, and
n particles making ﬁrst-order transitions between two positions, cannot be proven by curve ﬁtting ....
The lesson is easier to accept now that, after 50 years of work, new kinetic phenomena have been
observed that disagree signiﬁcantly with some speciﬁc predictions of their model’’ ( 1984: 55). One
must know details about the mechanism to conﬁrm the model.


=== PAGE 79 ===

58 explanation and causal relevance
They included the following ideas: ions are passing through aqueous pores that
we called channels, ion channels are proteins, the channels for Na + and K+ are
different, they have swinging gates that o pen and close them, we can study their
architecture by using electric currents t o measure gating, permeation and block,
and channel blockers are molecules that enter the pores and physically plug them.
(Hille et al. 1999: 1106)
At the time the idea of a channel was viewed with skepticism. It was merely
a ﬁller-term for an activity or mechanism to be named later:
From 1965 to 1973, such ideas were debated annually at the meetings of the
Biophysical Society. There, prominent scientist s would routinely rise to request
that anyone who chose to use the word ‘‘channel’’ avow ﬁrst that it bears
absolutely no mechanistic implications! It is probably fair to say that people
thought the discussion about molecular mechanisms was premature. In 1969,
when I had drafted a summary review of these ideas, Kenneth Cole, the dean of
American biophysics, wrote to me: ‘‘I’m ... worried you may be pushing some of
your channel arguments pretty far.’’ (Hille et al. 1999: 1106)
The idea of activation molecules (let alone pores or gates) was at most
a useful ﬁction—a how-possibly model—for Hodgkin and Huxley. It
helped them to model the action potential, but it could not at the time
be interpreted in terms of details about the membranes of nerve cells.
To leap to the end of the story, it is now well known that conductance
changes across the membrane are effected by conformation changes in ion-
speciﬁc channels spanning the cell membrane. Biochemists have isolated
the proteins that compose these channels, they have sequenced their
constituents, and they have learned a great deal about how they activate
and inactivate during an action potential. It is this wealth of detail about
how these channels regulate the timing of the conductance changes that
accounts for the time-course of the action potential.
Only with the discovery of these molecular mechanisms will the action
potential be not merely modeled but explained. As Michael Mauk notes:
There was little to be learned from the p articular mathematical implementation
that H[odgkin] and H[uxley] used to represent voltage-dependent conductances.
Because they were intended only as ma thematical tools to produce the correct
input/output behavior, the ingredients of the [phenomenological] model did not
need to reﬂect the underlying biological processes. For example, the conductances
could have been described in lookup tables. Thus, like experiments with only


=== PAGE 80 ===

explanation and causal relevance 59
one possible outcome, the ability to build these [phenomenological] models meant
little mechanistically. (2000: 650)
The equations for the conductance changes (speciﬁcally, the equations
governing the values of n, m, and h) are merely phenomenological
models.²⁶ These equations characterize how speciﬁc ion conductances
change with voltage and time, but they do not explain why they change as
they do, when they do. Without an account of the underlying mechanisms
of the conductance change, the buck of accounting for the temporal
features of the action potential (as speciﬁed in (a)–(h)) is merely passed on
to some-conductance-changing-process-we-know-not-what. This ﬁller-
process was later completed as Hille and his colleagues investigated the
structure and function of ion channels and gradually weeded merely
how-possibly mechanisms out of the space of plausible mechanisms.
These considerations raise serious doubts as to whether the Hodgkin
and Huxley model should be seen as a triumph of the CL model or the
U-model of explanation. For it is now clear that neither the ability to
subsume a phenomena under laws of nature, nor the ability to unify its
diverse features under a common argument schema, is alone sufﬁcient for
explanation. Appeal to such models is thus insufﬁcient for sorting good
and complete explanations of the action potential from bad and incomplete
explanations.
While constraints (E 1)–(E 5) apply to causal explanations of particu-
lar events, analogous constraints apply to constitutive explanations of the
behaviors of wholes (such as the action potential) and the activities of their
parts (such as the movements of ions). Because classical micro-reduction
is a model of constitutive explanation, these constraints apply to that
model as well: (C 1) action potentials are not explained by mere temporal
sequences of events in the cells that produce them, but are explained
instead by the causal relationships among them; (C 2) action potentials are
explained by a particular ordering of conductance changes from beginning
to end, and one could not reverse this ordering and still produce an action
potential—in constitutive mechanisms involving feedback, explanations
follow the direction of dependency among the component stages, so if an
²⁶ It turns out, in retrospect, that aspects of the equations for these conductance changes do
correspond to features of the ion channels, but this, as Hodgkin and Huxley would have noted, is not
a perfect ﬁt, and it is at any rate merely fortuitous.


=== PAGE 81 ===

60 explanation and causal relevance
explanation does not characterize those dependency relations, then it is not
an adequate explanation; (C3) when Na+ channels open, the gating charge
across the membrane and the rise in Na + conductance are correlated,
but neither explains the other—rather both are explained by the voltage
change that opens the channel; (C 4) blessing the membrane adds nothing
to the explanation of the action potential, for in describing a constitutive
mechanism, one must distinguish relevant from irrelevant components and
properties—one might be able to derive facts about a phenomenon from
laws concerning its parts, but (C 1)–(C 4) (as well as the Hodgkin and
Huxley example) show that mere derivation is insufﬁcient for explana-
tion.²⁷As I suggested above, because the view of constitutive explanation
expressed within the CL account is classical reduction, (C1)–(C 4) provide
reasons to suspect that the reduction model does not provide an adequate
regulative ideal for constitutive explanations. More positively, (C 1)–(C 4)
provide constraints on any adequate model of constitutive explanation in
neuroscience.
One other constraint is sufﬁciently important to be given its own heading
even though it is implicit in others:
(C5) Mere neural correlates are not explanatory. ²⁸
Neuroscientists know that merely ﬁnding that a brain region regularly
lights up (that is, shows signs of increased metabolic activity or blood ﬂow)
during a cognitive task does not allow one to infer that the brain region
is involved in the task. The brain region might be tonically active, or it
might be a component in a different phenomenon that is experimentally
inseparable from the one under study. For example, the volume of blood
ﬂowing to the visual cortex is tightly correlated with reading, but this does
not mean that increasing blood ﬂow explains my ability to read. In fact,
as all MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) researchers know, the changes
in blood ﬂow measured by these devices lag well behind the performance
of the task, and researchers have to adjust for this time lag to interpret
²⁷ Hempel and Oppenheim mention a similar problem in what Salmon ( 1989) calls the ‘‘infamous
footnote 33.’’ They admit that they cannot block trivial reductions, such as the derivation of Kepler’s
law from the conjunction of Kepler’s laws and Boyle’s law. Oneaspect of this ‘‘triviality’’ is that Boyle’s
law is irrelevant to Kepler’s law (Hempel and Oppenheim 1948).
²⁸ Although (C1)–(C 4) correspond to (E 1)–(E 4), I do not discuss whether there is a constitutive
sister to (E5). There is a question about whether constitutive relations can be stochastic, but I do not
discuss that here. (C5) has nothing to do with (E5).


=== PAGE 82 ===

explanation and causal relevance 61
their data. Similarly, the mere fact that performance on a task degrades
with the destruction or inhibition of a brain region does not mean that
the brain region’s activity is part of the explanation for the performance
of that task. Removing the kidneys will eventually degrade the ability to
generate past-tense verbs from present-tense verbs, but that does not mean
that kidney activities are part of the explanation for generating past-tense
verbs. I return to this issue in Chapter 4. For now, the point is that the
idea of a ‘‘neural correlate’’ is too weak to be taken seriously as an account
of explanation, despite the fact that neural correlates can be used to derive
descriptions of higher-level phenomena from descriptions of lower-level
phenomena.
If deductive subsumption under laws or argument schemata is insufﬁcient
for a good explanation, might it nonetheless be necessary? In Section 4
above, I argue that improbable events can be explained despite the fact
they cannot be seen as deductive consequences (or even as probable
consequences) of the laws of nature in speciﬁc antecedent and background
conditions. Etiological explanations, I conclude, need not show that the
phenomenon to be explained was to be expected on the basis of the laws
of nature. The nomic expectability thesis is the core idea behind the CL
model of explanation; it is the reason for thinking that explanations are
arguments. In showing that this thesis is questionable in cases of etiological
explanation, I have raised doubts about whether rational expectability is an
essential aspect of constitutive explanations as well.
7. Conclusion
In the remainder of this book, I develop a model of explanation that accom-
modates constraints such as (E 1)–(E 5) and (C 1)–(C 5). I thus provide an
existence proof for the possibility of a normatively rich account of expla-
nation that does not require anything like argumentative subsumption of
phenomena under general representations of any sort. Good neuroscientiﬁc
explanations are distinguished from bad not by the features of an inference
but by the fact that good explanations accurately describe the causal struc-
ture of the world. Complete neuroscientiﬁc explanations are distinguished
from incomplete explanations not by the ability to avoid enthymemes (that


=== PAGE 83 ===

62 explanation and causal relevance
is, arguments with suppressed premises), but by the fact that complete expla-
nations capture all of the relevant causal relations among the components
in a mechanism. Understanding the ‘‘mechanisms of permeability change’’
(as Hodgkin and Huxley say), the ‘‘mechanistic implications’’ (as Hille
says), and the ‘‘underlying biological processes’’ (as Mauk says) requires
understanding the causal structures—the mechanisms—that explain how
neurons produce action potentials.


=== PAGE 84 ===

3
Causal Relevance
and Manipulation
Summary
I provide a view of causal relevance that accommodates the mechanistic
fragility and historical contingency of neuroscientiﬁc generalizations but
that nonetheless satisﬁes constraints (E 1)–(E 5). I review the limitations
of two alternative accounts of causation—Stuart Glennan’s mechanical
account, and Wesley Salmon and Philip Dowe’s transmission account. I use
an example from the contemporary neuroscience of learning and memory
to defend Woodward’s (2002, 2003) view that the causal relevance relations
in neural mechanisms are relationships that can potentially be used for the
purposes of manipulation and control.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
In Chapter 2, I discuss ﬁve constraints on explanations in neuroscience, and
I argue that any acceptable account of explanation in neuroscience should
make sense of their importance. These constraints are:
(E1) mere temporal sequences are not explanatory;
(E2) causes explain effects and not vice versa;
(E3) causally independent effects of common causes do not explain one
another;
(E4) causally irrelevant phenomena are not explanatory; and
(E5) causes need not make effects probable to explain them.


=== PAGE 85 ===

64 causal relevance and manipulation
These constraints are explained by the fact that successful explanations
in neuroscience describe the causal structure of the world. This claim,
however, presupposes a view of the causal structure of the world, and one
that accommodates (E 1)–(E 5). In this chapter, I argue for an account of
causal relevance that satisﬁes these constraints. In doing so, I provide an
account of causal relevance that makes sense of the norms that scientists use
to search for causes and to evaluate causal claims.
My focus on the norms implicit in the practice of neuroscience contrasts
with traditional metaphysical projects concerning the nature of causation.
First, I do not deﬁne ‘‘causation’’ in terms of non-causal concepts, such as
‘‘regularity’’ and ‘‘temporal succession.’’ I doubt that any such reductive
deﬁnition is possible. My colleagues and I have argued elsewhere that at
least many cases of causation should be understood in terms of the diverse
activities that scientists describe in their theories (Machamer et al. 2000;
Darden and Craver 2002).¹ Such activities include collision, diffusion,
electrostatic attraction and repulsion, gravitation, magnetism, oxidation,
and phosphorylation. Activities are no less mysterious than most entities
in our best scientiﬁc theories (such as atoms, ﬁelds, molecules, nuclei,
and pituitary glands), and they are no more in need of reductive analysis.
From my perspective, causation requires normative regimentation, not
metaphysical demystiﬁcation.
Second, I do not provide an account of the secret connection that
Hume sought between a cause and its effect. I will argue that the search
for this connection (this cement, glue, spring, or string)—as exempliﬁed
by Salmon ( 1984, 1998) and Dowe’s ( 2000) transmission account and by
Glennan’s ( 1996) mechanical account of causal relevance—is sometimes
misguided and often distracts philosophers from the aspects of causation that
are most important for an account of explanation. This search is sometimes
misguided because many causes in neuroscientiﬁc explanations are not
connected to (that is, in contact with) their effects. For example, in cases of
omission and prevention (as when the absence of activity in an inhibitory
interneuron allows the post-synaptic cell to ﬁre, or when a competitive
antagonist prevents a neurotransmitter from binding to a receptor) there is
no hidden connection between the cause and the effect. Such causes work
by absences and gaps in connections (or so I will argue). The search for a
¹ This view is further elaborated in Bogen 2004, 2005;M a c h a m e r2004.


=== PAGE 86 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 65
connection is distracting because even in cases where one can identify an
unbroken connection between a putative cause and an effect, that alone
is insufﬁcient to establish that the putative cause is relevant to the effect.
The search for hidden connections can thus distract one from providing an
account of causal relevance, which is much more central to the practice of
distinguishing good explanations from bad.
In this chapter, I consider three accounts of causal relations: Glen-
nan’s ( 1996) mechanical account (Section 3), Salmon ( 1984, 1998)a n d
Dowe’s (2000) transmission accounts (Section 4), and Woodward’s (2003)
manipulationist account (Section 5). The ﬁrst two—the mechanical and
transmission accounts—are each advanced as part of an account of mecha-
nistic explanation, and so it is fair to ask whether they are adequate for that
purpose. Each also attempts to identify a hidden connection between causes
and their effects. These two views of causation, I believe, are separate paths
to the idea that all bona ﬁde causes are found only at the most fundamental
ontological levels. All of the real work, one might suppose, is being done
by contact action or exchanges of conserved quantities among the most
fundamental things. Once one recognizes the limitations of these views
of causation, it is much easier to make room for the causal relevance of
nonfundamental properties. In the ﬁnal section, I argue that Woodward’s
manipulationist view of explanation embodies the standards that neuro-
scientists (among others) use to discover and evaluate claims about causal
relevance, and I show that it satisﬁes constraints (E 1)–(E 5). I begin my
discussion with the example of Long-Term Potentiation.
2. The Mechanism of Long-Term Potentiation
It is widely believed—and there are polls (Stevens 1998)—that brains
learn through changes in the strengths of synapses, that is, by changes
in the efﬁciency with which a single action potential in the pre-synaptic
cell depolarizes the post-synaptic cell. The most studied form of synaptic
plasticity is known as Long-Term Potentiation (LTP). Many believe that
LTP, a laboratory phenomenon in which a synapse is strengthened through
exposure to a high-frequency pulse, reﬂects the existence in the synapse of
a mechanism for encoding and storing memories. Here, I focus on a type of
LTP mediated by a subtype of glutamate receptors that is highly responsive


=== PAGE 87 ===

66 causal relevance and manipulation
to the pharmacological agonist, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA). These
receptors are called NMDA receptors, and this variety of LTP is commonly
called NMDA-receptor dependent LTP. My description of LTP and its
mechanisms follows the classic description by Bliss and Collingridge (1993).
(For more recent developments, see Squire and Kandel 2000;L y n c h2004;
Malenka and Bear 2004.)
A common protocol for inducing LTP involves delivering a tetanus, a
high frequency train of stimuli, to populations of pre-synaptic neurons. This
stimulus results in a reliable increase in synaptic efﬁciency. This increase
in efﬁciency is commonly operationalized as: (i) an increase in the slope
and amplitude of the excitatory post-synaptic potential in populations of
post-synaptic neurons (indicating a larger effect of individual pre-synaptic
cells on the post-synaptic response); (ii) an increase in the amplitude of
the ‘‘population spike’’ (indicating the synchronous generation of action
potentials in the individual post-synaptic cells); and (iii) reduced latency
in the population spike (indicating that the post-synaptic action potentials
occur faster).
In saying that the tetanus potentiates the synapse, neuroscientists clearly
do not mean to assert that whenever one tetanizes a pre-synaptic cell one
potentiates the synapse. Nor do they mean to assert that there is a strict law
of LTP, in the way that Newton’s laws or Ohm’s law might reasonably
be said to be strict. Of course, one might use the term ‘‘law’’ in a more
relaxed sense. It does not matter for my point here. I will show how causal
generalizations in biology can function in explanations even if we grant
the now well-known reasons for thinking that there are no distinctively
biological laws (Beatty 1996; Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005; Rosenberg
1985;S m a r t1963; Weber 2005). Here are four such reasons.
First, LTP is limited in scope . It is not a feature of all cells, or of all
chemical synapses, or even of all glutamatergic synapses. Its features vary
from organism to organism, brain region to brain region, and synapse to
synapse. It also varies with developmental stages, with different experimental
manipulations, and with the cellular mechanisms used to produce it. In
the ﬁrst full-length report of LTP, Bliss and Lømo ( 1973) note that the
phenomenon varies both across subjects and in the same subject over
time. There are several types of LTP, and there are other forms of short-
and long-term potentiation that happen at other synapses in the brain.
Compared to the genetic code and the theory of evolution by natural


=== PAGE 88 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 67
300
%
A
C
200
100
0 0123 45 6
Amplitude of pop e.p.s.p.
%
B
200
100
0 123456
Amplitude of pop spike
C
4.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0123456
Latency of pop spike
Hours
Hours
Hours
msec
Figure 3.1. Potentiation displayed ∗
∗ As (i) increased amplitude of the population e.p.s.p. in A; (ii) the amplitude of the population spike
in B; and (iii) the latency of the population spike in C
Source: Compiled and reprinted with p ermission from Bliss and Lømo (1973: 339– 41)


=== PAGE 89 ===

68 causal relevance and manipulation
selection, such generalizations as there are to describe LTP have very
narrow application.
Second, these generalizations are stochastic. Even in those organisms and
synapses in which they hold, they hold only some of the time. Bliss and
Lømo found all three signs of potentiation ((i)–(iii)) in only 29 percent
of their trials. Only feature (ii) appeared in more than 50 percent of the
trials. And in only 26 percent of the trials did the synapses show any sign
of potentiation thirty minutes after the tetanus. Today, after over thirty
years of LTP research, neuroscientists can induce LTP in only roughly 50
percent of their trials.
At least part of the reason that these generalizations are stochastic is that
LTP is mechanistically fragile.² Like most other biological phenomena, LTP
varies with features of the stimulus, with background conditions, and with
the integrity of the underlying mechanism. By lowering the frequency of
the tetanus, one can weaken the synapse rather than strengthening it. By
increasing the frequency, one can exhaust or simply incinerate the cell.
One can also intervene in myriad ways in the machinery of the pre- and
post-synaptic cells such that no potentiation ever occurs. LTP has been
reported to vary with such factors as temperature, pH, and time of day
(Sanes and Lichtman 1999). If one insists on saying that there are laws
of LTP, such laws are at best ceteris paribus laws: meaning, roughly, that
they hold except when something defeats them, and neuroscientists cannot
(now or possibly ever) specify all of the conditions under which they are
defeated.³ Still, neuroscientists know quite a bit about LTP, about the
conditions under which it can be induced and maintained, and about the
² This point is familiar to philosophers of biolo gy. Rob Wilson, for example, characterizes biology
as one of the fragile sciences. This is not the samenotion of fragility that Lewis uses to discuss causation
in ‘‘Causation as Inﬂuence’’ (which has to do with criteria of event individuation), although it is related
to other themes in Lewis’s paper, especially the discussion of alterations.
³ There is considerable debate over how to understand ceteris paribus laws, about whether they exist,
and about whether they can explain anything. As I have formulated the notion of a ceteris paribus law,
such a law is vacuous either because it is a tautology (the law holds unless it does not) or because we
have no idea what it says (the law holds unless X, where X is unspeciﬁable). The ceteris paribus law
could also be understood as asserting that the law holds unless there is some factor X that can explain
why it does not (Pietrosky and Rey 1995). As Earman and Roberts (1999) point out, this allows there
to be a ceteris paribus law linking any F to any G, even where F is utterly irrelevant to G. Pufﬁns
could act as coincidence detectors in the LTP mechanism if only they were small enough, if they had
binding sites for glutamate, if they could c hange their conformation, and so on, and the fact that they
do not meet these requirements explains why the ceteris paribus law breaks down. The urge to ground
explanatory generalizations in ceteris paribus laws has its roots in the idea that one can only explain with
strict laws and that ceteris paribus laws are hedged strict laws (see Roberts 2004). I do not accept the ﬁrst


=== PAGE 90 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 69
conditions under which it fails, and neuroscientists count statements about
LTP as explanatory.
Finally, the generalizations describing LTP are historically contingent
(Schaffner 1993a; Beatty 1995; Rosenberg 2001).⁴ They are not time-
less truths about the brain and its components, but the products of
machines cobbled together through evolution by natural selection and soft-
constructed in development. The fact that these generalizations are true, in
other words, is a contingent product of how life happens to have developed
and how a given life happens to develop for each organism. Because of this
historical fact, the regularities currently exhibited in biological organisms
are not physically necessary, if by that one means that that they could not
be different given the laws of physics. There was a time when no organisms
in the world exhibited LTP, and there might well be another such time in
the future.
These four features of the generalizations describing LTP are not unique
to LTP. Instead, they are common to most generalizations in neuroscience
and biology generally.⁵They are true, for example, of the causal generaliza-
tions describing the mechanism of LTP. Three features make LTP plausible
as a potential mechanism of learning: its cooperativity, its associativity,
and its input-speciﬁcity. ⁶ Suppose that the experimental set-up involves
of these assumptions. I advocate a different view about how mechanistically fragile generalizations can
be explanatory in Section 5.
⁴ The exact sense in which these regularities are contingent is difﬁcult to make precise. Rosenberg
argues that, ‘‘every regularity in biology will be falsiﬁed (or turned into a stipulation) eventually’’ (2001:
141). This fact about generalizations in biology leads him to claim that there can be no distinctively
biological explanations. As he puts it, ‘‘Onehistorical fact cannot by itself explain another’’ (2001: 155;
see also Weber 2005: 34). Explanation, on Rosenberg’s view, requires the kind of physical necessity
found in some of the laws of physics. This conclusion is implausible in the face of the apparent
explanatory successes of contemporary neuroscience and biology. I see no reason to believe that one
historical fact cannot explain another. They can and they do. Indeed, it is hard to generate examples
of explanations that do not explain historical facts by historical facts. Why did the US invade Iraq?
Why did the dinosaurs go extinct? Why did AIDS take root among IV drug users? I would accept
Rosenberg’s conclusion only after exhausting the available options for thinking about how contingent
regularities might be explanatory.
⁵ Consider Crick’s (1988) claim: ‘‘Evolution is a tinkerer. It is the resulting complexity that makes
biological organisms so hard to unscramble. Biology is t hus very different from physics. The basic
laws of physics can usually be expressed in exact ma thematical form, and they are probably the same
throughout the universe. The ‘laws’ of biology, by contrast, are often only broad generalizations,
since they describe rather elaborate mechanisms that natural selection has evolved over billions of
years’’ (p. 5).
⁶ There is a sense in which these features of LTP are misleadingly associated with learning. The
loose connection is that learning is associative (p airing two co-occurring stimuli, for example), that
memories can be primed (cooperativity), and that learning must be speciﬁc to associations formed in


=== PAGE 91 ===

70 causal relevance and manipulation
stimulating a population of pre-synaptic neurons that converges on a single
set of post-synaptic neurons, and that many pre-synaptic neurons converge
on the same post-synaptic cells. Depending on whether the pre-synaptic
stimulus is weak or strong, it will produce action potentials in a few or in
many pre-synaptic neurons. LTP is cooperative in the sense that there is a
stimulus threshold below which too few pre-synaptic neurons are active to
induce LTP. Using a strong stimulus to recruit more pre-synaptic neurons
makes LTP more likely at each of the stimulated synapses. LTP isassociative
in the sense that a weak (or sub-threshold) stimulus can produce LTP if it
is paired with a strong stimulus to a separate set of pre-synaptic neurons
converging on the same post-synaptic cells. Finally, LTP is input-speciﬁc
in the sense that only those synapses that are active during the stimulus
are potentiated. These three features point to a common deﬁning mark
of LTP: it is induced only when the pre- and the post-synaptic cells are
simultaneously active. The synapse thus exhibits a Hebbian form of learning
(Hebb 1949).
This deﬁning mark of LTP is explained by a coincidence detector
mechanism involving the NMDA receptor (see Figure 3.2). The NMDA
receptor gates the diffusion of Ca
2+ into the post-synaptic cell. When the
pre-synaptic neuron is active, it releases the neurotransmitters, glutamate
and glycine, which traverse the synapse and bind to receptors on the
post-synaptic cell, including NMDA receptors. The NMDA receptors
change their conformation to form a Ca 2+-selective channel through the
membrane. If the post-synaptic cell is polarized (that is, resting), the channel
is blocked by large Mg 2+ ions. When the post-synaptic cell depolarizes
as a result of activity at non-NMDA receptors (speciﬁcally, α-amino-3-
hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxasolepropionic acid, or AMPA receptors), the
Mg2+ ions are repelled from the channels, removing the Mg 2+ blockage.
At this point, Ca2+ begins to ﬂow through the channel. The inﬂux of Ca2+
and the consequent rise of intracellular Ca 2+ concentrations then activate
a number of intracellular biochemical pathways leading to the changes that
constitute a potentiated synapse. In the short term, these pathways add
the environment. Few if any contemporary neuroscientists think that complex associative memories
are stored in single synapses, and so it is questionable whether these features of LTP make it directly
relevant to learning in the way that these words suggest. The associations relevant to complex forms
of learning (for example, semantic memories) are far more likely, given our current understanding of
learning, to be formed among distributed representations across populations of neurons than they are
to be formed at single synapses.


=== PAGE 92 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 71
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+/Calmodulin
CaMKII
Mg2+
GLU
NO?
AMPA
Receptor
NMDA
Receptor
Protein
Synthesis
???
Figure 3.2. A sketch of the synaptic mechanism of LTP ∗
∗ Beginning with the release of glutamate (GLU) from the pre-synaptic neuron (left) and termi-
nating with changes to the post-synaptic neuron (right) and/or the pre-synaptic neuron (via nitric
oxide, NO)
new receptors to the membrane, or alter their sensitivity to glutamate,
or change their Ca 2+ conductance. Such changes could account for the
rapid induction of LTP. In the long term, the biochemical pathways lead
to the production of proteins used to alter the structure of the synapse.
Some suspect that there is also a pre-synaptic component of this mechanism
whereby, for example, the pre-synaptic cell releases more glutamate with
each action potential. What matters most for present purposes, however, is
that the NMDA receptor gates the induction of LTP. LTP is cooperative
because weak inputs do not depolarize the post-synaptic cell sufﬁciently
to remove the Mg
2+ block. LTP is associative for the same reason: the
independent strong input depolarizes the post-synaptic cell sufﬁciently to
remove the Mg2+ from the channel. Finally, LTP is input-speciﬁc because
glutamate opens the NMDA receptors only at the active synapses.


=== PAGE 93 ===

72 causal relevance and manipulation
The generalizations describing the causal relationships in this mechanism
share all of the features mentioned above for the causal generalization
describing LTP. They are narrow in scope , holding only for pyramidal cells,
or only in NMDA receptors. Many of the causal relationships in this mech-
anism are stochastic, such as the diffusion of ions or the opening and closing
of NMDA receptors. The causal relationships in this mechanism are mech-
anistically fragile. If the concentration of glutamate is too high or too low, if
the temperature and pH are not within physiological ranges, or if there is a
missing amino acid in the NMDA receptor, many of these causal relation-
ships can break down. Finally, these generalizations arehistorically contingent;
before there were NMDA receptors, this mechanism could not work.
Despite the fact that these causal generalizations are limited in scope,
stochastic, mechanistically fragile, and historically contingent, they nonethe-
less describe causal relations in mechanisms that work. They are not mere
descriptions of temporal sequences. They relate causes to effects and not
vice versa. They do not describe relationships among effects of common
causes. And they describe relationships among relevant factors. How must
we think about causal generalizations in neuroscience, and the relations
that they describe, in order for them to be explanatory despite the fact
that they are fragile and contingent? Before getting to my positive view,
I ﬁrst consider two views of causation designed to explicate mechanistic
explanation.
3. Causation as Transmission
A widespread, if largely implicit, belief about causation is that it involves
objects coming into contact and exchanging or transmitting something
between them. When the eight ball careens off the two ball into the
side pocket, the balls touch and exchange momentum; this exchange
constitutes the two ball’s causal inﬂuence on the eight ball. This view of
causation has historical precedent in both science and philosophy, and one
might reasonably believe that causal relations in neuroscience (and hence
explanations in neuroscience) ultimately are grounded in fundamental
causal relations of this sort.
The most inﬂuential contemporary expression of this view is found
in transmission accounts of causation, especially those of Wesley Salmon


=== PAGE 94 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 73
(1984, 1997, 1998) and Phil Dowe ( 1992, 2000). Salmon developed two
transmission accounts: the Mark Transmission account (MT; Salmon1977,
1984) and the Conserved Quantity account (CQ; suggested by Skyrms
1980; Dowe 1992; elaborated by Salmon 1994 and Dowe 2000). Salmon
abandoned MT in favor of CQ, and he ultimately recognized a num-
ber of limitations to CQ (Salmon 1989). In each case, the reasons for
Salmon’s change of opinion show why this view of causation is ultimately
unsatisfactory for understanding causal relevance in neuroscience.
The two central constructs of MT and CQ are causal processes and causal
interactions. In this context, processes should not be understood as extended
events or occurrences, such as production processes or computational
processes. Rather, processes are world-lines in Minkowski space–time
diagrams; they are things that exhibit consistency of characteristics over
time. To introduce three examples that will recur below, a glutamate
molecule crossing the synapse, a Ca
2+ ion entering a cell, and a shadow
moving along the ground as a car moves down the highway are all
processes. Salmon distinguishes two kinds of process: causal processes and
pseudo-processes. According to MT, these are distinguished by the fact
that causal processes are capable of transmitting a mark. A mark is a change
in some characteristic of a process that occurs when processes intersect. For
example, glutamate can be tagged with a radioactive tracer, the NMDA
receptor changes its conformation when it binds to glutamate, and a car’s
shadow is deformed as it passes telephone poles. What distinguishes causal
processes (such as glutamate or Ca 2+ ions) from pseudo-processes (such as
shadows) is that the causal processes can transmit the mark beyond the
space–time point at which the processes intersect. A process transmits
a mark from space–time point A to space–time point B if and only
if the mark appears at each space–time point between A and B in
the absence of additional interactions. Once the tracer is attached to
the glutamate molecule, additional interactions are not necessary for the
glutamate molecule to continue to bear the mark. Likewise, a mark
introduced into the car at a local intersection with a pebble (for example, a
crack in the windshield) is borne by the car from that point on. The pebble
is marked by being broken, compressed, and accelerated. This is not true of
the shadow, which is deformed as it passes the telephone pole. The shadow
is a pseudo-process because it cannot transmit marks beyond local points of
intersection. Two processes (for example, a car’s windshield and the pebble)


=== PAGE 95 ===

74 causal relevance and manipulation
interact causally when they intersect, when both processes are marked, and
when the marks are transmitted beyond the point of intersection in the
absence of additional interactions. This is an elegant view, indeed.
For both MT and CQ, explaining a phenomenon is a matter of situating
it within the causal nexus.⁷As shown in Figure 3.3 (redrawn from Salmon
1984), etiological explanations situate the event to be explained within the
causal nexus by tracing the relevant portion of the causal nexus in its past.
To say that an event X is part of the explanation for an event Y is to
locate X in Y’s past light cone and to trace the physical connections—the
processes and interactions—linking X to Y.
MT places few restrictions on what constitutes a process or a mark.
At least in many cases, neural mechanisms involve parts interacting with
one another through contact, and those interactions introduce changes in
Constitutive
Aspect
Etiological
Aspect
Explanandum Event:
X’s φing
Future
Past
Figure 3.3. Two aspects of causal-mechanical explanation ∗
∗ The etiological aspect traces the antecedent causes of the explanandum event (X’s φ-ing); the
constitutive aspect traces the mechanisms that make up X’s φ-ing
Source: Adapted from Salmon ( 1984)
⁷ This is a view of etiological explanation. Th is simple and appealing story does not apply to
what Salmon and I call ‘‘constitutive’’ explanations, in which components are not causally (but rather
componentially) related to the explanandum phenomenon.S e eC h a p t e r4.


=== PAGE 96 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 75
the properties of the interacting parts. When an enzyme phosphorylates
a molecule, and when an electrode injects current, marks are transmitted
through local interactions. Despite this prima facie plausibility, neither MT
nor CQ can provide a general account of causation in neuroscience.
For example, MT has difﬁculty accommodating transitory interactions
involving marks that are borne only during local intersections between
processes. Consider the interaction between the glutamate molecule and
the NMDA receptor. When glutamate binds to the NMDA receptor, the
NMDA receptor changes its conformation and exposes a channel through
the membrane. When glutamate detaches from the receptor, the channel
returns to its original conformation. The mark is not borne beyond the
locus of the interaction. Many of the enzyme-substrate interactions that
appear in most molecular explanations in neuroscience have this basic
scheme. MT is prevented from accommodating such interactions by its
device for distinguishing causal processes from pseudo-processes.⁸Salmon is
insistent on this distinction in part because it corresponds to the distinction
in special relativity between processes that can be accelerated beyond the
speed of light (such as shadows) and those that cannot. Those that can are
pseudo-processes, and those that cannot are causal processes. An account
of causation in neuroscience, however, need not be bound by a distinction
peculiar to physics, especially if the effort to honor this distinction prevents
one from accommodating unproblematic kinds of causal relations accepted
in neuroscientiﬁc explanations.
From Salmon’s perspective, however, MT suffers from a more serious
limitation. Part of his motivation for developing MT is his desire to
treat causation as an empirical phenomenon, open to investigation with
the methods of physical science. For Salmon, this involves developing
an account of causation free of appeal to counterfactuals (that is, free of
statements of the form ‘‘if X were to happen, then Y would happen’’).
Salmon could not see a way to evaluate the truth-values of counterfactuals
within his broadly empiricist (though realist) epistemological framework;
more speciﬁcally, he eschewed efforts to determine their truth-values by
⁸ Salmon might respond that the mark fails to persi st because of additional interactions inside the
channel. Similar counterexamples can arise for fundamental interactions of this sort that cannot be
analyzed into interactions among constituent parts. Salmon recognized difﬁculties accounting for what
he calls Y-type interactions that do not involve two processes coming together but rather one process
splitting. The channel example involves a Y-type interaction.


=== PAGE 97 ===

76 causal relevance and manipulation
considering what happens when counterfactual possibilities (such as X)
happen in nearby possible worlds.⁹When he realized that MT makes tacit
appeal to counterfactual relations, he abandoned the account (see Salmon
1994). To see how MT makes such tacit appeal, imagine that a shadow
(a paradigm pseudo-process) intersects with a glutamate molecule (a causal
process) at the same time that the glutamate molecule interacts with a vehicle
bearing a radioactive tracer (a causal process). During the intersection with
the shadow, the glutamate molecule is marked with a radioactive tracer,
and that mark persists beyond the locus of the intersection. The intersection
with the shadow, however, is irrelevant to the marking of the glutamate
molecule. To rule out cases of this sort, Salmon recognized the need to
stipulate that in causal interactions, the mark would not have been transmitted
had the interaction not occurred . The vehicle satisﬁes this criterion, but the
shadow does not. Salmon’s empiricist convictions, however, led him to
ﬁnd this reliance on counterfactuals intolerable.
In ‘‘Causality without Counterfactuals’’ (Salmon 1994), Salmon aban-
doned MT, citing these concerns about counterfactuals as his primary
motivation. He adopted Phil Dowe’s ( 1992) CQ account of causal trans-
mission. According to the CQ account, causal processes and interactions
are deﬁned as follows:
(CQ1)A causal process is a world-line of an object that possesses
a non-zero amount of a conserved quantity (for example mass,
energy, charge).
(CQ2)A causal interaction is an intersection of world-lines that involves
exchange of a conserved quantity.¹⁰
⁹ Although Salmon did not express the problem in this way, one can put the problem in terms of
the thesis of Humean Supervenience: the idea that there can be no difference in causal facts without
a difference in past, present, or future occurrent facts. Roughly, if two worlds are identical with
respect to what in fact happens, where, and when, then they cannot differ with respect to what causes
what. Failing to conform one’s view of causation to this requirement threatens to make causal facts
unknowable in principle. If two worlds are identical with respect to their occurrent facts but differ in
their causal facts, then no amount of evidence gleaned from the world could ever settle the question of
what the causal facts are. Given these epistemic consequences, it seems wise to conform one’s account
of causation to the principle of Humean Supervenience unless there is a good reason for not doing so.
Counterfactual accounts, Salmon might have thought, force one to consider facts other than occurrent
facts (for example, facts about nearby possible worlds), thus violating this empiricist loyalty test. Salmon
did not develop arguments against counterfactual approaches, such as Lewis ( 1983), which is intended
to be consistent with Humean Supervenience.
¹⁰ It is doubtful that CQ can serve as a reductive account of causation since conservation is an
implicitly causal notion. Quantities are c onserved if their values remain constant in closed systems,


=== PAGE 98 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 77
CQ obviates the need for counterfactuals by appeal to conserved quantities
that remain constant in the absence of interactions. CQ also presents a
view of causation tailor-made for physicalists/fundamentalist metaphysics.
If causal interactions are exchanges of conserved quantities, and if conserved
quantities are found only at the fundamental level, then all causation is
located at the fundamental level.
The added ontological restrictions on processes and interactions in CQ
remove the generality that MT has for describing causal interactions in
neuroscience. A mark is any persistent alteration to a characteristic; so
described, marks are ubiquitous. Conserved quantities are not so prevalent.
In electrophysiology, as discussed in Chapter 2, explanations appeal to
the movement of charges and matter across the membrane. The folding
of proteins is similarly described in terms of transitions among stable
states through energy-conserving interactions. But the claim that voltage
causes NMDA receptors to open makes no explicit appeal exchanges of
conserved quantities, and interactions among neurons, such as the LTP
phenomenon itself, are not, and do not require for their intelligibility that
they be grounded in, conservative interactions. ¹¹ As soon as one begins
to talk about causal relations that arise when parts are organized into
mechanisms, the transmission view loses traction; its austere descriptive
vocabulary no longer applies. When a tetanus induces LTP, there is a
causal relationship between an injection of current and the strength of a
synapse. Conservation laws do not describe this relationship, and nothing
is passed from the tetanus to the strength of the synapse. Although I know
of no explanations in neuroscience that violate conservation laws, very
few explanations in neuroscience appeal directly to exchanges of conserved
quantities. Such exchanges almost always occur well below the ‘‘level’’
of the causal interactions that neuroscientists care about. As a result, very
few causal relationships described in neuroscience textbooks can usefully
be regimented by assimilating them to conservation laws.
Leaving this descriptive matter aside, however, there are two reasons
to doubt that CQ can provide an adequate account of causation in
and closed systems are those that have no causal transactions with their environments (see Hitchcock
1995a).
¹¹ I neglect here the empirical hypothesis th at synaptic changes in the central nervous system are
regulated to maintain a constant overall synaptic strength across all of the synapses in a region or system.
This could possibly be true. I am merely insisting that its truth is not required for LTP to count as a
causal phenomenon.


=== PAGE 99 ===

78 causal relevance and manipulation
neuroscience. The ﬁrst is that transmission theories do not provide a
satisfactory account of causal relevance (as required in E 4). The second is
that transmission theories do not accommodate negative causal relations,
such as cases of omission and prevention. MT and CQ can perhaps be
supplemented with additional apparatus to remedy these shortcomings. In
each case, though, the additional apparatus is an ad hoc adjustment that is
untrue to the original motivations for the account and that gives up the
simplicity that makes transmission accounts attractive in the ﬁrst place. A
univocal account of causal relations that can do all of the work of CQ and
MT without the additional apparatus, such as the manipulationist account
I defend in Section 5, looks more promising as an account of the causal
relations in neuroscientiﬁc explanations.
3.1 Transmission and causal relevance
Causal relevance cannot be analyzed in terms of exchanges of conserved
quantities alone. The causal nexus is a complex reticulum of causal processes
and interactions. Only some of them are relevant to any givenexplanandum
phenomenon. Providing an etiological explanation involves not merely
revealing the causal nexus in the past light cone of the explanandum
phenomenon. It involves, in addition, selecting the relevant interactions
and processes and picking out the relevant features of those processes and
interactions (see Hitchcock 1995).
Consider blessed neurons. Suppose our parson electrophysiologist blesses
the pre-synaptic neuron with isotonic holy water while delivering a tetanus.
The holy water is a causal process transmitting marks and conserved
quantities from the micropipette to the neuron. Likewise, the tetanus is
induced by injecting current and so involves movement of ions from an
electrode into the cell. Matter and energy are conserved in each case. The
isotonic holy water is as much a part of the antecedent causal nexus of LTP
as is the injection of current. But the blessing is causally irrelevant to LTP.
This example represents a situation at the heart of the search for causes,
not just in neuroscience, but generally. The search for causes is not merely
a search for what marks what, or what engages in conservative interactions
with what, but rather what factors make a difference to the effect. Follow
the glutamate molecule from the pre-synaptic cell to the NMDA receptor.
The molecule no doubt engages in any number of conservative interactions:
it bumps the pre-synaptic membrane; it collides with other molecules; it


=== PAGE 100 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 79
attracts a passing ion; and it exchanges energy with synaptic enzymes.
Each of these interactions involves causal processes exchanging marks or
conserved quantities. But only some of these processes and interactions are
causally relevant to LTP.
Similar problems arise for causal interactions in which multiple conserved
quantities are exchanged. To use an example due to Christopher Hitchcock:
a pool cue strikes a cue ball, imparting both momentum and a blue dot
of chalk. In the ﬁrst case, momentum is exchanged. In the last, matter is
exchanged. Yet only the ﬁrst is relevant to the trajectory of the cue ball.
We could remove the dot, or change it from blue to green, or change
its material constituents in many ways without affecting the trajectory of
the ball. Similarly, when an electrophysiologist (ordained or not) lowers
the electrode into the cell, the electrode punctures the cell membrane,
adds matter to the intracellular ﬂuid, collides with various intracellular
molecules, and injects current. Each of these involves an exchange of
marks and conserved quantities, but only the current is relevant to LTP.
The challenge is to determine which exchanges of conserved quantities
are relevant. Because an account of transmission alone does not distinguish
relevant from irrelevant markings and exchanges, transmission accounts do
not meet condition E4. If explanation is a matter of situating something in
the causal nexus, and if the causal nexus contains myriad causally irrelevant
processes, features, and interactions, then the explanation includes causally
irrelevant features (in violation of E4).
Salmon ( 1994) acknowledges these problems with his CQ model and
admits that they are serious setbacks to his vision of the causal nexus. ¹²
The problem of explanatory relevance requires a conditional solution.
What makes the blessing irrelevant is that the tetanus would strengthen the
synapse even if the neuron were not blessed. What makes the blue dot
irrelevant is that the imparted momentum would send the cue ball into
the eight ball even if the cue did not leave a dot. The goal of an account
of causal relevance is to say what makes a difference to what. That goal
requires appeal to claims about what would happen or what would be
likely to happen if the circumstances were different (or, if it be preferred,
to claims about what does or is likely to happen when the circumstances
are different; see Bogen 2004).
¹² Dowe (2000) addresses this matter (see his Chapter 7). For criticism of his account, see Hausman
(2002); Ehring (2003).


=== PAGE 101 ===

80 causal relevance and manipulation
3.2 Omission and prevention
A second difﬁculty for transmission accounts concerns the prevalence of
explanations that appeal to negative causal factors. This brings me back to
the coincidence detector mechanism in LTP. LTP is induced only when
both the pre- and the post-synaptic neurons are simultaneously active.
As I note above, the crucial features of LTP are explained by the fact
that unless the post-synaptic neuron is depolarized when the pre-synaptic
neuron is stimulated, Mg 2+ ions block the NMDA receptor channel and
prevent Ca2+ from ﬂowing into the post-synaptic neuron. To induce LTP
thus requires removing the Mg 2+ block. Depolarizing the post-synaptic
neuron causes Ca2+ to enter through the NMDA receptor. But this causal
relationship cannot be understood as an exchange of conserved quantities
(or transmission of marks) between the depolarization of the pre-synaptic
cell and the inﬂux of Ca 2+.
To see why, focus on the stage in which Mg 2+ is expelled from the
channel in the NMDA receptor. The absence of Mg2+ allows Ca2+ to enter
the cell. The depolarization removes the Mg2+ ion from the channel in an
interaction that involves exchanging conserved quantities. But no conserved
quantities are exchanged between the absence of the Mg 2+ ion and the
inﬂux of Ca2+ ions. Absences do not bear or exchange conserved quantities.
They are not processes; they are not ‘‘things,’’ properly speaking, and they
do not exhibit consistency of characteristics over time. Nonetheless, the
absence of the Mg2+ block does seem to cause Ca 2+ to enter the cell. At
least this is what controlled experiments suggest: when the Mg 2+ block
is in place, the Ca 2+ does not enter the cell. When the Mg 2+ block is
removed, the Ca2+ current begins to ﬂow. In this sense (further restrictions
will be added below), the absence of the Mg 2+ ion makes a difference to
intracellular Ca2+ concentrations. To the extent that causal relevance is a
matter of making a difference, the removal of the Mg 2+ block, and so the
opening of the channel pore, is causally relevant to the induction of LTP.
The example can also be described the other way around. When the
Mg2+ ion is in the channel, it prevents intracellular Ca 2+ concentrations
from rising despite the fact that glutamate is bound to the NMDA receptor.
Does the presence of a Mg 2+ ion in the channel cause Ca 2+ not to enter
the cell? The Mg2+ ion does exchange conserved quantities with Ca2+ ions
as they enter the channel, but this is not the same aspreventing an increase in


=== PAGE 102 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 81
intracellular Ca2+. The failure of Ca2+ concentrations to rise is not the sort
of thing that bears conserved quantities, and it is not the sort of thing with
which Mg2+ ions can exchange marks. Still, there is no difﬁculty saying
that Mg2+ is causally, and so explanatorily, relevant to LTP. The reason is
simple: the Mg 2+ ion makes a difference to the Ca 2+ concentration of the
cell, a difference that is revealed, and so can be tested, by removing the
Mg2+ block.¹³
These examples exhibit two varieties of negative causation. ¹⁴ The ﬁrst,
in which the absence of the cause allows an effect (that is, not-C causes
E), is commonly called omission. The second, in which a cause inhibits or
precludes an effect (that is C causes not-E), is commonly called prevention.
Omission and prevention are common in neuroscience and everyday life.
Neurons ﬁre because inhibitory neurons are inhibited. Cells produce pro-
teins because molecules inhibit repressors. Aberrant movements appear in
Huntington’s disease because of damage to systems that would normally
suppress such movements. One does not need to look hard in neuroscien-
tiﬁc textbooks to ﬁnd crucial causal roles for antagonists, blockers, gates,
inhibitors, repressors, derepressors, negative feedback, and switches. These
are the kinds of systems for which negative causes are crucial.
Jonathan Schaffer (2004) argues, convincingly in my view, that any view
of causation that does not include negative causes is sharply at odds with
common-sense talk about causes, with scientiﬁc judgments about what
causes what, and with theoretical applications of the concept of the cause
(for example, to understand human agency and moral responsibility). LTP
is not unique or in any way exceptional in this respect. Different areas
of neuroscience have learned at different rates that they had to include
negative causation in their theories for different aspects of brain function.
Inhibitory neurons in the brain were not discovered until the middle of the
twentieth century. Physiologists and pharmacologists studying the chemical
synapse quickly learned that they had to discuss the means by which
neurotransmitters are enzymatically inactivated and/or removed from the
synapse. The neuroscientists who developed functional brain imaging began
¹³ Negative causation also raises problems for Glennan’s ( 1996) mechanical view because absences
are not physical parts and cannot ‘‘interact,’’ in Glennan’s sense of the word, with other parts.
¹⁴ These two can be combined to generate a family of test-problems for views of causation,
including cases of double prevention, preemptive prevention, and so on. See Collins et. al. (eds) (2004)
for discussions of these and other cases.


=== PAGE 103 ===

82 causal relevance and manipulation
by studying only increases in activation during the performance of a task
and then realized that they should also systematically investigate reductions
in activation as well. Neuroscientists have learned time and again that brain
systems can make a big deal out of nothing.
I would add an epistemic point. One discovers and tests negative causal
relationships with the same experimental strategies, and negative causal
claims are evaluated according to the same normative standards used to
evaluate positive claims. If the evidence for testing causal relations is
blind to the distinction between negative and positive causes, then our
epistemic access to them is no more and no less problematic than it is
to positive causes. These considerations make a strong case for accepting
negative causes and so place the burden of proof on those who would deny
that negative causes exist.
Some philosophers, however, deny that cases of omission and prevention
are true cases of causation. There are metaphysical reasons for this view,
grounded in the idea that absences, as nothings, have no causal powers. ¹⁵
This is a thorny issue, and it is hard to imagine it being resolved decisively.
The issue turns in part on how one construes the relata in the causal relations.
(Are they events, processes, states of affairs, values of variables, properties,
or objects? See Schaffer 2003.) According to the view I recommend, which
follows Dretske ( 1977), Hitchcock ( 1996), Northcott (forthcoming), and
Schaffer (2005), the causal relata are contrasts. For the cause variable, the
contrast is between the value of the variable as ﬁxed by the ideal intervention
and the value that the variable has in the control condition (that is, without
intervention). For the effect variable, the contrast is between the value
of the variable in the control condition (when one does not intervene
on the cause variable), and its value in the experimental condition (when
one does intervene on the cause variable). Causal statements are thus most
clearly articulated when they describe a relationship between contrasts: C
rather than not-C causes E rather than not-E. Different choices of contrast
classes yield different causal claims. To use Dretske’s example, it is true
that Socrates’ ingesting (rather than not ingesting) the hemlock (rather than
some non-poisonous beverage) caused him to die (rather than live). It is
false that Socrates’ ingesting (rather than injecting) the hemlock caused
¹⁵ This consideration would at best preclude the possibi lity of omission. It rai ses no difﬁculties for
prevention, so long as the preventer is a presence.


=== PAGE 104 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 83
him to die (rather than live). I defend this contrastive view in Chapter 6.
Note further that cases of omission and prevention are in many cases
merely extremes on a continuum of positive or negative causal relevance.
Raising the dose of a drug improves pain relief. Lowering the dose of
the drug reduces pain relief. Removing the drug entirely reduces it to
a zero-point. Cases of omission and prevention are not outliers in our
scientiﬁc conception of causation.
A second problem raised against the acceptance of negative causes is that
there are too many of them, and most negative causes are of no use for
understanding explanation in neuroscience. As Dowe ( 2004) and Beebee
(2004) argue, many instances of negative causation run counter to our
common sense, scientiﬁc, and theoretical uses of the concept of ‘‘cause,’’
and no available account of negative causation accepts all and only the
intuitively satisfactory instances. If omissions count as causes, then it would
appear that I am a cause for all of the things that I might have acted to
prevent. Whenever someone spills coffee in someone’s lap in a Vienna
caf´e, I could have prevented it had I been there and moved the coffee cup,
or distracted the waitress, or placed a pufﬁn on the counter, or whatever.
I am also the cause of every window’s not breaking, for the simple reason
that I might have tossed a rock through it. I take very little pride in that
fact. It would appear that, in the context of neuroscience, treating cases of
omission and prevention as on par with causal processes and interactions
makes the project of explaining the brain (that is, discovering its causal
structure) much more complicated. The complete etiological explanation
(that is, the complete cause) for a phenomenon includes not only all of
the factors that actually contributed to its occurrence, but also all of the
factors that might have prevented it, no matter how remote. In short, some
examples of negative causation are intuitively satisfying and explanatorily
salient, and some are not. Such considerations lead many to draw a clear
line where they can ﬁnd it: between positive causation (involving physical
connections) and negative causation (not involving physical connections).
Dowe ( 2000, 2004), in particular, argues that the common-sense notion
of causation (including cases of negative causation) should be bifurcated
into genuine causation, involving exchanges of conserved quantities, and
causation
∗, a counterfactual-laden quasi-causation without connection.
Dowe offers separate accounts of omission and prevention and he shows
how these accounts might be extended to cover more complex examples


=== PAGE 105 ===

84 causal relevance and manipulation
of negative causation. It sufﬁces for present purposes to examine cases of
prevention. On his account, to say that X prevented Y is to say that X
caused∗ not Y. X caused∗ not Y if:
(P1) X occurred and Y did not, and there occurred an m such that
(P2) there is a causal relation between X and the process due to m, such
that either
(i) X is a causal interaction with the causal process m, or
(ii) X causes n, a causal interaction with process m, and
(P3) If X (or an alternative preventer) had not occurred, m would have
caused Y. (Modiﬁed from Dowe 2000, 133– 4).¹⁶
To return to the LTP example, the Mg 2+ ion is lodged in the channel
(X) and the Ca2+ does not enter the post-synaptic cell (Y), in accordance
with (P 1). There is a causal interaction between the Mg 2+ ion in the
channel and Ca2+ ions entering the channel (m), in accordance with (P2).
If the Mg 2+ ion had not blocked the channel, then the ion would have
moved into the cell, in accordance with (P 3). In this way, the Mg 2+ ion
prevented the inﬂux of Ca2+ ions, or caused∗ the ions not to enter the cell.
This account does not so much solve the problem of there being too
many negative causes as rename it as a problem for causation ∗. Dowe
recasts the problem in (P 1) and (P 2), and then appeals to counterfactuals
in (P3) to show how the problem can be solved. Dowe does not claim to
provide an account of counterfactuals, or a means for distinguishing those
generalizations that sustain counterfactuals from those that do not, or a story
about how their truth-values are determined. Nor does he provide a means
to distinguish those appeals to causation
∗ that are appropriate (the intuitive
cases) from those that are not. All he really wants to show is that there are
genuine cases of causation that do not require appeal to counterfactuals.
The problem of providing an account of the counterfactual in (P3) can then
safely be left to those interested in causation ∗. This strategy is legitimate
for Dowe’s goal of constructing an empirical account of causation. Dowe’s
bifurcation effectively banishes omission and prevention from the domain
of phenomena over which his theory of causation is required to range.
However, my objective is to develop an account of causation that satisﬁes
the norms of explanation in neuroscience. Explanations in neuroscience
¹⁶ Machamer (personal communication) has also suggested an informal version of this view.


=== PAGE 106 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 85
typically involve instances of both causation and causation ∗, and so the
task of understanding (P3) cannot be left to others. Dowe’s account is thus
incomplete for present purposes.
The extravagant cases of negative causation can be handled in a number
of ways. Some negative causes are too improbable or abnormal to be
included in explanatory texts or even counted as causes. Others are ruled
out by, for example, legal, moral, and epistemic factors that determine the
salience of a fact in a particular discussion (see Beebee 2004). For example,
I cannot be held responsible for the coffee spillage in Vienna because I did
not know about it (an epistemic claim), I could not reasonably be expected
to go to Vienna today for this purpose (a moral claim), and I am under
no obligation, legal or otherwise, to prevent the spillage (in the way that
perhaps a personal assistant would be). Consider a neuroscientiﬁc example:
is the gasoline in my car’s tank a cause of the instance of LTP in the Petri
dish? It is likely true that if I had doused the dish with the gasoline, then
the cells would not induce LTP, but it seems odd to think of the absence
of gasoline as a cause of LTP. Although I do not have a general formula for
ruling out nonexplanatory causes of this sort, it is clear enough that gasoline
is neither normally part of cells nor part of their extracellular environment.
Gasoline is not part of the set-up or background conditions under which
the cell normally operates. It is not a cellular constituent. Gasoline levels
do not vary as the mechanism works. The distinction between intuitive
and counterintuitive cases is a psychological distinction that is drawn on a
number of different grounds in different epistemic contexts.
However, it is a psychological distinction that all parties in this dispute
have to accommodate. To remove negative causation from the extension
of the term ‘‘cause’’ is only to relocate the problem as a problem for
causation
∗. For the question that naturally arises is: what is the difference
between the intuitive and counterintuitive cases of causation ∗?F o rt h e
goal of building an account of mechanistic explanation, one cannot simply
banish negative causes from consideration. They play too central a role in
biological (and neuroscientiﬁc) mechanisms. And once they are admitted
(either as bona ﬁde causes or as mere causes∗), then the extravagance follows
automatically.
The problem of causal relevance that I discuss in Section 3.1 and the
problem of negative causation that I discuss in this section together present a
signiﬁcant challenge to transmission accounts. For the transmission account


=== PAGE 107 ===

86 causal relevance and manipulation
to provide an account of causal relevance, it needs to be supplemented with
the idea that causes make a difference to their effects, a difference that can
be assessed with controlled experiments. The cue ball, after all, would still
have gone in the corner pocket even if it had not been marked with the
blue dot. For the transmission account to provide an account of negative
causation, it also needs to be supplemented with the idea that causes make
a difference to their effects. If the Mg 2+ ion does not leave the channel,
the Ca2+ does not enter the cell. But once one has introduced this idea of
difference-making (one that many believe requires counterfactuals, such as
Dowe’s (P3); see Hitchcock 1995; Woodward 2003; see also Bogen 2004)
into the account of both positive and negative causation, it is reasonable
to ask what further work is left to be done by the requirement that the
entire causal chain must involve physical connections or transmission of
marks. What justiﬁcation is there for this further ontological restriction on
the notion of ‘‘cause’’? It is more appropriate to say that even though many
cases of causation involve transmission of marks or conserved quantities,
this is but one way for something to make a difference to something else.
The manipulationist approach that I recommend in Section 5 makes this
reliance on difference-making (and the experimental procedures to test
it) explicit, shows how this notion should be regimented, and thereby
provides a univocal account of positive and negative causal relevance.
4. Causation and Mechanical Connection
Let’s turn then to Glennan’s (1996) mechanical account of causation.¹⁷His
view contains some important insights about how mechanistically fragile
and historically contingent generalizations can be explanatory. However,
Glennan advances his account as a response to Humean skeptical challenges
to causation, ¹⁸ and his focus on this classic problem prevents him from
developing a normatively adequate account of causation or, consequently,
of mechanisms. Glennan has since amended his view (see Glennan2002)i n
¹⁷ I call Glennan’s account of causation ‘‘mechanical,’’ which should not be associated with my
mechanistic view of explanation. As my criticisms make clear, I do not think that causation can be
explicated in terms of mechanisms, as the mechanical account claims, but I do believe that explanations
often describe mechanisms.
¹⁸ I use the term ‘‘Humean’’ to acknowledge debates over Hume’s thoughts about causation. I am
merely reporting Glennan’s rendition of a set of worries traditionally attributed to Hume.


=== PAGE 108 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 87
a way that can perhaps handle the objections I raise and in a way that brings
his view much closer to my own.¹⁹Here, I focus only on the earlier view
because its limitations bring out some general lessons about the notion of
causal relevance in neuroscience.
Glennan (1996) describes Hume’s challenge as follows: given a putative
cause X and an effect Y, at best, one can observe that X and Y are
contiguous, that X precedes Y, and that X-type things and Y-type things
are constantly conjoined. One cannot observe the necessity or hidden power
by which X causes Y. For Glennan, the challenge is to identify this hidden
power connecting X to Y, because that hidden causal power distinguishes
cases in which X causes Y from those in which X is merely correlated with
or merely precedes Y. Glennan argues that for nonfundamental causes, the
hidden causal power is a mechanism linking X to Y: ‘‘a relation between
two events (other than fundamental physical events) is causal when and only
when these events are connected in the appropriate way by a mechanism’’
(Glennan 1996: 56, 1997). For Glennan, a mechanism is a complex system
that produces its behavior by the interaction of a number of parts according
to direct causal laws (Glennan 1996: 52). On his account, the tetanus causes
the strengthening of the synapse because there is a mechanism (involving
glutamate, NMDA receptors, and Ca
2+) that connects them.
Glennan argues that his mechanical account of causation offers a partial
solution to Hume’s problem:
To what degree have we uncovered the secret connexion that binds together
causally connected events? At the level of fundamental physics, Hume’s problem
still remains. We can observe certain regularities, but we cannot offer an explanation
of why those regularities obtain. It is not good enough to say that in physics there
just are regularities, for there are still questions about which regularities are lawful
and causal. Despite the difﬁculties that remain, we have shown that Hume’s
problem is not a universal one. In the case of higher-level laws, we can distinguish
connections and conjunctions, because we can understand the mechanisms which
produce higher level regularities. Very often, the connexion is not so secret after
all. (Glennan 1996: 68)
Causation is thus to be understood in two tiers. For nonfundamental
causal relations, mechanisms ﬁll the gap between cause and effect with
¹⁹ Indeed, we agree on many aspects of this general framework. My view centers on the same
basic ideas and builds from the same philosophical literature. I focus on our differences for purposes of
explication.


=== PAGE 109 ===

88 causal relevance and manipulation
intermediate causal relations. For fundamental causal relations, there are
by deﬁnition no mechanisms. While Glennan acknowledges that Hume’s
problem still arises at the fundamental level, he claims that it is not a
problem he needs to confront to understand nonfundamental causes.
Glennan’s use of the words ‘‘direct causal law’’ to describe the interactions
in a mechanism (Glennan1996, 1997) has attracted criticism from those who
believe that the mechanistic fragility and historical contingency of causation
in nonfundamental sciences make talk of universal laws inappropriate
(see, for example, Machamer et al. 2000; Woodward 2002; Darden 2002;
Glennan 2002). While I agree with the spirit of these criticisms, I also
believe that they obscure the progress Glennan makes in thinking about
these matters.
Glennan explicitly addresses mechanistic fragility. On his account, non-
fundamental causal regularities are sustained by a working mechanism in a
range of background and stimulus conditions. Mechanisms (such as the LTP
mechanism) break down in inappropriate stimulus conditions, or in abnor-
mal background conditions, or if the components of the mechanism break.
Nonfundamental causal regularities are fragile because the mechanisms that
sustain them can fail to work.
Although Glennan ( 1996) does not discuss the historical contingen-
cy of nonfundamental causes, the same point applies. Nonfundamental
regularities (and the mechanisms that sustain them) are in many cases
contingent products of evolution and development. Biological mechanisms
are tinkered together (Jacob 1977), and their components are adjusted as
variants arise and perish in the course of evolutionary history and as organ-
isms change and develop over their life histories. Such mechanisms have
changed considerably over the history of life. They also change over the
life of individual organisms. On Glennan’s account, such historical contin-
gency subtracts nothing from the ability of a mechanism to act as a hidden
connection between present causes and effects. The difference between
causal regularities and accidents, for Glennan, is not that causal regularities
are timeless and that accidents are historically transitory, but rather that
causal regularities are sustained by mechanisms and accidents are not.
To attack Glennan for his use of the term ‘‘law’’ also distracts atten-
tion from a serious problem with his attempt to ameliorate the force of
Humean causal skepticism, a problem that ultimately ramiﬁes through Glen-
nan’s account of causation. The problem derives from a tension between


=== PAGE 110 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 89
Glennan’s anti-fundamentalism and his attempt to analyze causation in
terms of lower-level mechanisms. Glennan states his anti-fundamentalism
as follows:
The mechanical theory of causation rejects a widespread assumption about the
nature of causation. I think that it is generally assumed that whatever causal
connections are, they ultimately have something to do with the most fundamental
physical processes. The closer we are to fundamental physics, the more our
statements are about the true causes of things; the further we stray into the
higher-level sciences, the more we move away from causal statements and toward
mere empirical generalizations. This assumption, however, is what makes Hume’s
skepticism so devastating. ... Causal statements are typically statements about events
regulated by mechanisms, and mechanisms are complex higher-level entities. Only
when we talk about interactions governed by fundamental laws does causal talk
become problematic. (Glennan 1996: 67)
I believe that mechanists should follow Glennan in resisting causal funda-
mentalism, but not because such resistance addresses the Humean challenge.
Glennan’s anti-fundamentalism does not solve the Humean problem.
Although he rejects the view that nonfundamental causal relations are
grounded in fundamental metaphysical glue (Glennan1996: 67), he accepts
the weaker intuition that they are grounded in metaphysical glue at lower,
yet nonfundamental, levels. For Glennan, the causal relationship between
the tetanus and LTP is grounded in causal relations among glutamate,
NMDA receptors, and Ca 2+ ions. Likewise the causal relations between
glutamate and NMDA receptors, and NMDA receptors and Ca 2+ ions,
are grounded in still lower-level mechanisms. Glennan’s mechanisms are
causal mechanisms. They are complex systems composed of interacting parts
that produce the behavior of the whole according to direct causal laws. The
italicized words are transparently causal, and the Humean will rightly request
an account of these causal terms. If Glennan grounds these causal terms in
still lower-level causal mechanisms, then he only staves off ignorance of the
nature of causes a little longer. He responds:
The circularity [or regress] is only apparent. In describing the mechanism that
connects the two events I have explained how the events are causally connected.
How the parts are connected is a different question. I can try to answer the second
question by offering another account of the mechanisms which connect them, but
I need not give an account to explain the connection between the events. Indeed
such an account would only obscure the causally relevant features of the original


=== PAGE 111 ===

90 causal relevance and manipulation
explanation. ... I refer to a mechanism which in turn refers to causal relations, but
these latter causal relations are different (and more basic) relations, than the one
which I am seeking to explain. (Glennan 1996: 65)
This response is unassailable as a point about explanation,b u ti td o e s
not address the worry about causation. I agree that one makes progress
in explaining LTP by appeal to activities such as binding, changing
conformation, diffusing, and phosphorylating. These activities are different
from and relatively more basic than LTP. I agree further that it would
obscure the understanding of LTP to keep descending through levels of
explanation all the way to quarks, strings, and branes. But the Humean
problem as stated above is not about explanation. Hume asks, ‘‘What is
the necessary connexion between cause and effect?’’ For that question,
Glennan’s answer is unsatisfying: the mysterious connections at higher
levels are grounded in many more and equally mysterious connections at a
lower level.
One way out of the regress is to allow it to terminate. One way
to do this is to claim that those fundamental causal relations involve
exchanges of conserved quantities; I discuss the limitations of that option
above. Glennan takes a related approach by claiming that the regress
terminates in fundamental laws. He admits that he has no account of how
fundamental laws are distinguished from fundamental accidents: ‘‘Hume
provides a convincing argument that we can have no knowledge of
this glue [at fundamental levels], and that talk of such glue may even
be unintelligible ... Only when we talk about interactions governed by
fundamental laws does causal talk become problematic’’ (Glennan1996: 67).
Here, Glennan echoes a familiar claim of physicists and many philosophers
of physics: belief in fundamental causes is no longer tenable (if it ever was).
Many of these physicists and philosophers also argue on these grounds that
belief in causes is untenable (or literally false) tout court (see, for example,
Russell 1913;N o r t o n2003). This strategy, however, threatens the heart of
Glennan’s view of causation in a more direct way.
Suppose that one is trying to understand the necessary connection
between X and Y (that is, X → Y) at one level above the fundamental
level. Glennan (1996) says that the necessity in the connection between X
and Y should be understood in terms of the connections between items
at the fundamental level, say, X → a → b → Y. Glennan grants that
a and b have no necessary connection between them and that talk of


=== PAGE 112 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 91
such a connection may be unintelligible. But how can a necessary causal
connection between X and Y be built out of relations in which there is no
necessary connection and for which such talk is unintelligible? The problem
then scales up: if the necessary connection between X and Y is problematic,
then so are any causal relationships built out of that connection. If the
Humean is right about causation at fundamental levels, then when Glennan
arrives at the font of causal power at the fundamental level, the well will be
dry. In short: the regress terminates or it does not, and either way Glennan
fails to solve Hume’s problem.
Similar considerations show why Glennan’s ( 1996) mechanical account
cannot satisfy (E 1)–(E 5). Consider (E 1), the idea that causal relations are
not mere temporal sequences. To meet this constraint, Glennan appeals
to the fact that causal relations (as opposed to temporal successions) are
underwritten by mechanisms. However, the same worry arises for the causal
relations in the mechanism. How are the causal relations in mechanisms
distinguished from mere temporal sequences? Glennan answers that the
causal relations in mechanisms are interactions governed by direct causal
laws. And what are direct causal laws? He answers that they are not mere
temporal sequences but necessary connections.²⁰Glennan does not explain
what it means to say that the direct causal laws are ‘‘necessary.’’ It appears
that, contrary to the spirit of his mechanical account, Glennan appeals
to ‘‘direct causal laws’’ to distinguish causal relations from mere temporal
sequences. If so, he does not (and perhaps cannot, given his remarks about
fundamental causal laws) develop the resources to adequately distinguish
direct causal laws from mere temporal sequences.
A like problem arises concerning the effects of a common cause (E 3).
Glennan says that ‘‘the stipulation that the laws [composing the mechanism]
be causal is meant to exclude lawful generalizations which can be explained
by common causes’’ (1996: 55). However, the challenge of (E 3)i st oﬁ n d
a principled means to distinguish effects of a common cause from causal
relations, not merely to stipulate that there is such a difference. Note that
there is a set of causal relations between the effects of common causes:
namely, one that passes via a series of interactions from one effect, through
the common cause, to the other effect. Unless Glennan stipulates that the
²⁰ This response is inconsistent with Glennan’s claim, discussed above, that talk of necessity is
unintelligible for fundamental causal laws.


=== PAGE 113 ===

92 causal relevance and manipulation
bona ﬁde interactions in mechanisms run from causes to effects (that is,
stipulates (E2)), there is no way to rule out this set of causal relations as a
mechanism linking the two effects of a common cause. Again, the buck
of providing an account of causation is passed ever lower in a hierarchy
of mechanisms until it is discharged by stipulation in fundamental causal
relationships.
Finally, consider the problem of distinguishing relevant from irrelevant
causes (E 4). Here is a possible description of the LTP mechanism: A
glutamate molecule with molecular weight w crosses the synaptic cleft at
velocity v, collides with a passing protein, alters the position of various
amino acids in the NMDA receptor, and lowers the concentration of
Na+ in the intracellular ﬂuid. Each step in this bizarre description is
true: the molecular weight, the velocity, the collision, the position of the
amino acids, and the changes in Na + concentration each hold for the
mechanism producing LTP. This description includes a set of parts and
mechanistically explicable interactions. Each stage is linked via a mechanism
to its predecessor. Yet no one would claim that this is a good explanation
of LTP. This is because the putative explanation is composed of irrelevant
features of the synapse. It is not the molecular weight of the glutamate
molecule or its velocity that matter, but rather its conformation and charge
conﬁguration. It is not the position of a particular amino acid in the
glutamate receptor that matters (at least in many cases), but rather the
appearance of a pore through the membrane. And it is not the drop in
Na+ concentration, but rather the rise in intracellular Ca 2+ concentration
that is relevant to the occurrence of LTP. An account of causation suitable
for use in an account of explanation must distinguish causally relevant from
causally irrelevant factors. Glennan does not show how this can be done,
and so he has not provided a normatively adequate account of the causal
relations in mechanisms. As a result, he does not provide a normatively
adequate account of mechanisms.
Glennan offers a useful way to explain the mechanistic fragility and
historical contingency of neural mechanisms. However, his desire to
solve Hume’s problem for nonfundamental causes ultimately backﬁres,
driving his account deeper and deeper into a hierarchy of mechanisms. I
suspect that many are convinced of the truth of fundamentalism because
they endorse a view of causation very much like Glennan’s. If this is
right, my objections to Glennan’s account should help to weaken that


=== PAGE 114 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 93
motivation. For in Glennan’s account, the most pressing questions for a
normatively adequate account of causation are stipulated as features of
‘‘direct causal laws’’ at the fundamental level. As a consequence, Glennan
neither ameliorates Hume’s worries nor satisﬁes (E 1)–(E 5). In Section 5,
I show how the manipulationist approach satisﬁes (E 1)–(E 5) without
stipulation and without descending into fundamentalism.
5. Manipulation and Causation
I dwell at some length on the mechanical and transmission approaches
to causation because each is associated with mechanistic explanation and
because each can be used (intentionally or not) to support explanatory
fundamentalism. The mechanical view grounds higher-level causal relations
in lower-level mechanisms, a grounding process that ends, if ever, only
in the most fundamental causal laws. The transmission account is more
explicit in its association between causation and properties found only at
the most fundamental levels (that is, conserved quantities). The fact that
neither of these views provides an adequate account of causation—and in
particular, that each struggles to provide an account of causal relevance and
negative causation—weakens the attraction of fundamentalism.
To repeat a central theme: causal relevance, explanation, and control are
intimately connected with one another. This is particularly true in biomed-
ical sciences, such as neuroscience, that are driven not merely by intellectual
curiosity about the structure of the world, but more fundamentally by the
desire (and the funding) to cure diseases, to better the human condition,
and to make marketable products. The search for causes and explanations
is important in part because it provides an understanding of where, and
sometimes how, to intervene and change the world for good or for ill. This
connection between causation, explanation, and control is also reﬂected
in the procedures that neuroscientists use to test explanations. These tests
involve not only revealing correlations among the states of different parts of
a mechanism but, further, intervening in the mechanism and showing that
one has the ability to change its behavior predictably. More explicitly: to
say that one stage of a mechanism is productive of another (as I suggest in
Machamer et al. 2000; Craver and Darden 2001), and to say that one item
(activity, entity, or property) is relevant to another, is to say, at least in part,


=== PAGE 115 ===

94 causal relevance and manipulation
that one has the ability to manipulate one item by intervening to change
another. More concretely, to say that LTP is caused by tetanic stimulation
is to say that one can potentiate a synapse by tetanizing it.
In embracing this view, I rely closely on James Woodward’s account of
the role of invariance in explanation (see, especially, Woodward1997, 2000,
2002, 2003; and Woodward and Hitchcock 2003a, 2003b). Woodward is
not especially concerned with neuroscience; however, he is concerned
with developing an account of causation adequate for explanations that
involve mechanistically fragile and historically contingent generalizations.
Woodward ( 2002) shows how his account of causal relations might be
ﬁtted into an account of mechanisms, and Glennan ( 2002) has followed
him in this idea. In this section, I build on that idea by showing how the
manipulationist account of causal relevance can satisfy (E 1)–(E 5). I also
show how it can accommodate negative causation.
Woodward’s view is currently the most defensible and readable expo-
sition of the manipulationist tradition in thinking about causation both in
philosophy (see, for example, Collingwood 1940; von Wright 1971)a n di n
statistics (Cook and Campbell 1979; Freedman 1997). Related ideas appear
in Pearl’s (2000) notion of a ‘‘do operator,’’ the notion of an intervention
by Spirtes et al. (1993), and Glymour’s (2001) idea of surgically intervening
into a causal graph. The central idea is that causal relationships are distinctive
in that they are potentially exploitable for the purposes of manipulation and
control. More speciﬁcally, variable X is causally relevant to variable Y in
conditions W if some ideal intervention on X in conditions W changes the
value of Y (or the probability distribution over possible values of Y). In the
context of a given request for explanation, the relationship between X and
Y is explanatory if it is invariant under the conditions (W) that are relevant
in that explanatory context. Now I consider the different components of
this basic statement.²¹
Woodward construes X and Y as variables, that is, as determinables
capable of taking on determinate values. Although this is a common way of
speaking in some areas of science and statistics, philosophers have generally
²¹ Again, I do not offer this account as a reductive analysis of causation. It would clearly be circular,
given that intervention is an ineliminablycausal concept. Instead, my account is intended as a necessary
condition to be met by relationships of causation and to be explained by any satisfactory metaphysics
of causation. Lewis’s view of causation, for example, a bly captures many of the crucial features of this
necessary condition (see Woodward and Hitchcock 2003a for a discussion).


=== PAGE 116 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 95
preferred other relata in their accounts of causation. Davidson ( 1969)a n d
many other philosophers, for example, describe causation as a relationship
between events. Salmon ( 1984, 1998) and Dowe ( 2000) describe it as a
relationship among processes. Others describe it as a relationship among
objects, facts, and contrasts. Each of these ways of speaking and thinking
about causation can be translated without loss into talk of variables. For
example, talk of event and object causation can be translated into talk of
a variable that can take on two values {E occurs/is present, E does not
occur/is not present}. Talk of causation among processes can be translated
by assigning variables to the features of a process or to the magnitudes
of the conserved quantities. ²² Similar translations can be made for the
other ways of thinking about causation. To view causal relevance as a
relationship among variables allows one to consider cases in which the
variable may take on any value in a continuum (for example, a dose),
to make relative assessments of causal efﬁcacy along that continuum (for
example, a dose-response relation), and to consider cases in which there are
sharp discontinuities in the effect between one portion of the continuum
and another (threshold events, such as action potentials).²³
The term ‘‘intervention’’ denotes, roughly, a manipulation that changes
the value of a variable. It is helpful to think of interventions as well-
designed experimental interventions. However, one must not think of
manipulations as exclusively the products of human agency. When a stroke
damages a brain region, this counts as an intervention on that brain region’s
functioning. When a meteor strikes the moon, it intervenes in the moon’s
environment.
The manipulationist view of causal relevance requires that the relation-
ship between X and Y must be potentially exploitable for the purposes
of manipulating Y in conditions W. One need not actually be able to
manipulate X. One might not know how to intervene on X, one might
not have the tools, or X might be too small, too big, or too far away for
human intervention. Many believe, for example, that a spatial map in the
²² Those who think of causation as involving activi ties can make use of the fact that activities have
precipitating conditions or enabling properties (that are necessary for or conducive to the occurrence of
the activity) and termination conditions or signatures (that is, effects). One can then apply the strategy
just described for causation among events, objects, or properties. See Darden and Craver (2002).
²³ As I note above and discuss further in Chapter 6, a contrastive formulation is even more
perspicuous. It is a variable X’s having one value (ra ther than some other value) that causes the effect
to occur (rather than some alternative). (See Dretske 1977; Hitchcock 1996.)


=== PAGE 117 ===

96 causal relevance and manipulation
hippocampus is causally relevant to the ability of rodents to navigate their
environments (as argued by O’Keefe and Dostrovsky 1971; O’Keefe and
Nadel 1978; Wilson and McNaughton 1993). They believe this in spite of
the fact that neuroscientists currently lack the ability to drive a rat through
a novel maze by manipulating its spatial map. The ability to do so would
no doubt be convincing evidence that the hippocampus is involved in
navigation, but this evidence is not required to know that there is a causal
relation. What matters is that there is a relationship between X and Y
that can possibly be exploited to change Y by changing X, even if no
human can or will ever be able to so exploit it. It is a very interesting
question how (and how much) we can manage to learn about the causal
structure of the world in cases where we cannot intervene in this way. This
question is best answered through a detailed look at speciﬁc experimental
practices in neuroscience. I do not pursue such a detailed investigation in
this book (see, for example, Bogen 2001; Bechtel forthcoming). I focus
instead on more abstract and general features of the evidence required to
establish causal claims.
An ideal intervention I on X with respect to Y is a change in the value
of X that changes Y, if at all, only via the change in X. More speciﬁcally,
this requirement implies that:
(I1) I does not change Y directly;
(I2) I does not change the value of some causal intermediate S between
X and Y except by changing the value of X;
(I3) I is not correlated with some other variable M that is a cause of
Y; and
(I4) I acts as a ‘‘switch’’ that controls the value of X irrespective of X’s
other causes, U. (Adapted from Woodward and Hitchcock 2003a)
These restrictions on ideal interventions are represented graphically in
Figure 3.4. Unidirectional arrows represent causal relations, bidirectional
dotted arrows represent correlations, and bars across arrows represent a
restriction against the represented relation. In this ﬁgure, an intervention
changes the value of X, surgically removing other causal inﬂuences, U,
on X (I4). This intervention produces a change in Y that is not mediated
directly (I 1), by affecting an intermediate variable, S (I 2), or by being
correlated with some other variable, C, that can change the value of Y


=== PAGE 118 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 97
U
X
I4
I2
I1
I3
I
YS
C
Figure 3.4. An ideal intervention on X with respect to Y ∗
∗ Solid arrows represent causal relations; dotted a rrow represents correlations; hashes represent the
absence of the cause or correlation
(I3). Note that conditions (I 1)–(I 4) represent the kinds of control that are
routinely used and required to test causal and explanatory claims.
The focus on ideal interventions will give rise to objections that experi-
mental situations are often in many ways non-ideal. This is true, and it is an
important insight about our epistemic situation with respect to the causal
structure of the world. More work remains to be done to say how one can
learn about the causal structure of the world if criteria (I1)–(I 4) are relaxed,
removed, or replaced in order to more accurately describe the complex
epistemic situation in which most experimentalists work. The best inroad
into that discussion, it seems to me, is to work ﬁrst on the clear cases and
then to see how (and if) the account can be adjusted so that it can regiment
non-ideal experimental situations.
Consider the LTP example again. When is it appropriate to assert
that a tetanus in the pre-synaptic cell is causally relevant to LTP? One
might establish this relationship experimentally by intervening into the
pre-synaptic cell, delivering a tetanus, and observing subsequent changes in
the strength of the synapse. An experimenter could intervene by injecting
current into the cell, by creating an electrical ﬁeld in a population of
pre-synaptic cells, by applying neurotransmitters to the pre-synaptic cell,
or by allowing a population of cells to enter its normal burst cycle. What
matters is that the intervention makes the pre-synaptic cell ﬁre rapidly and


=== PAGE 119 ===

98 causal relevance and manipulation
repeatedly. Suppose that one performs such an intervention and observes a
subsequent increase in the strength of the synapse. Such a ﬁnding would
not warrant belief in the claim that the tetanus is causally relevant to
synaptic strength. It is possible that the intervention strengthened the
synapse for reasons having nothing to do with the tetanus. Perhaps merely
breaking the cell membrane or inserting an electrode into a population of
neurons can strengthen synapses (in violation of (I1)). Or perhaps inserting
the electrode changes features of neurotransmitter release (in violation of
(I2)). Or perhaps one inserts electrodes only when one has the cells in
a particular bath solution, and the bath solution strengthens synapses (in
violation of (I 3)). Or perhaps the injected current is swamped by input
from other neurons into the cell (in violation of (I 4)). If any of the
conditions (I1)–(I 4) fails in an experimental protocol, the observed changes
in synaptic strength would not be good evidence of a causal relationship
between the tetanus and the changes in synaptic strength. When one asserts
a causal relevance relation between the ﬁring rate of the pre-synaptic cell
and the strength of a synapse, one asserts when one alters the ﬁring rate
of the cell in speciﬁed ways using an ideal intervention, then one either
strengthens the synapse or changes the probability that the synapse would be
strengthened.
Each of the activities in the LTP mechanism can be described in the
same way. Neuroscientists believe that glutamate opens NMDA receptors
because they open when glutamate is applied, but not (or not to the same
extent) when isotonic saline or some other neurotransmitter is applied, and
not when the binding site for glutamate has been blocked or altered. They
are convinced that Mg
2+ blocks the ﬂow of Ca 2+ into the post-synaptic
cell because they can manipulate Ca 2+ levels in the cell by changing the
concentration of Mg 2+ or by manipulating the electrical potential that
holds Mg2+ ions in the NMDA receptor’s pore. They are convinced that
depolarizing the post-synaptic cell is relevant to the eventual occurrence
of LTP because they can keep everything else the same and eliminate
LTP simply by clamping the voltage of the post-synaptic neuron at rest.
Experiments of this sort show neuroscientists what can manipulate what.
On the further assumption that such manipulations are relevantly similar
to changes occurring in the brain under the conditions in question,
neuroscientists can assume that natural interventions (that is, those not
wrought by human hands) produce similar changes in the brain.


=== PAGE 120 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 99
5.1 Invariance, fragility, and contingency
The explanatory generalizations describing these causal relevance relations
are stable, or as Woodward says invariant, though not necessarily—or
even usually—universal. To say that a generalization is stable is to say that
the speciﬁed relation between the cause variable and the effect variable
holds under a (generally nonuniversal) range of conditions. The conditions
under which a generalization might be stable include stimulus conditions,
intermediate conditions,a n dbackground conditions. Stimulus conditions include
conditions explicitly represented as independent variables in the description
of the relationship; in the case of X → Y, the stimulus condition is X.
The relationship need not be stable across all stimulus conditions. Outside
of a normal range of stimulus conditions, the stimulation might have no
effect, might weaken the synapse, or might simply damage the cells. The
generalization might also be more or less stable under a range of values for
the variables intermediate between X and Y, such as Ca 2+ concentration
and Mg2+ concentration. Finally, the relationship holds only under a range
of background conditions, such as temperature, pH, and available energy.
Stable causal relations in neuroscience, in other words, do not hold under
all conditions but only under a narrow range of conditions.
The idea that a relationship between variables must be stable to be
explanatory is also weaker than the requirement of ‘‘contextual unanimity’’
found in many accounts of causation (for example, Cartwright 1983; Eells
1991;S k y r m s1980). The requirement of contextual unanimity demands,
roughly, that if X causes Y, then the relationship between X and Y holds
in all contexts. This requirement is too strong for the causal relations
in neuroscience precisely because these causal relationships often depend
crucially upon the absence of counteracting causes, on the absence of
interaction effects, and on background conditions within relatively circum-
scribed ranges (see Glennan 1997). In contrast to the contextual unanimity
requirement, the manipulationist approach allows explanatory generaliza-
tions to vary considerably in their stability or invariance and requires only
that the generalization should be stable in the conditions relevant to a
particular request for explanation (see below).
The fact that generalizations can be more or less stable and still be
explanatory is useful for dealing with the fact that causal generalizations in
neuroscience are limited in scope, mechanistically fragile, and historically


=== PAGE 121 ===

100 causal relevance and manipulation
contingent. Causal relations need not be universal to be explanatory, nor
need they be unrestricted in scope, nor need they lack any reference to par-
ticulars. All that matters is that there is some stable set of circumstances under
which the variables speciﬁed in the relation exhibit the kind of manipula-
ble relationship sketched above. Mechanistically fragile generalizations are
invariant over a range of values for the stimulus variable, the intermediate
variables, and the background conditions. Furthermore, the fact that the
relationship is historically contingent, and so in some sense unnecessary,
makes no difference to whether the relation is explanatory here and now.
Na+ channels produce action potentials today even if no creatures produce
action potentials that way 20 million years from now. What matters, again,
is that there exists a range of conditions under which one can reliably
manipulate the effect variable by intervening to change the cause variable.
Which are the relevant conditions for assessing the stability of a gener-
alization? There is no general answer to that question. Woodward often
conﬁnes his attention to changes in the values of the variables appearing
in the statement of the causal relevance relation. However, this requires at
once too much and too little. It requires too much because, as just noted,
such relationships might break down under extreme values of the variables
appearing in the statement of the relation. It requires too little because,
although neuroscientists are often interested in physiologically relevant con-
ditions (that is, the conditions found in intact and healthy organisms), they
are just as often interested in disease states in which the stimulus, interme-
diate, and background conditions are abnormal or pathological. Sometimes
they are interested in background conditions well outside the physiological
range, as when they try to explain highly contrived experimental effects,
to design drugs to interact with the CNS, or to commandeer some part of
the CNS for their own purposes. The appropriate range of conditions in
which a causal generalization must be stable thus depends crucially upon
one’s explanatory interests. This does not mean that the causal relations
are interest-relative. The causal relevance relations under different ranges
of conditions are objective features of the world. However, which of those
objective relations is relevant depends on what you are trying to explain.
5.2 Manipulation and criteria for explanation
According to the manipulationist account, explanatory texts describe rela-
tionships between variables that can be exploited to produce, prevent,


=== PAGE 122 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 101
or alter the explanandum phenomenon . Merely being able to manipulate
a phenomenon, of course, is not sufﬁcient to explain it. People made
babies long before they understood how DNA works. But the wider the
range of possible manipulations, and the deeper one’s knowledge of how
such manipulations change the explanandum phenomenon , the more com-
plete is the explanation. As Woodward puts it, a good explanation allows
one to answer a range of ‘‘what-if-things-had-been-different questions’’
(w-questions, for short). Deep explanatory texts (or models) provide the
resources to answer more questions about how the system will behave
under a variety of changes than do shallow explanatory texts. The answers
to such questions are evaluated experimentally according to the standards
described above.
The manipulationist view readily satisﬁes criteria (E 1)–(E 5). Consider
mere time-courses (E 1). The ability to lay down long-term memories
invariably appears after the development of the primary sexual characteris-
tics, but (so far as I know) the latter is explanatorily irrelevant to the former.
In contrast, delivery of a rapid and repeated stimulus to the pre-synaptic
cell is explanatorily relevant to the entry of Ca2+ into the post-synaptic cell.
The difference, according to the manipulationist account, is that one could
not manipulate the ability to lay down long-term memories by intervening
to change the development of primary sexual characteristics (so far as I
know), but one can manipulate the tetanus to change the concentration
of Ca2+ in the post-synaptic cell. This way of dealing with the difference
between causation and regular succession has clear advantages over both
regularity-based accounts of causation and certain counterfactual views.
Both of these alternative views of causation treat at least some cases of
regular temporal succession as cases of causation. This is because the values
of the two variables, X and Y, are constantly conjoined (ex hypothesi ) such
that whenever the ﬁrst variable occurs, the second does as well. One could
then infer that if X takes a particular value, then Y will take the corre-
sponding value. Nonetheless, it is not the case that one could change Y
by intervening to change X. In cases of this sort, the relationship between
X and Y supports what Lewis ( 1979) calls ‘‘backtracking counterfactu-
als,’’ but, as Lewis notes, such counterfactuals are not explanatory. The
manipulationist-based approach instead requires causal regularities to fulﬁll
a more demanding requirement, namely that if X is set to x in accordance
with (I1)–(I 4), then Y will take on the value f(x). This kind of statement


=== PAGE 123 ===

102 causal relevance and manipulation
is tested in controlled experiments. Relations that meet this requirement
allow one to answer w-questions.
The same strategy can be used to show why causal explanations tend to
run from earlier to later (E2). The reason is that, at least in all known cases
in neuroscience, one cannot change the past by intervening in current states
of affairs. No matter what one does to the pre- or post-synaptic neuron
now, one will not change the way that it behaved yesterday. There is no
need to insist that all causes precede their effects on metaphysical grounds.
There are still debates about whether backwards causation is possible in
physics (see, for example, Price 1996). Were such a relationship to be
demonstrated (using the sorts of ideal experimental manipulations discussed
above), one would be justiﬁed in asserting that past events can be caused by
future events and in asserting that at least in some cases one needs to appeal
to future events to explain the past. However, there have been no such
demonstrations in neuroscience, and this helps to explain the presumption
that explanations in neuroscience are temporally asymmetrical.
Constraint (E3) is that two effects of a common cause do not explain
one another in spite of the fact that the occurrence of one allows us to
infer the occurrence of the other. Suppose that one pre-synaptic neuron
(A) synapses upon two unconnected post-synaptic neurons, N
1 and N2;
that stimulating A reliably causes N 1 and N2 to ﬁre action potentials; and
(for simplicity) that N1 and N2 are quiescent in the absence of activity in
A. Let X be a variable representing the electrical activity of N 1 with the
values {ﬁring, not ﬁring } , and let Y be a like-valued variable representing
the electrical activity of N 2. Under these suppositions, one could reliably
infer the value of X from the value of Y and vice versa because N 1 and
N2 always ﬁre in tandem. That is, there is a robust regularity between X
and Y that sustains certain backtracking counterfactuals. Were X to take
the value {ﬁring }, then Y would take the value {ﬁring }. And if Y were
to take the value {not ﬁring }, then X would take the value {not ﬁring } as
well. However, one could not change X’s activity by intervening directly
to change Y. Nor could one change Y’s value by intervening directly to
change X. The regularities here do not satisfy requirement W. Examples
such as this generalize: if the relationship between two variables is merely
a correlation, then one will not be able to manipulate one variable by
intervening to change the other. If the two are causally related, then one
can manipulate one of them by manipulating the other.


=== PAGE 124 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 103
The manipulationist approach also sorts relevant from irrelevant prop-
erties and interactions, as required by criterion (E 4). (I extend this basic
model considerably in Chapter 6 to address issues of nonfundamental causal
relevance). To begin with the parson and his micropipette, while it may
be true that all pyramidal cells blessed with holy water produce LTP when
tetanized, the holy water is irrelevant. One can establish this by intervening
in the above sense to remove the blessing, or to change the blessing to
a curse, while leaving everything else the same. If one ﬁnds that such
interventions have no effect on the occurrence (or incidence) of LTP, then
one should conclude that the blessing is irrelevant to LTP. Of course,
experiments are rarely so clean in the real world. In the history of LTP
research, for example, it has been very difﬁcult to determine which of
the myriad interactions among intracellular molecules are relevant to the
occurrence of LTP (see, for example, Sanes and Lichtman 1999). Part
of the reason that these relevance relationships have been so difﬁcult to
disentangle is that the intracellular molecular cascades are so complex and
causally interwoven that it is difﬁcult to perform the sorts of ideal interven-
tions described above. It is complex, in practice, to determine that one’s
intervention acts only on the target variable X, and that the intervention
changes Y only via X and not through a host of myriad other connec-
tions. But these practical difﬁculties, which are part of what make science
challenging and rewarding, do not impugn the overall idea that what one
ideally wants to establish is precisely such well-controlled relationships of
manipulability.
The ﬁnal criterion, that the account of causation should allow for
improbable effects (E 5), requires only a slight modiﬁcation of the basic
argument scheme applied to (E 1)–(E 4). Many of the causal relationships
posited in neuroscience are probabilistic. Tetanizing a pre-synaptic cell
produces LTP only 50 percent of the time (with current techniques). If
X and Y are only probabilistically related, then any particular intervention
to change X might have no effects on Y. As remarked above, what
the manipulationist account requires in such cases is that manipulating
X changes the probability distribution over possible values for Y. For
example, depolarizing the neuron should change the probability that the
Na+ channel will open or that the synapse will be potentiated. In neither
case is it required that manipulating X makes Y probable (that is, p(Y | X)
> 0.5). The probability of Y might be quite low even under the maximally


=== PAGE 125 ===

104 causal relevance and manipulation
effective manipulations of X. Indeed, this matches precisely the way that
researchers assess stochastic relationships in neuroscience and elsewhere.
One last point requires emphasis. Nothing in this view of causal relevance
makes reference to a privileged level at which all causes act or at which
all relevant causes are located. Variables can be fundamental (spin, charm)
or nonfundamental (socio-economic status, priming, inﬂation). All that
matters is that they exhibit the patterns of manipulability discussed above.
5.3 Manipulation, omission, and prevention
A ﬁnal promising feature of the manipulationist approach to causal rele-
vance is that it accommodates causation by omission and prevention (see
Woodward 2002). In cases of omission, such as when the absence of an
attractive force allows the Mg 2+ ion to ﬂoat out of the NMDA receptor
channel, what matters is not the transmission of marks or conserved quan-
tities from the beginning of this mechanism to the end, but rather the fact
that one can prevent the Mg 2+ ion from ﬂoating out of the channel by
polarizing the cell. Likewise in cases of prevention, such as when the Mg2+
ion blocks the channel and thereby prevents Ca 2+ from entering the cell,
what matters is not an exchange of conserved quantities between the Mg2+
ion and the non-increase in Ca2+ (for there can be no such exchange), but
rather the fact that by manipulating the putative cause (positive or negative),
one can make a difference in the putative effect (positive or negative).
The ability of the manipulationist account of causal relevance to satisfy
(E1)–(E 5) and to accommodate cases of negative causation is directly tied
to the ability of such generalizations to answer w-questions. This ability
provides the kind of rich information about theexplanandum phenomenon that
is typically required of a good explanation. When one knows the relations
of manipulability, one can say which interventions make a difference to the
explanandum and which do not (for example, mere temporal predecessors,
temporal successors, irrelevant properties, and the like). In cases where
interventions do make a difference, knowing these relations allows one to
predict how the explanandum phenomenon will be different under a variety
of conditions. There is a strong appeal in this connection given that one
way to test one’s understanding of a phenomenon (as any good test-writer
knows) is to test whether someone can say how it will change in novel
conditions.


=== PAGE 126 ===

causal relevance and manipulation 105
6. Conclusion
This view of causal relevance adds an essential normative component to
previous accounts of mechanistic explanation. For example, Bechtel and
Richardson (1993), like Glennan ( 1996), argue that mechanistic explana-
tions describe parts and their interactions, but they do not say how to
sort interactions from correlations or relevant from irrelevant parts. My
co-authors and I (Machamer et al. 2000) describe mechanisms as partly
constituted by ‘‘activities productive of regular changes,’’ but we do not
say what distinguishes productive activities from mere correlations. The
manipulationist account clearly makes some progress on this question: X
is causally relevant to Y if one can manipulate Y (or, more generally, the
probability distribution over values of Y) by intervening ideally on X. X is
explanatorily relevant to Y if it is causally relevant.
It is worth noting how much progress can be made in thinking about
causation and causal relevance without resolving metaphysical worries
about the ultimate nature of causation. The manipulationist approach
does not reduce talk of causation to some less problematic notion; the
idea of manipulation is causal, and conditions (I 1)–(I 4) are all stated in
causal terms. But it is not clear that a reductive account of causation can
provide a satisfactory treatment of causal relevance (that is, one that satisﬁes
(E1)–(E 5)). An account of causal relevance should allow one to say which
of a number of putative causes actually makes a difference to the effect
even if it cannot alone resolve the question of what difference-making
really is. The diverse examples discussed above (especially cases of omission
and prevention) should cast some doubt on the thesis that there is one
and only one thing answering to the word ‘‘causation.’’ This is one reason
why the manipulationist view also remains silent concerning the ‘‘hidden
connection’’ between causes and effects. As I have argued, the search
for such a connection has led more than one philosopher to develop an
account of causation that includes no account of causal relevance. One can
complain that the manipulationist account presupposes a metaphysics of
causation, and refuse ascent until an account of the metaphysics is provided,
or one can recognize the manipulationist account of causal relevance as
a normative framework that any adequate metaphysics should satisfy, or
better, explain. I do not discuss here whether such metaphysics is required


=== PAGE 127 ===

106 causal relevance and manipulation
or what the available metaphysical options are. Even if the manipulationist
view does not identify the truth-maker for causal claims, it is nonetheless
an illuminating analysis of the causal truths themselves, and it is crucial for
the project of deciding which putative metaphysical explanations (that is,
which truth-makers) are adequate and which are not.
Although I display some of the merits of the manipulationist approach
relative to some competitors (mechanical and transmission accounts), I do
not argue that one can make sense of causal relevance only by appeal to
manipulability relations. I do not rule out the possibility that (E 1)–(E 5)
might be satisﬁed by other accounts of causation. Nor do I rule out the
possibility that there is more to learn about causation by investigating
such alternatives. I believe, for example, that Hitchcock’s comparative
conception of the statistical dependency relations involved in causation
(Hitchcock 1996) can help to remove certain ambiguities in the manipula-
tionist approach (I build on this idea in Chapter 6). I believe further that
the notion of ‘‘productive activities’’ developed by Machamer et al. (2000)
and deployed by Craver and Darden (2001) and Darden and Craver (2003)
is extremely useful for describing the history of science, for understanding
aspects of scientiﬁc change, for thinking about how to build explanations,
and for thinking about the metaphysics of causation (for a discussion of
this issue, see Tabery 2004). Nonetheless, I now have a view of causal and
explanatory relevance that can resolve some of the problems that plague
the CL model, the U-model, and the PDP model. This seems to me a
very friendly amendment to many current mechanistic views of etiological
explanation, including my own (Machamer et al. 2000;C r a v e r2001). By
supplementing the account of mechanisms in this way, one adds a normative
dimension, showing what it means to correctly identify causally relevant
factors within a mechanism. In the next chapter, I show how this view of
causal relevance can be embedded within an account of mechanisms and
can be extended to provide an account ofconstitutive explanatory relevance.


=== PAGE 128 ===

4
The Norms of Mechanistic
Explanation
Summary
In this chapter, I develop a causal-mechanical model of constitutive expla-
nation. The account satisﬁes two goals: ﬁrst, to provide an alternative
to classical reduction for thinking about constitutive explanation, and
second, to show how the systems tradition (exempliﬁed by Cummins’s
view of explanation as functional analysis) would have to be amended
and revised if it is to offer a normatively adequate account of consti-
tutive mechanistic explanation. I build my account by considering the
discovery of the mechanism of the action potential and the diverse kinds
of experiment required to show that a component is relevant to such
a mechanism. The resulting view is a causal-mechanical competitor to
reduction as a way of understanding interlevel relationships in neuroscience
and beyond.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
Explanations in neuroscience describe mechanisms. Some mechanistic
explanations are etiological; they explain an event by describing its
antecedent causes. Dehydration is part of the etiological explanation of
thirst. Prion proteins are part of the etiological explanation of Creutzfeldt-
Jacob disease. Excessive repetition of the CAG nucleotide pattern on the
fourth chromosome is part of the etiological explanation for Huntington’s


=== PAGE 129 ===

108 the norms of mechanistic explanation
disease. Other mechanistic explanations are constitutive or componential;¹
they explain a phenomenon by describing its underlying mechanism. The
NMDA receptor is part of the constitutive explanation of LTP. The hip-
pocampus is part of the constitutive explanation for spatial memory. Ions are
part of the constitutive explanation for the action potential. In this chapter,
I develop a normatively adequate account of constitutive explanation.
There are two dominant and broad traditions of thought about constitu-
tive explanation: the reductive tradition and the systems tradition. My view
is a development and elaboration of one strand in the systems tradition.
The reductive tradition construes constitutive explanation as a species
of CL explanation holding between theories at different levels. The expla-
nation proceeds by constructing identity statements (or partial identity
statements) between the kind-terms of the higher-level theory and those of
the lower-level theory and then deriving the laws of the higher-level theory
from the laws of the lower-level theory. The derivational requirement serves
two purposes. First, it provides an epistemic account of explanation, accord-
ing to which understanding is rational expectation of the explanandum on the
basis of the explanans (in accordance with the nomic expectability thesis
discussed in Chapter 2). Second, it offers a regulative ideal for explanation. If
the explanation is ideally complete, one should literally be able to derive the
explanandum from the explanans. Even if few explanations in neuroscience
or elsewhere live up to this standard, the reduction model nonetheless
provides a clear statement of what is required of an adequate explanation.
Although most philosophers of neuroscience (including John Bickle
1998, 2003; P. S. Churchland 1986; and Schaffner 1993a and b) fall in
the reductive tradition, this classic view of reduction has few remaining
advocates among philosophers of mind and philosophers of science. The
most cited reason is that it is impossible to formulate the requisite identities
because higher-level kinds are multiply realized by lower-level kinds to
such an extent that there is no question of forming identities between the
kind-terms in the higher-level theory and those in the lower-level theory.
The conceptual taxonomies at different levels are askew, and therefore the
one-to-one mapping that reduction requires is unlikely to ﬁt the facts.
¹ I borrow the term ‘‘constitutive’’ from Salmon ( 1984). I mean by ‘‘constitutive’’ a relationship
between the behavior of a mechanism as a whol e and the organized activities of its individual
components. I understand that the word ‘‘constitutive’’ is used for other purposes in metaphysics, but
I am following Salmon’s usage.


=== PAGE 130 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 109
A second reason why reduction is unpopular is that real explanations in
neuroscience look nothing like the explanations that the reduction model
requires. Defenders of reduction have been forced to endorse the limited
claim that the model serves mainly as a ‘‘regulative ideal’’ that is entirely
‘‘peripheral’’ to the practice of biology and neuroscience (see Schaffner
1974; P. M. Churchland 1989). A third, and least cited, reason why
reduction has few supporters is that the deductive model of explanation
on which reduction is premised has the varied shortcomings I discuss in
Chapter 2. It is not sufﬁcient to explain a theory merely to be able to
derive it from another theory. The required derivation can be constructed
on the basis of mere correlations, temporal sequences, effect-to-cause
generalizations, and incomplete explanations.
The systems tradition, in contrast, construes explanation as a matter of
decomposing systems into their parts and showing how those parts are
organized together in such a way as to exhibit theexplanandum phenomenon.
In this tradition, I include philosophers of biology and psychology who
discuss explanation by functional analysis (Fodor 1968; Cummins 1975,
1983, 2000), by decomposition (Simon 1969; Wimsatt 1974;H a u g e l a n d
1998), by identifying homunculi (Fodor 1968; Dennett 1978;L y c a n1987),
by reverse engineering (Dennett1994), by taking the design stance (Dennett
1987), by describing the articulation of parts (Kauffman 1971), and, ﬁnally,
by discovering mechanisms (Bechtel and Richardson 1993; Glennan 2002).
Lycan, following Dennett ( 1978), describes this form of explanation with
the metaphor of little men:
We explain the successful activity of one homunculus not by idly positing a second
homunculus within it that successfully performs the activity, but by positing a
team consisting of several smaller, individually less talented and more specialized
homunculi—and detailing the ways in which the team members cooperate in
order to produce their joint or corporate output. (Lycan 1987;i nL y c a n1999: 51)
Dretske mobilizes several different metaphors in his article, ‘‘If you can’t
make one, you don’t know how it works’’:
All I mean to be suggesting by my provo cative title is something about the
spirit of philosophical naturalism. It is motivated by a constructivist’s model of
understanding. It embodies something like an engineer’s ideal, a designer’s vision,
of what it takes to really know how something works. You need a blueprint, a
recipe, an instruction manual, a program. (Dretske 1994: 468)


=== PAGE 131 ===

110 the norms of mechanistic explanation
Cummins’s account of explanation by functional analysis is the most
rigorous formulation of the systems tradition prior to recent discussions of
mechanisms and mechanistic explanation. I reference Cummins’s account
throughout this chapter. On his view, the explanandum is some capacity
ψ of a system S. S’s ψ-ing is explained by analyzing it into subcapacities
{φ1,φ2, ... ,φn} and showing that ψ is produced through the programmed
exercise of the subcapacities. To show that ψ can be produced, in this
sense, through the programmed exercise of the subcapacities, one speciﬁes
a box-and-arrow diagram showing how the subcomponents work together
such that they ψ. For example, the capacity of the neuron (S) to generate
action potentials (ψ) would presumably be explained by a box-and-arrow
diagram that exhibits the programmed exercise of such capacities as rotating,
changing conformation, and diffusing.
As Cummins’s account illustrates, systems explanations involve showing
how something works rather than showing that its behavior can be derived
from more fundamental laws (Dretske 1994; Cummins 2000; Bechtel and
Abrahamsen 2005). This view of explanation has several advantages over
the model required by the reductive tradition. For example, it does not
matter for the systems tradition that the explanandum phenomena might be
multiply realized. If the multiple realizability of nonfundamental phenom-
ena raises a problem for classical reduction (there is debate on this matter),
it is because classical reduction requires the translation of kind-terms in one
theory into those of another theory. Translation is not required because the
systems tradition rejects the idea that explanations are arguments. All that
matters is that the phenomenon is realized by some underlying mechanism.
Furthermore, systems explanations are not peripheral to the practice of
neuroscience; they are much more accurate descriptions of neuroscientiﬁc
explanations than the reduction model supplies. Finally, systems explana-
tions need not inherit the limitations of the CL model; they promise an
altogether different vision of scientiﬁc explanation.
But what, exactly, is that alternative vision of explanation? What does
it mean to ‘‘know how something works’’ or to ‘‘reduce a capacity to
the programmed exercise of sub-capacities’’ if not that one can derive
the behavior of a mechanism as a whole from the organized behaviors
of its parts? What distinguishes good constitutive explanations from bad?
What does it mean to have a complete systems explanation? How does


=== PAGE 132 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 111
one decide which parts should be included in a systems explanation and
which parts are irrelevant? If the systems tradition is to present a complete
alternative to reduction, then it must provide an alternative set of norms by
which explanations should be assessed. Otherwise, it provides an adequate
surface description of constitutive explanations in neuroscience without
challenging the core idea of explanation underlying classical reduction.
In this chapter, I construct a normatively adequate mechanistic model of
constitutive explanation (henceforth, mechanistic explanation). Chapter 1,
Section 2 contains a sketch and overview of my basic position. Those
wanting merely a summary should consult that sketch and the conclusion
of this chapter. The primary purpose of this chapter is to move beyond that
sketch and to show how the simple idea of explanation by decomposition
can be made precise and normatively rigorous. In doing so, I present a
more detailed and elaborate exposition of the systems tradition than is
currently available, and I provide it with the tools to challenge reduction
as a normative model of constitutive explanation in neuroscience and
beyond.
I construct my model of mechanistic explanation to serve two ends: (1)t o
distinguish how-possibly explanations from how-actually explanations, and
(2) to distinguish mechanism sketches from mechanism schemata. These
distinctions are introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, I illustrate progress
along these two dimensions by considering how neuroscientists moved
beyond the Hodgkin and Huxley model of the action potential in order to
provide a complete explanation of the conductance changes constituting
the action potential. In subsequent sections, I show how Cummins’s
account of functional analysis (and so the systems tradition generally) can
be supplemented and transformed to become an account of mechanistic
explanation that rivals reduction as a regulative ideal for explanation. The
regulative ideal is that constitutive explanations must describe all and only
the component entities, activities, properties, and organizational features
that are relevant to the multifaceted phenomenon to be explained. I
build my account slowly by considering separate aspects of mechanistic
explanation sequentially. These include:
(i) the nature of the explanandum phenomenon (Section 4);
(ii) the constitutive relationship between a phenomenon and its com-
ponents (Section 5);


=== PAGE 133 ===

112 the norms of mechanistic explanation
(iii) the difference between real components and useful ﬁctions (Sec-
tion 5);
(iv) the nature of capacities or activities (Section 6);
(v) the nature of mechanistic organization (Section 7); and
(vi) the nature of constitutive explanatory relevance (Section 8).
This last topic—the problem of saying what it means for a component
to be explanatorily relevant to a phenomenon—has thus far been entirely
neglected by both the systems tradition and the reduction tradition. In
Section 8, which could be considered a chapter within this chapter, I
introduce this problem and offer a causal-mechanical solution.
2. Two Normative Distinctions
Throughout this chapter, I am guided by two normative distinctions that
are implicit in the practices of constructing and evaluating mechanistic
explanations. An adequate account of mechanistic explanation should help
one to understand how these distinctions are drawn.
First, the proposed account should have resources adequate to distinguish
how-possibly models from how-actually models. How-possibly models have
explanatory purport, but they are only loosely constrained conjectures
about the sort of mechanism that might sufﬁce to produce the explanandum
phenomenon. They describe how a set of parts and activities might be
organized together such that they exhibit the explanandum phenomenon .
One might have no idea if the conjectured parts exist or, if they do,
whether they are capable of engaging in the activities attributed to them in
the model. Some computer models are purely how-possibly models. For
example, one might simulate aspects of the visual system in LISP without
any commitment to the idea that the brain is somehow executing CARs
and CDRs (the basic operations of LISP) through its neural networks.
How-possibly models are often heuristically useful in constructing and
exploring the space of possible mechanisms, but they are not adequate
explanations. How-actually models , in contrast, describe real components,
activities, and organizational features of the mechanism that in fact produces
the phenomenon. They show how a mechanism works, not merely how it
might work. Between these extremes is a range ofhow-plausibly models that
are more or less consistent with the known constraints on the components,


=== PAGE 134 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 113
their activities, and their organization. ² To continue Dennett and Lycan’s
metaphor for functional analysis, without some restrictions on who can be
a homunculus, on which homunculi are on the team, and on how the
team members work together to produce a corporate output, the account
of explanation lacks the resources to distinguish how-possibly from how-
actually explanations. One guiding question in this chapter is: How would
one have to restrict functional analysis to distinguish how-possibly from
how-actually mechanistic explanations?³
Second, the account of mechanistic explanation should distinguish mech-
anism sketches from complete mechanistic models. A mechanism sketch is an
incomplete model of a mechanism. It characterizes some parts, activities,
or features of the mechanism’s organization, but it leaves gaps. Sometimes
gaps are marked in visual diagrams by black boxes or question marks. More
problematically, sometimes they are masked by ﬁller terms that give the
illusion that the explanation is complete when it is not. A list of common
ﬁller terms in neuroscience is shown in Table4.1. Terms such as ‘‘activate,’’
‘‘inhibit,’’ ‘‘encode,’’ ‘‘cause,’’ ‘‘produce,’’ ‘‘process,’’ and ‘‘represent’’ are
often used to indicate a kind of activity in a mechanism without providing
any detail about exactly what activity ﬁlls that role. Black boxes, question
marks, and acknowledged ﬁller terms are innocuous when they stand as
place-holders for future work or when it is possible to replace the ﬁller term
with some stock-in-trade property, entity, activity, or mechanism (as is the
case for ‘‘coding’’ in DNA).⁴In contrast, ﬁller terms are barriers to progress
when they veil failures of understanding. If the term ‘‘encode’’ is used to
Table 4.1. Common ﬁller terms in neuroscience
Activate Generate Process
Cause Inﬂuence Recognize
Control Inform Represent
Encode Inhibit Regulate
Excite Modulate Store
Filter
² Both the distinctions among how-possibly, how-p lausibly, and how-actually descriptions and
between a schema and a sketch are introduced in Machamer et al. ( 2000). (The term ‘‘how-possibly
explanation’’ is used in Brandon 1990).
³ I do not claim that all explanations are mechanistic explanations.
⁴ Stock-in-trade items (cf. Kauffman 1971) are those that are accepted and understood by a science
at a time; they are part of its ontic store (Craver and Darden 2001).


=== PAGE 135 ===

114 the norms of mechanistic explanation
stand for ‘‘some-process-we-know-not-what,’’ and if the provisional status
of that term is forgotten, then one has only an illusion of understanding. For
this reason, neuroscientists often denigrate the authors of black-box models
as ‘‘diagram makers’’ or ‘‘boxologists.’’ Between sketches and complete
descriptions lies a continuum of mechanism schemata whose working is only
partially understood. A second guiding question in this chapter is: how
would one have to restrict the systems tradition to distinguish sketches,
schemata, and complete descriptions of mechanisms?
Progress in building mechanistic explanations involves movement along
both the possibly-plausibly-actually axis and along the sketch-schema-
mechanism axis. I now describe how neuroscientists made such progress in
the discovery of the mechanism of the action potential.
3. Explaining the Action Potential
The history of the discovery of the mechanism of the action potential serves
three purposes in this chapter. First, it provides an example of a successful
mechanistic explanation. Second, it illustrates the distinctions that I have
just introduced. And, ﬁnally, it illustrates many of the norms implicit in the
practice of constructing constitutive mechanistic explanations.
I begin where I leave off in Chapter 2.I n 1952, Hodgkin and Huxley
constructed a mathematical model of the action potential, which they
characterize in terms of a list of features (a)–(h) (see Chapter 2, Section 6).
They began their project with a background sketch of a mechanism. They
knew some of its entities and activities. They knew that action potentials
are produced by the movement of ions across a lipid membrane. They
knew that action potentials are produced by depolarizing the cell body (that
is, by making V
m greater than Vrest).⁵And they knew that the shape of the
action potential, as described in (a)–(h), could possibly be produced by the
voltage-dependent activation and inactivation of membrane conductance for
speciﬁc ions, as represented by the variables n, m, and h in their total current
equation. Hodgkin and Huxley did not engage in boxology. They used the
more informative representational conventions for diagramming electrical
circuits shown in Figure 4.1. Left to right, in parallel, are a capacitor and
⁵ Here I neglect the possibility of spontaneous actionpotentials, resulting from the stochastic opening
of even a few Na+ channels.


=== PAGE 136 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 115
Outside
Inside
CM
IC INa
RNa
ENa
IK
RK
EK
IL
RL
EL
E
Figure 4.1. The equivalent circuit model of the neuronal membrane ∗
∗ I is current, R is resistance, E is the equilibrium potential, and C is capacitance
three pathways for the component currents in the total current equation.
Each of the three pathways contains a battery (representing the equilibrium
potential for the ion) and a resistor (the inverse of conductance for the
ion) in series. The HH model shows that the coordinated changes in the
resistances to Na+ and K+ currents could account for items a–h.
The primary reason for calling this background mechanistic model asketch
is that ‘‘activation’’ and ‘‘inactivation’’ are ﬁller terms. Hodgkin and Huxley
(1952) consider some ways to complete these ﬁller terms. They consider the
possibility that ions are conveyed across the membrane by active transport.
They suggest that perhaps a number of ‘‘activation’’ particles could weaken
the integrity of the membrane. They hint at a biological interpretation of
their model according to which activation and inactivation particles move
around in the membrane and somehow change the membrane’s resistance.
They admit, however, that they have no evidence favoring their model over
other possible models. This admission spurred research on the biophysics of
the membrane and the search for ion channels. Nonetheless, well into the
1970s most neuroscientists regarded talk of ion-speciﬁc channels as mere
metaphor at best and boxology at worst.


=== PAGE 137 ===

116 the norms of mechanistic explanation
C. M. Armstrong ( 1981) and Bertil Hille ( 1992) among others elevated
talk of ion-speciﬁc channels above the status of ﬁller terms. On Hille’s
model, which is now textbook neuroscience, the conductance changes
in action potentials are explained by the temporally coordinated opening
and closing of transmembrane channels. Action potentials are generated
in the axon hillock, a region at the interface of the cell body and the
axon, the ‘‘sending’’ end of a neuron. The hillock is rich in Na+ channels,
and depolarizing the cell body opens these voltage-sensitive Na+ channels.
The resulting increase in membrane conductance (as represented by the
dotted line in Figure 4.2) allows Na + ions to diffuse from the Na +-
rich extracellular ﬂuid into the relatively Na+-poor intracellular ﬂuid. This
inward Na+ current is balanced at low values by the effects of depolarization
on outward K+ and leakage currents, the latter of which I ignore for the
moment. Above a threshold depolarization, the high voltage sensitivity and
rapid activation of the Na
+ channel overwhelms these balancing currents.
The ﬂood of Na+ drives the voltage of the cell towards the Na+ equilibrium
potential (ENa; roughly +55 mV), where the forces of diffusion and voltage
balance. This ﬂood accounts for the rapid rising phase of the action
potential.
Falling
Phase
gNa
gK
After-potential
1 msec
Rising
Phase
ENa
EK
0
−70 0
20
40
Open channels per µm2 of membrane
mV
Figure 4.2. The action potential superimposed on a graph of changes in the
membrane’s conductance for Na+ and K+


=== PAGE 138 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 117
Depolarizing the membrane has two consequences that account for the
declining phase of the action potential. The ﬁrst is inactivation of Na +
channels, which slows and eventually stops the ascent of V m towards ENa.
The second is activation of voltage-sensitive K+ channels, which increases
the K+ conductance of the membrane (as indicated by the dashed line in
Figure 4.2) and allows K + to diffuse from the K +-rich intracellular ﬂuid
into the relatively K +-poor extracellular ﬂuid. The diffusion of K + out
of the cell drives the membrane potential back down towards the K +
equilibrium potential (E K; roughly − 75 mV) and even below the resting
potential of the membrane.
Thus begins the after-potential phase of the action potential, characterized
by both hyperpolarization of the membrane (that is, Vm is lower than Vrest)
and reduced excitability of the neuron. The membrane hyperpolarizes after
the action potential because K+ channels are slow to return to their resting
closed state (they are sometimes called ‘‘delayed rectiﬁers’’ for this reason).
The K+ current tugs Vm away from Vrest and towards EK. This hyperpo-
larization makes the neuron less excitable, because a larger depolarization is
required to move Vm to the threshold for an action potential. This refrac-
tory effect is reinforced by the residual inactivation of Na+ channels, which
temporarily prevents them from conducting Na + ions. The above is the
intermediate elaboration of the action potential mechanism as it appeared
when talk of channels gained acceptance through the 1970sa n d1980s.
Still, Armstrong and Hille’s intermediate elaboration remains a sketch.
It ﬁlls in some of the details. For example, talk of channels replaces less
precise talk about activation and inactivation of conductances, and the
focus on channels eliminates speculation about active transport across the
membrane. But ﬁller terms remain. In particular, questions remain about
how channels ‘‘activate’’ and ‘‘inactivate.’’ To illustrate how these ﬁller terms
were replaced and how how-possibly models gave way to how-actually
mechanisms, I focus speciﬁcally on how rising membrane voltage can
activate and, at higher voltages, inactivate, the Na
+ channel. Hille started
work on these mechanisms by conjecturing the set of how-possibly models
shown in Figure 4.3. These models of the mechanism have different parts,
with different activities, organized in different ways. There are swinging
gates, sliding gates, free-ﬂoating blockers, tethered balls and chains, rotating
cylinders, and assembling components. Hille intended these as merely
how-possibly models because he had no idea whether channels would turn


=== PAGE 139 ===

118 the norms of mechanistic explanation
(A) (B) (C)
(D) (E) (F)
(G) (H) (I)
( J) (K)
Figure 4.3. Hille’s how-possibly mechanisms for gating channels
Source: Reprinted with permission from Hille ( 1992: 479)
out to have parts of the requisite sort, or whether the parts could act as
the model requires, or whether their activities were organized in the way
that the model suggests. Hille (1992) rules out many of these how-possibly
mechanisms in the face of known constraints and plausibility arguments,
leaving only A, B, and C as contenders to account for activation. None
of these, however, anticipates the model that subsequently emerged from
several independent lines of investigation.
Clues about the Na+ channel came from sequencing the channel protein,
reconstructing its three-dimensional structure, identifying its hydrophilic


=== PAGE 140 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 119
and hydrophobic regions (hydrophilic regions are more likely to be inside
the membrane, and hydrophobic regions are more likely to be outside)
and recording the behavior of individual Na + channels under a range
of electrical, pharmacological, and genetic interventions. ⁶ These studies
show that the Na + channel consists of four subunits, each of which
is composed of six membrane-spanning regions (see Figure 4.4). One
membrane-spanning region, known as the S 4 region, is arranged such
that every third amino acid residue is either arginine or lysine. This
ordering produces a helical structure, known as an α-helix, with evenly
spaced positive charges (see Figure 4.5). At V rest, a positive extracellular
potential holds the α-helix in place. Weakening that potential, which
happens when the cell is depolarized, allows the helix to rotate out
toward the extracellular side (carrying a ‘‘gating charge’’ as positively
charged amino acids move outward). This rotation, which occurs in
each of the Na
+ channel’s subunits, destabilizes the balance of forces
holding the channel in its closed state and bends the pore-lining S6 region
in such a way as to open a channel through the membrane. Another
consequence of these conformation changes is that the pore through
the channel is lined with hairpin turn structures, the charge distribution
along which accounts for the channel’s selectivity to Na +.P a r to ft h e
evidence for these conclusions comes from experiments involving site-
speciﬁc mutagenesis: point mutations induced in the α-helix prevent the
channel from opening, and mutations to the hairpin turn regions alter the
channel’s ion selectivity. The α-helix and the hairpin turn are thus parts
of a more complete how-actually model of the rising phase of the action
potential.
How does the Na + channel close? The currently accepted hypothesis
invokes the ball-and-chain model shown in (G) of Hille’s diagram. One of
the protein subunits composing the channel is thought to contain a long
protein strand on the intracellular side of the membrane that terminates in a
small ‘‘ball’’ of protein. As Vm reaches a threshold value, this proteinaceous
ball and chain swings into the channel, blocking the ﬂow of Na + ions.
Evidence for this hypothesis includes the fact that removing the ball and
chain, either with site-speciﬁc mutations or with a pharmacological agent,
eliminates inactivation entirely.
⁶ For a more detailed discussion, see Catterall (2000) and Hille (1992).


=== PAGE 141 ===

120 the norms of mechanistic explanation
Na+ channel
123456 123456 123456 123456
Outside
I II III IV
C
N
Inside
Figure 4.4. Transmembrane regions of the Na + channel
Source: Adapted from Hall ( 1992: 109)
∆V
Figure 4.5. A plausible mechanism for activating Na + channels∗
∗ An α-helix with regularly spaced positive charges rotates outward
Source: Redrawn from Hall ( 1992: 112)
There is a great deal more to be said about the mechanisms of
Na+ channel activation and inactivation. Recent studies of the Shaker
K+ using X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy provide
detailed accounts of the internal structure of voltage-sensitive K+ channels


=== PAGE 142 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 121
and are leading researchers both to recognize multiple voltage-sensitive
regions in channels and to rethink how these voltage-sensitive components
work. (For a recent review, see Swartz 2004). The above rotating-helix
model of voltage-sensing in the Na+ channel now has competitors, although
it is not currently clear which, if any, is the how-actually model (see Sands,
Grottesi, and Sansom 2005). On one model, the S4 region does not move
substantially across the membrane but rather causes other parts of the
channel to do so, thereby accounting for the gating charge. According to
another model, parts of the S 4 and S3 regions form paddle-like structures
on the external surface of the channel that translocate en masse during
voltage changes, thereby opening the channel. According to a third model,
two segments within the S4 region twist relative to one another, exposing
a channel through the membrane. Although these details are exciting,
and although they illuminate the structure of the Na + channel, the above
textbook sketch is sufﬁcient to reveal the relevant features of mechanistic
explanation that I focus on in the remainder of this chapter.
This textbook sketch of one component of the mechanism for the
action potential calls attention to three aspects of mechanistic explanation.
First, mechanistic explanations are framed by the explanandum phenomenon
(represented at the top of Figure 4.6), in this case, the action potential as
partially described by Hodgkin and Huxley’s items (a)–(h). Second, the
explanation is constitutive; the action potential is explained by reference to
component parts of the action potential mechanism. There are component
Phenomenon
Sψ -ing
X1φ1-ing
X3φ3-ing
X2φ2-ing
X4φ4-ing
Mechanism
Figure 4.6. A phenomenon (top) and its mechanism (bottom)


=== PAGE 143 ===

122 the norms of mechanistic explanation
entities (the parts), such as ions, ion channels, α-helices, and protein
chains, and there are component activities, such as diffusion and changes in
conformation. The circles and arrows at the bottom of Figure4.6 represent
the mechanism’s entities and activities. Third, these entities and activities
are organized together such that they jointly exhibit the phenomenon to be
explained. It matters, for example, that the α-helix contains evenly spaced
positive charges, and that the ball at the end of the chain is large enough to
block the channel, and that the thresholds for activation and inactivation of
the channels are such as to explain the temporal features of the conductance
changes. In short, mechanistic models describe how constituent entities and
activities are organized to exhibit a phenomenon (compare Bechtel and
Richardson 1993; Glennan 1996;K a u f f m a n1971;M a c h a m e re ta l .2000).
Cummins’s account of functional analysis can be grafted onto the abstract
diagram in Figure 4.6. S’sψ-ing represents theexplanandum phenomenon,a n d
the circles and arrows represent the analyzing capacities {φ1,φ2, ... ,φn}.
This is why functional analysis provides an appropriate starting place for
constructing an adequate account of mechanistic explanation. However,
Cummins intends his account of explanation to be more general than
mechanistic explanation, including in addition what he calls ‘‘interpretive
explanations,’’ and his effort to develop such a general account prevents
him from supplying the kind of detail required for an adequate account
of mechanistic explanation. Cummins’s commitment to functionalism also
leads him to a view of explanation that is abstracted away from the details of
the mechanism that realize the functions. This abstraction makes Cummins’s
account inappropriate as an account of speciﬁcally mechanistic explanation.
In what follows, I show how the basic structure of Cummins’s account
would have to be elaborated and transformed to provide a normatively
adequate account of mechanistic explanations—that is, an account that
can distinguish how-possibly from how-actually models, and sketches
from complete mechanistic models. Such an account rivals reduction as a
normative account of constitutive explanation.
4.T h e Explanandum Phenomenon
The core normative requirement on mechanistic explanations is that they
must fully account for the explanandum phenomenon .A sK a u f f m a n(1971)


=== PAGE 144 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 123
and Glennan ( 1996, 2002) argue, mechanisms are always mechanisms
of a given phenomenon. The mechanism of protein synthesis synthesizes
proteins. The mechanism of the action potential generates action potentials.
The boundaries of mechanisms—what is in the mechanism and what is
not—are ﬁxed by reference to the phenomenon that the mechanism
explains. Consider some ways that a description of the phenomenon can
fail. These failures provide clues to the standards of success.
One way that the search for mechanistic explanations can fail is by trying
to explain a ﬁctional phenomenon. Prior to Galvani’s eighteenth-century
work on animal electricity, natural philosophers entertained a number of
hypotheses about how nerves work (see Pera 1992). Descartes and Borelli
believed that nerves are hollow conduits for the ﬂow of animal spirits,
and that they activate muscles by inﬂating them. Starting with this idea,
one would be led to search for mechanisms that explain, for example,
how nerves shunt the ﬂow of animal spirits into this nerve or that, how
they activate muscles, and how light or auditory stimuli impact upon this
hydraulic machine. David Hartley, the self-proclaimed Newton of the
Mind, believed that neurons work by vibrating. He sought to understand
how such vibrations could be distinguished from one another, how they
could be stored in the ‘‘medullary substance,’’ and how the occurrence
of one vibration might cause another to be produced (as demanded by
his associationist view of memory). Just as the CL model requires that the
explanandum sentence should be true, the mechanistic model requires that
the explanandum phenomenon should exist.
Slightly less obvious are the diversetaxonomic errors that one might make
in characterizing the phenomenon. If the goal is to provide a mechanistic
explanation, the phenomena should be delimited in such a way that they
correspond to underlying mechanisms.⁷One kind of taxonomic error is a
lumping error, which involves assuming that several distinct phenomena are
actually one. Cognitive neuroscientists of memory, for example, argue that
they have made progress on this front. Daniel Schacter writes that: ‘‘We
have now come to believe that memory is not a single or unitary faculty
⁷ One need not enter the process of discovery with the right taxonomy of phenomena. As
Churchland and Sejnowski ( 1992) illustrate, neuroscientists’ understanding of a phenomenon often
‘‘co-evolves’’ with their understanding of und erlying mechanisms. Bechtel and Richardson ( 1993)
argue that this co-evolution frequently involves ‘‘reconstituting the phenomenon’’ in the process of
searching for mechanisms.


=== PAGE 145 ===

124 the norms of mechanistic explanation
of the mind, as was long assumed. Instead, it is composed of a variety
of distinct and dissociable processes and systems. Each system depends on
a particular constellation of networks in the brain that involve different
neural structures, each of which plays a highly specialized role within the
system’’(Schacter 1996: 5).⁸
Conversely, one might commit asplitting error, which involves incorrectly
assuming that one phenomenon is many. For example, it was once
assumed that rusting, burning, and breathing are different phenomena
with different mechanisms rather than different expressions of a common
oxidation mechanism. Taxonomic errors are not always conﬁned to single
phenomena, but sometimes infect entire taxonomies. Franz Joseph Gall
(1810– 19), for example, believed that philosophers were wrong to explain
the mind in terms of such mere abstractions as action, memory, perception,
cogitation, and will. Gall’s system, in contrast, was tailored to identify the set
of talents that might vary from individual to individual. His organological
map contains cranial regions dedicated to the instinct to murder, tenderness
for one’s offspring, mechanical skill, facility with colors and coloring,
and the impulse to propagation. Contemporary cognitive scientists have a
different taxonomy. They divide the mind into such phenomena as motion
detection, working memory, change blindness, and pitch perception. The
point of this comparison is that it is possible that an entire taxonomic
system could be ill-matched to the mechanistic structures of the brain. If
so, the taxonomic system is clearly not suited to the search for mechanistic
explanations.⁹
One can also err by underspecifying the phenomenon. What is required
to fully characterize the explanandum phenomenon ?¹⁰ For Cummins, the
explanandum phenomenon is a capacity or disposition, ψ.
To attribute a disposition [ ψ] to an object [S] is to assert that the behavior of [S]
is subject to (exhibits or would exhibit) a certain law-like regularity: to say [S] has
⁸ Similar arguments are given by Weiskrantz ( 1990), Schacter and Tulving ( 1994), and Squire and
Knowlton (1994). Such arguments have been discussed by Churchland and Sejnowski ( 1989); Bechtel
and Richardson (1993).
⁹ Note that I have not said that this is ground for eliminating the taxonomy. Mismatch between
phenomena and the mechanistic structure of the world need not carry eliminativist implications.
¹⁰ Some workers in the systems tradition assume or stipulate that all explanandum phenomena have
been selected by evolution by natural selection (Lycan1987,i nL y c a n1999: 52– 3; Schouten and Looren
de Jong 1998: 242– 5) or that the phenomena are otherwise adaptive (that is, the phenomenon is how
something behaves when it is behaving properly; see Bechtel 1986; Mundale and Bechtel 1996: 485).
In the philosophy of biology, Cummins is best known for his attacks on Wright’s (1973) adaptive view


=== PAGE 146 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 125
[ψ] is to say that [S] should manifest [ ψ] (shatter, dissolve) were any of a certain
range of events to occur ([S] is put into water, [S] is struck sharply). (Cummins
1975,i nS o b e r1984: 401)¹¹
Several years later, Cummins reiterates: ‘‘A capacity is speciﬁed by giving
a special law linking precipitating conditions to manifestations—that is,
by specifying input-output conditions’’ (Cummins 1983: 53). This terse
characterization of the phenomenon downplays the wealth of detail that
can be used to distinguish how-possibly from how-actually explanations
and to distinguish sketches from complete descriptions of mechanisms. ¹²
Consider some dimensions along which this basic characterization might
be elaborated.
Phenomena are typically multifaceted. Action potentials are complex phe-
nomena, when compared to shattering and dissolving. Part of characterizing
the action potential phenomenon involves noting that action potentials are
produced under a given range ofprecipitating conditions (for example, a range
of depolarizations in the cell body or axon hillock). But, as Hodgkin and
Huxley’s (a)–(h) illustrate, there is more to be said about the manifestations
of an action potential. It is necessary to describe its rate of rise, its peak
magnitude, its rate of decline, its refractory period, and so on. Consider, for
example, how different values of the peak magnitude of the action potential
demand (and exclude) different mechanistic explanations. In 1902, Julius
Bernstein hypothesized that nerve impulses might be produced by a sudden
breakdown in membrane resistance. If so, the action potential should peak
at a value no higher than 0 mV. And so it was widely believed until the
1930s, when Kenneth Cole and Howard Curtis ( 1939) conﬁrmed that
the membrane resistance drops by roughly two orders of magnitude during
of functions. I side with Cummins. Neuroscie ntiﬁc explanations often focus on malfunctions, disease
states, laboratory phenomena, pharmaceutical contrivances, and industrial and military applications (for
example, how the vestibular system works in zero-gravity). There also seems no reason to presuppose
that all of the functions currently operating in organisms have selective histories. Traits can become
entrenched through genetic drift and exaptation. The c onsiderations below also provide reasons for
concluding that adaptive functional characterizations of the phenomenon omit much of the crucial
information for distinguishing how-possibly from how-actually models. No doubt, some of the features
of the brain have straightforward adaptive etio logies, but I do not want to presuppose for present
purposes that all of them do. Either way, one still needs the more limited sense of role-functions,
activities that make some crucial contribution to the behavior of a containing system (Cummins 1975;
Craver 2001).
¹¹ I have changed the variables for consistency.
¹² Cummins (2000) has explicitly abandoned this connecti on between functional analysis and laws
(more about which in Section 6).


=== PAGE 147 ===

126 the norms of mechanistic explanation
the action potential. However, Hodgkin and Huxley (1939) demonstrated
that the action potential overshoots 0 mV, peaking at +40 to +50 mV.
Curtis and Cole (1940) later redid these experiments with a different kind of
electrode and found much higher peak magnitudes. They published one of
their most dramatic examples of the overshoot, which peaked at+110 mV.
Because the Na+ equilibrium potential is roughly +55 mV, Hodgkin and
Huxley’s ﬁnding was consistent with the possibility that the rising phase of
the action potential is constituted by a breakdown in the resistance to Na+.
Curtis and Cole’s ﬁnding, on the other hand, could not be explained by that
mechanism (or at least not by that mechanism alone). Note that this is only
one of multiple aspects of the manifestation of the action potential. If the
peak magnitude can be characterized as an ‘‘output,’’ then the action poten-
tial is characterized by a very large array of input–output relationships, each
of which must be satisﬁed by any explanatory model of the mechanism.
The understanding of the action potential has expanded considerably since
1952. A how-possibly model that accounts for features (a)–(h), but not
the subsequent discoveries concerning action potentials, would be merely
a how-possibly model. It would not explain the action potential.
Second, it is insufﬁcient to characterize the phenomenon only under
standard precipitating conditions. A complete characterization of the
phenomenon requires one to know its inhibiting conditions —that is, the
conditions under which the phenomenon fails to occur. Action potentials
can be prevented, for example, by applying tetrodotoxin (TTX), which
blocks the ﬂow of Na
+ through Na+ channels, or by removing Na+ from
the extracellular ﬂuid. If one truly understands the mechanism of the action
potential, one should be able to say why they arenot produced under these
conditions. A complete characterization of the phenomenon also requires
knowing the phenomenon’s modulating conditions —that is, knowing how
variations in conditions alter the action potential. For example, one wants
to know how the action potential changes if one changes the neuron’s
diameter, or the density of ion channels in a given stretch of membrane,
or the extracellular concentration of Na
+. One has not fully characterized
the action potential unless one also knows how it behaves under a variety
of non-standard conditions . Most laboratory conditions are nonstandard. If
one connects a squid giant axon (the experimental system in which most
of these experiments were performed) to a space clamp or a voltage clamp
(crucial experimental innovations in this historical episode), one observes


=== PAGE 148 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 127
the behavior of cells under conditions that would never occur in a normal
organism. Although such experiments are not physiologically relevant (that
is, relevant to the behavior of neurons in a normal cell under standard
operating conditions),¹³ they are nonetheless part of how the mechanism
works if manipulated in speciﬁc ways. Two how-possibly mechanisms can
account equally well for the capacity of a neuron to produce standard
action potentials under physiologically normal precipitating conditions but
nonetheless diverge considerably in their ability to account for features
of action potentials in inhibiting, modulating, and otherwise nonstandard
conditions.
A variety of by-products or side effects of the phenomenon can also be
crucial for sorting how-possibly from how-actually models and sketches
from complete mechanistic models. By-products include a range of possible
features that are of no functional signiﬁcance for the phenomenon (for
example, they do not play any role in a higher-level mechanism) but are
nonetheless crucial for distinguishing mechanisms that otherwise account
equally well for the phenomenon. Cummins now recognizes that describing
phenomena as capacities is an oversimpliﬁcation, and that it is often ‘‘a
matter of some substance’’ to specify what the explanandum is (Cummins
2000: 123– 4):
Given two theories or models of the same capacity, associated incidental effects
can be used to distinguish between them. ... Even when two models are not
weakly equivalent, they may be on a par empirically, that is, close enough that the
differences between them are plausibly attributed to such factors as experimental
error, idealization, and the like. Again, incident al effects that may have no great
interest as explananda in their own right may serve to distinguish such cases
(2000: 124).
As noted above, the activation of Na+ channels is accompanied by a gating
charge, a very slight movement of charges across the membrane. Why
¹³ ‘‘Normal’’ and ‘‘standard’’ conditions amount to something like ‘‘the way that the mechanism
behaves under the conditions that we consider most appropriate for our current explanatory purposes.’’
Sometimes this is assessed in terms of the healthy and ﬁt organism, and normal means something like
‘‘behavior consistent with or conducive to overall system health and function.’’ Sometimes it is assessed
in terms of evolutionary stories, and so means something like ‘‘behavior similar tothat which preserved
the trait in the population of organisms.’’ Sometimes normalcy is assessed in terms of its utility for an
experiment, and so means something like ‘‘behavior consistent with or conducive to manipulation and
detection with my experimental protocol.’’ There is no need to be more restrictive about this notion.
‘‘Normal’’ and ‘‘standard’’ are deﬁned relative to an implied investigative context.


=== PAGE 149 ===

128 the norms of mechanistic explanation
is there a gating charge? According to the standard textbook model, the
activation of Na+ channels involves rotating anα-helix, which is composed
of regularly spaced positive charges (see Figure 4.5). It turns out that the
gating current is precisely equal to the amount of charge moved across the
membrane as the α-helix rotates. All of the competing models of voltage
sensor mentioned in Section 3 have to, and are designed to, accommodate
the gating charge. Gating charge apparently plays no role in the electrical
activities of nerve cells, but it is nonetheless an aspect of the voltage sensor,
and it is one that any how-actually model has to account for.¹⁴
In summary, mechanistic explanations can fail because one has tried
to explain a ﬁctitious phenomenon, because one has mischaracterized the
phenomenon, and because one has characterized the phenomenon to be
explained only partially. One can conjecture a mechanism that adequately
accounts for some narrow range of features of the phenomenon, but that
cannot accommodate the rest. For this reason, descriptions of the multiple
features of a phenomenon, of its precipitating, inhibiting, modulating, and
nonstandard conditions, and of its by-products, all constrain mechanis-
tic explanations and help to distinguish how-possibly from how-actually
explanations. Similarly, mechanism sketches, with large gaps and question
marks, can explain some aspects of the explanandum phenomenon but fail
to explain others. Hodgkin and Huxley’s background sketch explains the
shape of the action potential in terms of changes in component currents,
but the sketch does not explain the conductance changes that regulate the
current ﬂow. To characterize the phenomenon correctly and completely is
a crucial step in turning a functional analysis into an acceptable mechanistic
explanation.
5. Components
Mechanistic explanations are constitutive or componential explanations: they
explain the behavior of the mechanism as a whole in terms of the organized
activities and interactions of its components. Components are the entities in
a mechanism—what are commonly called ‘‘parts.’’ Action potentials are
¹⁴ Such by-products are not functionally relevant but they nonetheless are part of the phenomenon
to be explained. This is an additional reason to think that the character of the phenomenon should not
be restricted to those features that contributed to survival, or that contribute to current health, etc.


=== PAGE 150 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 129
explained by appeal to components such as Na + and K+ channels, ions,
and protein chains.
This is a crucial point of contrast between my mechanistic view of
constitutive explanation and Cummins’s account of functional analysis.
Unlike other exponents of the systems tradition, Cummins insists that,
‘‘it is important to keep functional analysis and componential analysis
conceptually distinct’’ (Cummins 1983: 29, 2000: 123). He insists on this
point because he wants to allow for nonconstitutive analytic explana-
tions—analytic explanations in which both the analyzed and the analyzing
capacities (ψ and φ, respectively) are capacities of the system as a whole. ¹⁵
He gives the following example: if one wants to explain how a cook
(S) bakes a cake (ψ), one will appeal to analyzing capacities (φ) that are also
‘‘cook-level’’ capacities, such as reading recipes, stirring, and salting to taste.
He also discusses John B. Watson’s explanation of maze-running in terms
of capacities such as stimulus substitution and ‘‘the ability to respond in
certain simple ways to simple stimuli,’’ which are also properties of the rat
as a whole (1975: 761).¹⁶Cummins makes this allowance to accommodate
‘‘interpretive explanations,’’ which appeal to the ﬂow of information or
to the manipulation of representations in a system. Indeed, Cummins is
not primarily interested in constitutive mechanistic explanations, but rather
with forms of psychological explanation that are functional and largely
independent of the implementing mechanisms. I agree with Cummins
that these two varieties of explanation must be kept distinct, especially in
discussions of explanation in neuroscience. Lumping both together under
the rubric of functional analysis blurs this distinction. So let us make it
explicit that functional analysis and mechanistic explanations are distinct
in that in mechanistic explanations, S’s ψ-ing is not explained merely by the
subcapacities of ψ, but by the capacities {φ
1,φ2, ... ,φn} of S’s component parts
{X1, X2, ... , Xm}.
The distinction is crucial because how-actually explanations are often
distinguished from how-possibly explanations on the grounds that the
latter appeal to component parts that do not exist and because models
¹⁵ Cummins often frames his account of functional analysis without any reference to component parts.
For example: ‘‘Functional analysis consists in analyzing adisposition into a number of less problematic
dispositions such that the programmed manifestati on of these analyzing dispositions amounts to a
manifestation of the analyzed disposition’’ (2000: 125).
¹⁶ Thanks to Uljana Feest for calling my attention to this ambiguity.


=== PAGE 151 ===

130 the norms of mechanistic explanation
of mechanisms are often distinguished from sketches on the grounds that
the latter contains black boxes or ﬁller terms that cannot be completed
with known parts or activities. In some functional explanations (such as
interpretive explanations), explanations describe a program that could possibly
produce the phenomenon. Cummins repeatedly emphasizes that, ‘‘there is
no unique right answer to the question ‘Which program does this system
execute?’’’ (1983: 30– 43). Further:
Any way of interpreting the transact ions causally mediating the input-output
connection as steps in a program for doing [ ψ] will, provided it is systematic
and not ad hoc , make the capacity to [ ψ] intelligible. Alternative interpretations,
provided they are possible, are not competitors; the availability of one in no
way undermines the explanatory force of another. (Cummins 1983: 42; symbol
substituted for consistency)
For interpretive functional explanations, then, any set of how-possibly
φ-ers will sufﬁce so long as they can be strung together in a program that
accounts for S’s ψ-ing. Not so for mechanistic explanations. If it did sufﬁce,
then Hodgkin and Huxley would have counted their equations for the
conductance changes as explanations, but as I show in Chapter2, they insist
that their proposed sequence of biological activities, involving activation
particles and their motion in the membrane, is only a convenient ﬁction.
In a more recent paper, Cummins acknowledges that in neuroscientiﬁc
explanations in particular one cannot be so cavalier about how different
psychological capacities are realized in the parts of organisms:
Neuroscience enters the picture as a source of evidence, arbitrating among
competitors, and ultimately, as the sourceof an account of the biological realization
of psychological systems described functionally. (Cummins 2000: 135)
And furthermore:
a complete theory for a capacity must exhibit the details of the target capacity’s
realization in the system (or system t ype) that has it. Functional analysis of a
capacity must eventually terminate in dispositions whose realizations are explicable
via analysis of the target system. Failing this, we have no reason to suppose we
have analyzed the capacity as it is realized in that system. (Cummins 2000: 126)
No neuroscientist would claim that it makes no difference whether
action potentials are produced by passive diffusion through Na + and K+
channels or by active transport through some energy-intensive membrane


=== PAGE 152 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 131
mechanism. Mechanistic explanation is inherently componential. Box-
and-arrow diagrams can depict a program that transforms relevant inputs
onto relevant outputs, but if the boxes and arrows do not correspond to
component entities and activities, one is providing a redescription of the
phenomenon (such as the HH model of conductance changes) or a how-
possibly model (such as their working model of conductance changes), not
a mechanistic explanation.
Distinguishing good mechanistic explanations from bad requires that
one distinguish real components from ﬁctional posits. The most dramatic
examples of ﬁctional posits include animal spirits, entelechies, and souls, but
ﬁctitious entities can be far more mundane than these. It might have turned
out that Bertil Hille’s channels did not exist. The movement of charge
across the membrane might well have been a matter of active transport (as
Hodgkin and Huxley once thought), or degradation of the membrane
(as Bernstein suggested), or it might have involved no movement of ions
across the membrane at all. Many of the how-possibly mechanisms in
Figure 4.3 require parts (and activities) that do not exist.
There is no clear evidential threshold for saying when one is describing
real components as opposed to ﬁctional posits, or for detecting when one
is pushing one’s hypothesis a bit far (as Hille’s older colleagues claimed).
Nonetheless, the following four criteria are satisﬁed by real parts and help to
distinguish mere how-possibly from how-actually explanations. Real parts
have a stable cluster of properties, they are robust, they can be used for inter-
vention, and they are physiologically plausible in a given pragmatic context.
First, the parts should have astable cluster of properties (compare Boyd 1991).
Hille’s speculative channels were gradually transformed into stock-in-trade
entities as it became possible to identify them as proteins, to determine the
linear order of their amino acids, to recover their secondary and tertiary
structure, to describe their interactions with neurotransmitters and with
chemical agonists and antagonists, to characterize their voltage-dependence
and rapid inactivation, and so on. Discovering clusters of such properties
also allowed researchers to distinguish multiple kinds of channel proteins,
selective for different ions, sensitive to different agonists and antagonists,
composed of different sequences of amino acids, and the like. As details
mounted about the shapes of the channels, their components, their causal
interactions, and their subtypes, it became increasingly difﬁcult to dismiss
channels as a mere hypothesis being ‘‘pushed too far.’’


=== PAGE 153 ===

132 the norms of mechanistic explanation
Second, and related, the parts should be robust (Wimsatt 1981). They
should be detectable with a variety of causally and theoretically independent
devices. The convergence of multiple lines of independent evidence about
Na+ channels convinced neuroscientists of their existence. Ion channels can
be isolated from the membrane, puriﬁed, and sequenced. Their behavior can
be detected en masse through intra- and extracellular recording techniques,
and they can be monitored individually with single-channel patch-clamp
techniques. They can be manipulated with pharmacology, they can be
altered with site-speciﬁc mutagenesis, they can be crystallized and X-rayed,
and they can be seen through an electron microscope. Using multiple
techniques and theoretical assumptions to reason for the existence of a
given item decreases the probability that conclusions drawn from any single
technique or mode of access are biased or otherwise faulty (Salmon 1984;
Culp 1994, 1995; Psillos 1999; Achinstein 2002).
Third, it should be possible to use the part to intervene into other parts
and activities (Hacking 1983). It should be possible, that is, to manipulate
the entity in such a way as to change other entities, properties, or activities.
One can manipulate Na + channels to alter the membrane potential, to
change Na+ conductance, to open K+ channels, and to balance current. As
I argue in Chapter 3, the ability to manipulate items in this way is crucial
evidence for establishing causal and explanatory relationships among the
mechanism’s components. This criterion is also crucial for distinguishing
real components from ﬁctional posits.
Finally, the component should be physiologically plausible . It should not
exist only under highly contrived laboratory conditions or in otherwise
pathological states. Of course, what constitutes a contrived condition or
a pathological state varies across explanatory contexts. If one is trying to
explain healthy functions, then pathological conditions might be considered
physiologically implausible. If, on the other hand, one is trying to explain a
disease process, one’s explanation might be physiologically implausible if it
assumes conditions only present in healthy organisms. What matters is that
the parts’ existence should be demonstrable under the conditions relevant
to the given request for explanation of the phenomenon
This is neither an exhaustive list of criteria nor an exhaustive discussion
of the items in it. Nonetheless, in making these criteria explicit, I take
steps toward spelling out when one is justiﬁed in presuming that one
has moved beyond providing merely a how-possibly account or a ﬁller


=== PAGE 154 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 133
term (black or grey boxes), and toward describing an actual mechanism.
Hille and Armstrong’s channel hypotheses moved from a how-possibly
posit to a how-actually description of a mechanism as ﬁndings about
membrane-spanning ion channels satisﬁed the above criteria. To adequately
describe mechanistic explanation, functional analysis must be restricted to
constitutive explanations in which some property or activity of a whole is
explained in terms of the properties or activities of its parts. And it should
be restricted to cases in which the components in the explanation are not
mere ﬁctions but real components in the system.
6. Activities
The systems tradition and Cummins’s account usefully shift attention away
from etiological explanation and toward the kinds of explanation found in
neuroscience and psychology. As Cummins notes:
The concern to distinguish causal laws from noncausal correlations, to shun
uncaused or idle events, and to make provision for independent access to causes
and effects are, of course, not the only methodological concerns to manifest
themselves in scientiﬁc practice and in writings on the scientiﬁc method, but
they are, perhaps, the most fundamental and pervasive. ... It should become clear
shortly, however, that these concerns are s imply out of place in the context of
property theories and the analytic strategy of explanation. (1983: 14)
Cummins is right to call attention to this philosophical tunnel vision.
However, functional analyses are made up of capacities, and mechanisms
are partly constituted by activities and interactions. An adequate account
of constitutive explanation must address traditional philosophical problems
about causation.
Cummins describes capacities as input–output relations that relate pre-
cipitating conditions to manifestations. He requires further that there must
be ‘‘lawsin situ’’ relating input to output conditions, that is, ‘‘laws that
hold of a special kind of system because of its peculiar constitution and
organization. The special sciences do not yield general laws of nature, but
rather laws governing the special sorts of systems that are their proper
objects of study’’ (2000: 121). Laws in situ are what I describe in Chapter 3
as mechanistically fragile generalizations.


=== PAGE 155 ===

134 the norms of mechanistic explanation
Cummins’s appeal to laws to analyze capacities raises two issues. The
ﬁrst is the matter of squaring this view with his insistence that laws
are not explanatory. Cummins rejects the CL model because ‘‘No laws
are explanatory in the sense required by the [CL model]. Laws simply
tell us what happens; they do not tell us why or how’’ ( 2000: 119). If
capacities or dispositions are analyzed in terms of special laws, and special
laws are not explanatory, then it is hard to make sense of Cummins’s
claim that ‘‘[functional] analysis allows us to explain how the device as
a whole exercises the analyzed capacity, for it allows us to see exercises
of the analyzed capacity as programmed (that is, organized) exercises of
the analyzing capacities’’ ( 2000: 125). Cummins needs to distinguish the
laws used in CL explanations from the laws underlying the capacities in
functional analyses, but he does not articulate the difference.
The second issue is that Cummins needs a way to distinguish bona ﬁde
capacities from pseudo-capacities. One can use Cummins-style input–out-
put pairs to describe mere temporal sequences (input crowing roosters,
output dawn), effect-to-cause pairs (input refractory period, output rising
phase), correlations between the effects of a common cause (input falling
barometer, output storm), and irrelevant pseudocause-to-effect pairings
(input blessing, output action potential). It will not help to require that the
input–output regularity support counterfactuals (as Weber 2005 requires),
because not all counterfactual supporting generalizations are explanatory. If
the rooster were to be crowing, dawn would be coming. If my barometer
were falling, a storm would be on the horizon. Cummins requires an
account of analyzing capacities sufﬁciently robust to satisfy criteria such as
(E1)–(E 5).
In Chapter 3, I show that the manipulability account distinguishes laws
from accidents while honoring Cummins’s accurate assessment that the
laws of neuroscience and psychology are mechanistically fragile. The causal
relationships in mechanisms are not mere capacities in Cummins’s sense;
they are relationships that are potentially exploitable for purposes of control.
7. Organization
Mechanistic explanatory texts can begin with a correct and complete
characterization of a phenomenon, and with real parts and bona ﬁde


=== PAGE 156 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 135
capacities, and still fail to understand how these components are organized.
Cummins deﬁnes organization as something that can be described in a ﬂow
chart or a program. But almost anything can be described in a ﬂow chart
or a program. Arguments, libraries, time-lines, taxonomic systems, chains
of command, legal precedent, and words in a book all can be described
with boxes and arrows. Yet some forms of organization are distinctively
mechanistic.
The distinctively mechanistic form of organization can be brought out
by contrasting mechanisms with mere aggregates (Wimsatt 1985, 1997). In
an aggregate, the whole is literally the sum of its parts. Suppose that a
property or activity ( ψ) of the whole (S) is explained (in an ontic sense)
by the properties or activities{φ1,φ2, ... ,φn} of its parts {X1, X2, ... , Xm}.
The ψ-property of S is an aggregate of the φ-properties of X’s when:
(W1) ψ is invariant under the rearrangement and intersubstitution of Xs;
(W2) ψ remains qualitatively similar (if quantitative, differing only in
value) with the addition or subtraction of Xs;
(W3) ψ remains invariant under the disaggregation and reaggregation of
Xs; and
(W4) There are no cooperative or inhibitory interactions between Xs
that are relevant to ψ. (Modiﬁed from Wimsatt 1997)
Wimsatt’s (W1)–(W 4) are criteria for diagnosing the importance of orga-
nization in a system and are also a set of strategies for discovering a
mechanism’s organization. Compare the mechanism for generating action
potentials (S
1) to a neat glass of gin (S 2) and, likewise, Na+ channels, K+
channels, and the membrane (the Xs in S 1) to unit volumes of gin (the
Xs in S 2). The mechanism of the action potential (S 1) generates action
potentials (ψ1), and the glass of gin (S2) has a given volume (ψ2). The parts
(Xs) of the action potential mechanism, such as the Na + channels and K+
channels, cannot be intersubstituted with one another (W 1). They are ion
speciﬁc. Only judicious removal or multiplication of certain parts of the
action potential mechanism is compatible with its continued working as a
whole (W2). Changing even the spatial relations among the components
of the mechanism would, at least in many cases, completely disrupt the
behavior of the whole system (W 3). Finally, there are cooperative and
inhibitory interactions between the components of the action potential
mechanism (W4). This is why alterations to the entities and activities of the


=== PAGE 157 ===

136 the norms of mechanistic explanation
action potential mechanism can destroy it. The volume of gin, in contrast,
stays the same any way you shake it.
The above description of the mechanism of the action potential displays
three varieties of mechanistic organization: active, spatial, and temporal.
Different kinds of organization predominate in different mechanisms.
Most fundamentally, the components in the action potential mechanism
are actively organized . In direct violation of W 4 they act and interact with
one another in such a way that the ψ-ing of S is more than just a sum
of φ-properties. In fact, the φ-properties of a working mechanism are not
just properties; they are the activities of and interactions among the entities
in the working mechanism. The different components act in cooperation
or competition, and they do so with some components and not with
others. It matters which Xs φ with which others, and it matters how they
interact. This is why the parts of mechanisms often cannot be reorganized
randomly (W1), added or subtracted at will (W 2), or taken apart and put
back together again (W3) without disturbing their corporate ability to ψ.
Active organization also distinguishes mechanistic explanations from
what John Haugeland calls ‘‘morphological explanations.’’ Haugeland
(1998) illustrates the contrast with the transmission of an image along
a ﬁber optic cable. An image projected on one end of the cable is trans-
mitted to the other by an array of bundled ﬁbers. Each ﬁber is an isolated
conduit of light for a given dot in the image, the brightness and color
of which is transmitted along the length of the wire. So long as the
relative spatial arrangement of the wires in the bundle is the same at each
end, the input image is conserved in the output image. In such expla-
nations, mere spatial organization does most of the work. The ﬁbers do
not relevantly interact with one another or work together, and they can
become hopelessly tangled in the middle of the wire so long as the spatial
arrangement remains the same at the end. This relationship is a matter of
degree, however, because many morphological explanations also essentially
involve interactions among the parts (for example, the shapes of crystals
are determined by the shapes of the molecules, their spatial arrangement,
and their packing). Mechanisms, in contrast, are not mere static or spatial
patterns of relations, but rather patterns of allowance, generation, preven-
tion, production, and stimulation. There are no mechanisms without active
organization, and no mechanistic explanation is complete or correct if it
does not capture correctly the mechanism’s active organization.


=== PAGE 158 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 137
Finally, active organization distinguishes mechanistic models from taxo-
nomic schemes or temporal sequence displays. The periodic table organizes
the elements in terms of their underlying atomic structures by exhibit-
ing, for example, some as noble gases and others as radioactive isotopes.
Although there are mechanistic models for explaining why certain elements
are possible or impossible, and although these allow one to predict the
existence of hitherto unobserved elements, mere taxonomic ordering is
not a mechanism. Similarly, the Linnaean taxonomic system, which sorts
organisms on the basis of their phenotypic traits, is not a mechanistic
explanation: the components in this system do not do anything that con-
tributes to a behavior of all of the parts taken together. The same can be
said of purely sequential theories, such as those describing developmental
stages of an organism or the life cycle of a cell. Purely sequential models
describe time-slices of a four-dimensional object and show how its parts
are arranged at different stages. However, such models do not show how
one stage arises from its predecessor, or how the conﬁguration of parts at
one stage produces the conﬁguration at the next.
Active organization in mechanisms is sustained by thespatial and temporal
organization of the component parts. The same entities and activities
joined in different spatial and temporal organization often yield different
mechanisms. The spatial organization of a mechanism includes, for example,
the sizes, shapes, structures, locations, orientations, directions, connections,
and compartments of its components. Several kinds of spatial organization
are crucial for understanding the mechanism of the action potential. It
matters, for example, that the ion channels have appropriate sizes to allow
the ﬂow of ions, that they are long enough to traverse the membrane,
and that they are small enough to ﬁt in a small patch of membrane. It
matters that the components have appropriateorientations, for example, that
the ball and chain is inside the membrane and that the α-helix is roughly
perpendicular to the membrane. The conformations (or shapes)o ft h ei o n
channels under different membrane voltages allow them to act as channels
and to gate the ﬂow of ions appropriately. Furthermore, it matters that
large numbers of Na
+ channels are located in the axon hillock, and that
the α-helix is in the S 4 region of the protein. ¹⁷ In many mechanisms, it
¹⁷ Bechtel and Richardson ( 1993) emphasize the importance of localization in discovering mecha-
nistic explanations.


=== PAGE 159 ===

138 the norms of mechanistic explanation
matters that the different components are in contact with one another: it
matters that the S4 region is connected to the rest of the channel or that the
ball and chain comes into contact with the walls of the channel. This is
not an exhaustive list of spatial forms of organization found in mechanisms.
Furthermore, one should not expect each form to be equally represented
in all mechanisms. Some mechanisms, such as biochemical cascades in the
cytoplasm, depend less on the precise location of the activities than on
the structures of the entities involved and the temporal arrangement of
their activities. But in many cases—and the action potential is an excellent
example—spatial organization provides the structure by virtue of which
mechanisms work. Getting the relevant aspects of the spatial organization
right is part of developing a good and complete mechanistic explanation.
The third aspect of mechanistic organization, is temporal. The order, rate,
and duration of successive component activities are crucial for the action
potential. There is a sequence of stages from beginning to end, and it is not
possible to change their order without interfering with how the mechanism
works (or making it a different mechanism entirely). The activation and
inactivation of the Na
+ and K+ channels are appropriately timed so that the
action potential rises, falls, and exhibits its characteristic refractory period.
The rates at which the channels open and close, and the duration over
which they are open or inactivated, are similarly crucial for the overall
shape of the action potential. One much-noted problem with programs in
classical artiﬁcial intelligence is that they often ignore real-world temporal
constraints on processing. One might be able to simulate object recognition
in LISP, but such a model is unlikely to work as fast as the visual system.
Good mechanistic explanations incorporate temporal constraints.
In Cummins’s account, the notion of organization is underspeciﬁed,
requiring only that it be possible to describe the system with a box-
and-arrow diagram. He requires this abstraction in order to accommodate
interpretive functional explanations (such as Watson’s explanation for how
a mouse runs a maze). Mechanistic explanations, however, are embodied.
They are anchored in components, and those components occupy space and
take time to act. A description of a mechanism is not merely a summation
of parts or capacities; it is a description of how they work together.
That description involves—in addition to a list of component entities
{X1, X2, ... , Xm} and activities {φ1,φ2, ... ,φn}—an account of how they
are organized together actively, spatially, and temporally in S’s ψ-ing.


=== PAGE 160 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 139
As the discovery of the mechanism of the action potential illustrates,
neuroscientists distinguish how-possibly from how-actually models by
adding such constraints on organization (see Craver and Darden 2001). In
the ﬁnal chapter of this book, I show how the mosaic unity of neuroscience
is achieved when different ﬁelds, with different techniques and theoretical
vocabularies, place different constraints on the same mechanism.
8. Constitutive Relevance
To recap the basic features of my account thus far: The explanandum
of a mechanistic explanation is a phenomenon, typically some behavior
of a mechanism as a whole. ¹⁸ The central criterion of adequacy for a
mechanistic explanation is that it should account for the multiple features
of the phenomenon, including its precipitating conditions, manifestations,
inhibiting conditions, modulating conditions, and nonstandard conditions.
The explanans is a mechanism. The model of a mechanism does not
describe capacities of the mechanism as a whole; it describes the activities of
the mechanism’s components. How-possibly models can be composed of
ﬁctional components, but how-actually models describe real components
that have multiple properties, that are detectable with multiple techniques,
that are utilizable for the purposes of intervention, and that are physio-
logically relevant. The model of the mechanism also describes the causal
relations (activities) that compose the mechanism. These are not mere
input–output relationships or laws in situ but relationships of manipulability
as described in Chapter 3. Finally, mechanistic explanatory texts do more
than exhibit box-and-arrow diagrams; they reveal the active, spatial, and
temporal organization of a mechanism. These restrictions make signiﬁcant
progress in deﬁning mechanistic explanation, in distinguishing it from other
kinds of explanation, and in distinguishing good explanations from bad.
However, this model of mechanistic explanation is not yet complete.
There are two reasons: ﬁrst, I have not said what it means for a model
of a mechanism to ‘‘account for’’ the phenomenon. According to the CL
model—the model of explanation at the core of classical reduction—one
accounts for the phenomenon by showing that its diverse features are to be
¹⁸ In an explanatory text, the explanandum is a description of the phenomenon and the explanans is a
description, or schema, of a mechanism.


=== PAGE 161 ===

140 the norms of mechanistic explanation
expected on the basis of the description of the mechanism; this means that
one can infer the features of the phenomenon from a complete speciﬁcation
of the mechanism, the initial conditions, the background conditions, and
the relevant transtheoretic identities. In Chapter 2, I argue that this is an
inadequate view of the nature of explanation on the grounds that it is
impossible for most explanations in neuroscience and that it is too weak to
distinguish explanatory derivations from, for example, mathematical models
that merely save the phenomena. However, I have not yet provided an
alternative vision of how a mechanism accounts for, and so explains, the
phenomenon.
Second, I have not provided an account of constitutive explanatory
relevance.¹⁹ That is, I have not said when a part of S is a component
in the mechanism of S’s ψ-ing. Not all parts are components. Consider
again the difference between mechanisms and machines. Machines contain
many parts that are not in any mechanism. The hubcaps, mud-ﬂaps, and
the windshield are all parts of the automobile, but they are not part of
the mechanism that makes it run. They are not relevant parts of that
mechanism. Good mechanistic explanatory texts describe all of the relevant
components and their interactions, and they include none of the irrelevant
components and interactions. The failure to address constitutive relevance is
a major lacuna not just in Cummins’s model of explanation, but also in the
systems tradition generally, in recent discussions of mechanistic explanation
(including my own), and, in fact, in all discussions of ‘‘mircroreduction’’
in the philosophy of biology and the philosophy of mind. Considerable
philosophical effort has been expended on the topic of etiological (that is,
causal) relevance, but almost none has been dedicated to the problem of
constitutive relevance.
In Section 8.1, I show that any adequate account of mechanisms must
supply an account of constitutive relevance. I build my positive account
by considering the experimental strategies that neuroscientists use to test
whether a given entity, activity, property, or organizational feature is
relevant to the behavior of the mechanism as a whole and by considering
some well-known ways that these strategies can fail ( 8.2). The account of
constitutive relevance should block these failures in much the same way that
¹⁹ Again, I am using this term as Salmon uses it, that is, to refer to an underlying mechanism. The
goal is to specify the sense in which a component is relevant to, and so is part of the explanation for,
the phenomenon.


=== PAGE 162 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 141
the manipulationist account of etiological relevance in Chapter3 blocks the
k i n d so ff a i l u r e se x p r e s s e di n( E1)–(E 4).²⁰I then offer a sufﬁcient condition
for interlevel relevance: the mutual manipulability account. According to
that account, a part is a component in a mechanism if one can change
the behavior of the mechanism as a whole by intervening to change
the component and one can change the behavior of the component by
intervening to change the behavior of the mechanism as a whole.
8.1 Relevance and the boundaries of mechanisms
One cannot delimit the boundaries of mechanisms—that is, determine what
is in the mechanism and what is not—without an account of constitutive
relevance. To see that this is the case, consider the shortcomings of some
efforts to delimit the boundaries of mechanisms without appealing to
explanatory relevance.
One might, for example, equate the boundaries of mechanisms with
compartmental boundaries. Some mechanisms are entirely contained with-
in physical compartments, such as a nucleus, or a cell membrane, or skin.
Transcription (typically) happens within the nucleus, and translation occurs
in the cytoplasm. Detection of plasma ion concentrations happens within
the circumventricular organs and outside of the blood–brain barrier. How-
ever, mechanisms frequently transgress compartmental boundaries. The
mechanism of the action potential relies crucially on the fact that some
components of the mechanism are inside the membrane and some are
outside. The membrane allows the intracellular and extracellular concen-
trations of ions to be different, allows a diffusion gradient to be set up, and
allows for a separation of charge. Likewise, many cognitive mechanisms
draw upon resources outside of the brain and outside of the body to such
an extent that it may not be fruitful to see the skin, or the surface of the
CNS, as a useful boundary (as Haugeland 1998; Wilson 1995, 2004;C l a r k
1997; and Clark and Chalmers 1998 e m p h a s i z e ) .E x a m p l e ss u c ha st h i sa r e
commonplace.²¹
Cartesian mechanists faced this challenge as well. If the extended world
is devoid of goals and purposes, composed only of corpuscles operating
²⁰ The failure of (E5) is not germane in the case of constitutive explanations.
²¹ von Eckardt and Poland ( 2005) criticize my view of mechanisms in Craver ( 2001) for my failure
to accommodate outward- and upward-looking explanations. Craver (2001) is motivated in part by the
desire to accommodate such explanations.


=== PAGE 163 ===

142 the norms of mechanistic explanation
blindly by motion and contact, what principles could possibly deﬁne
the unity of a machine, organ, or organism? Descartes at times favors
principles of spatial organization: the parts are within a spatial boundary,
they move together, and they can be transported together from one
place to another while maintaining ﬁxed relative positions with the other
components (see Des Chene 2001). Others (such as Salamone De Caus)
appeal to contact among the parts. Few contemporary scientists hold to
the idea that all causal interactions require contact among components,
but even granting this possibility, there are several counterexamples to
each of these suggestions. I have already noted that mechanisms frequently
defy tidy physical boundaries (although every mechanism can, trivially,
be circumscribed). Parts of mechanisms often move in separate directions
(as any multiple-pulley system illustrates). Some mechanisms are more
ephemeral than others;²² they work only as components happen to come
into the appropriate spatial arrangement. For example, in many biochemical
cascades, the relevant reactions could happen anywhere in the cytoplasm.
Such mechanisms lack stable spatial relations; they cannot be picked up and
carried from one place to the next.
Some members of the systems tradition deﬁne the boundaries of mecha-
nisms by appeal to the intensity of interaction among its components. Herbert
Simon ( 1969) takes this approach in his discussion of ‘‘near complete
decomposability.’’ Systems, for Simon, are sets of state variables and their
interactions. A system can be decomposed into distinct (that is, bounded)
subsystems by comparing the relative strengths of interactions among the
variables in the system as a whole. Variables are clustered into subsys-
tems when their interactions with one another are stronger than are their
interactions with variables outside of that set. Wimsatt ( 1976b) adopts the
same view, but notes that the threshold of strength required for inclusion
in a mechanism depends upon one’s pragmatic interests. If one requires
exacting control or exceptionally precise predictions, then even weak inter-
actions must be included in the model. For other purposes, one might be
willing to tolerate error or imprecision and so can neglect weak interac-
tions. John Haugeland develops a third variant. He describes systems as
‘‘relatively independent and self-contained composites of components inter-
acting at interfaces’’ ( 1998: 215), where to be relatively independent and
²² I borrow this term from Stuart Glennan (personal communication).


=== PAGE 164 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 143
self-contained is to interact more often and more intimately with items
inside the interfaces than with those outside (215). Intimacy, in turn, ‘‘means
something like how ‘tightly’ things are coupled, or even how ‘closely knit’
they are’’ ( 215). Grush ( 2003) has elaborated Haugeland’s position (for
the purposes of criticizing it), as distinguishing mechanisms from their
environment by the bandwidth of their interaction. By bandwidth, Grush
means the number of state variables describing a component that appear
in the equations describing the evolution of the other state variables. The
narrower the bandwidth, the more appropriate it is to identify the inter-
action as an interface. Grush’s elaboration of Haugeland’s view is the most
sophisticated interactionist account of the boundaries of mechanisms.²³
The bandwidth criterion, it would seem, needs to be supplemented by
the kinds of pragmatic considerations that Wimsatt discusses in order to
specify a threshold of bandwidth below which the components are separate
and above which the components are not separate. The location of this
threshold is likely to depend upon one’s error-tolerance and one’s purposes.
Leaving this issue aside, however, neither strength nor bandwidth criteria
sufﬁce to pick out the right boundaries. First, they do not readily distinguish
components from background conditions . The beating of my heart and my
ability to read are strongly connected to one another, on any notion of
causal strength. If my heart were to stop beating for any stretch of time,
or if it were to speed up dramatically, my ability to read would quickly
decay. The action potential shares high-bandwidth interfaces with protein
synthesis mechanisms and glucose metabolism, for example, because ion
channels are constantly recycled in the membrane and because the ion
pump that establishes the V
rest is energetically demanding. Although the
distinction between a mechanism and a background condition is likely to
be vague, it is nonetheless a common distinction and one that a view of
constitutive relevance can help to sort out.
There is also the problem of sterile effects . Components of mechanisms
have many effects that are irrelevant to the behavior of the mechanism.
²³ Grush (2003) develops his own view, according to whi ch distinct mechanisms are plug-and-play
components that can readily be ejected from and plugged into a systemic context. This works well for
the case that Grush considers (the importance of theskin as a boundary for cognition), but it works less
well for biochemical cascades and physiological systems, which are often spatially quite distributed and
so tightly interwoven into their systematic context that it is very difﬁcult to see them as self-contained
in this way. Furthermore, whether a mechanism is truly plug-and-play depends on whether it contains
all of the relevant components.


=== PAGE 165 ===

144 the norms of mechanistic explanation
Such effects might provide evidence for or against a given how-possibly
mechanism, but they are not part of the mechanism itself. Action potentials
affect a host of other processes in cells, such as protein synthesis, metabolism,
membrane turnover, and packaging of neurotransmitters. Na + channels
exert attractive and repulsive effects on ions and other particles in the
cytoplasm and in the extracellular space, they deform the membrane, and
so on. But these activities are sterile in the mechanism: they either produce
no changes in the other components of the mechanism, or the changes
they do produce make no difference to action potentials. In contrast, the
rotation of the α-helix, the movement of the ball and chain, and the
diffusion of ions are all tightly coupled in a way that does make a difference
to action potentials.²⁴
The boundaries of mechanisms, it appears, cannot be deﬁned by strength
of interaction or bandwidth alone. The spatial and interactive boundaries of
mechanisms depend on the epistemologically prior delineation of relevance
boundaries. Spatial boundaries are those that circumscribe all the relevant
entities and activities. Temporal boundaries are those that include all the
relevant activities. An account of constitutive mechanistic explanation
must include an account of constitutive relevance. The causal-mechanical
alternative to derivation as a regulative ideal is that the mechanism should
describe all of the components, activities, and organizational features that
are relevant to the explanandum phenomenon.
8.2 Interlevel experiments and constitutive relevance
The norms of constitutive relevance are implicit in the experimental
strategies that neuroscientists use to test claims about componency and in
the rules by which neuroscientists evaluate applications of those strategies
(Bechtel forthcoming; Bechtel and Richardson 1993;C r a v e r2002b). Neu-
roscientists use these experiments to establish which parts are components
in a mechanism and which are not, that is, to distinguish relevant compo-
nents from mere constitutive correlates (as discussed in C 5 of Chapter 2),
sterile effects, and background conditions. These experimental strategies,
²⁴ I have not discussed the possibility that the boundaries of mechanisms might be deﬁned by grouping
together those items that were selected for the performance of some function. This answer, however,
presupposes a solution to the problem under consideration here. To establish that a component was
selected for its contribution to a function, one must ﬁrst show that the part contributes to the function
and so is relevant in the sense under discussion here. (As a purely epistemic point, neuroscientists often
know very little about how features of the brain evolved.)


=== PAGE 166 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 145
Detection
Technique
Intervention
Technique
Causal Sequence
Figure 4.7a. Abstract representation of an experiment for testing etiological (causal)
relevance
and their various well-known weaknesses, provide a valuable window on
the norms of constitutive relevance.
To start with the more familiar case, etiological causal claims are test-
ed with experiments of the sort diagrammed in Figure 4.7a. That ﬁgure
represents an intervention (I) into a causal sequence to change variable
(X) and a detection technique (D) that monitors the consequences (if any)
of that intervention on some downstream variable (Y). In interlevel exper-
iments, in contrast, the intervention and detection techniques are applied
to different levels of mechanisms. (For present purposes, X’s φ-ing is at
a lower level than S’s ψ-ing if X’s φ-ing is a component of S’s ψ-ing.)
Interlevel experiments test the relationship between the components of a
mechanism (the entities, activities, and organizational features at the lower
level²⁵)a n dt h eexplanandum phenomenon (at the higher level). The left side
of Figure 4.7b shows a bottom-up experiment, in which one intervenes
to change a component in a mechanism (X’s φ-ing) and detects changes
in the behavior of the mechanism as a whole (S’s ψ-ing). The right side
of Figure 4.7b shows a top-down experiment, in which one intervenes
to manipulate the phenomenon (S’s ψ-ing) and detects changes in the
activities or properties of the components in the mechanism (X’s φ-ing).
Let me clarify the relationships involved in such experiments. X’s φ-ing
is a component in S’s ψ-ing. S’s ψ-ing can be understood as a complex
input–output relationship. The inputs include all of the relevant conditions
required for S to ψ. In the case of the action potential, this includes the
²⁵ By ‘‘level’’ in this context I mean the relationship between a mechanism as a whole and the
entities, activities, properties, and organizational features of the mechanism taken individually. See
Chapter 5.


=== PAGE 167 ===

146 the norms of mechanistic explanation
Intervention
Technique
Detection
Technique
Detection
Technique
Intervention
Technique
Bottom-up Experiment Top-down Experiment
Figure 4.7b. Abstract representation of experiments f or testing constitutive (or
componential) relevance
stimulus delivered to the pre-synaptic cell and a host of other conditions
of the sort described in the methods sections of scientiﬁc papers. The
output is an action potential. Between these inputs and outputs is a
mechanism, an organized collection of parts and activities. X is one of
those parts, and φ is one of those activities. One intervenes on S’s ψ-ing
by intervening to provide the conditions under which S regularly ψs.
Top-down experiments intervene in this way. Bottom-up experiments
involve intervening into the components of the intermediate mechanism.
Often they also involve putting S in the conditions for ψ-ing in order to
see whether the intervention into the part changes whether S ψso rt h e
way that S ψs. In each case, the goal is to show that X’s φ-ing is causally
between the inputs and outputs that constitute S’s ψ-ing.²⁶
Three varieties of interlevel experiment are common in contemporary
neuroscience: interference experiments, stimulation experiments, and acti-
vation experiments.²⁷ They differ depending on whether the experiment
²⁶ I stress again that this relationship should not be understood causally. Nor should it be understood
as a relationship between a supervenient event or property and its supervenience base. Rather I am
talking about a relationship between a component in the mechanism and the behavior of a mechanism
as a whole.
²⁷ There is a fourth kind of interlevel experiment, deprivation experiments, which I neglect here
because they are so rare in neuroscience. In such experiments, one inhibits the behavior of a mechanism
as a whole and detects changes in the behaviors of the parts. I am thinking, for example, of the


=== PAGE 168 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 147
is top-down or bottom-up, and on whether the intervention is excitatory
or inhibitory. To reveal the criteria for assessing constitutive relevance, I
examine some inferential challenges that these different kinds of experiment
face. Neuroscientists are aware of these challenges. I mention them not
as objections to interlevel experiments (which I take to be indispensable),
but as data points in building a descriptively and normatively adequate
account of constitutive relevance. A complete discussion of these methods,
their strengths and weaknesses, and their relationships to one another is
much needed but beyond the scope of this book. What follows is a skeletal
framework that can be used for that purpose.
8.2.1. Interference experiments Interference experiments are bottom-up
inhibitory experiments. They are represented on the left side of Figure4.7b.
In interference experiments, one intervenes to diminish, disable, or destroy
some putative component in a lower-level mechanism and then detects the
results of this intervention for the explanandum phenomenon . The assump-
tion is that if X’s φ-ing is a component in S’s ψ-ing, then removing X or
preventing it from φ-ing should have some effect on S’s ability to ψ.I n
the simplest case, removing X or preventing it fromφ-ing would eliminate
or inhibit S’s ψ-ing. If X is an inhibitory component, then intervening to
remove X or to inhibit its φ-ing might produce or augment S’s ψ-ing.
The point of an interference experiment is to show that one can change
S’s ψ-ing by intervening to manipulate X’s φ-ing.
Lesion experiments, for example, are interference experiments in which
something intervenes to remove a portion of the brain and one then
detects the effects of the lesion on task performance (see, for example, von
Eckardt Klein 1977; Glymour 1994;B u b1994). Clinical case studies, such
as the cases of Leborgne (Broca 1861), H. M. (Scoville and Milner 1957),
and Phineas Gage (Harlow 1868), are dramatic examples of interference
studies. Interference experiments have also been crucial for discovering
the mechanism of the action potential. When one intervenes to introduce
mutations to the primary structure of the S 4 region, or to cleave the ball-
and-chain inactivation gate in the Na
+ channel with proteolytic enzymes,
or to inhibit channels with TTX or TEA, and then detects the effects of
experiment in which David Hubel sutured the eyes of kittens and monkeys to observe how the cortex
develops when deprived of visual input.


=== PAGE 169 ===

148 the norms of mechanistic explanation
the intervention on the shape of the action potential, one is conducting an
interference experiment.
It is well known among scientists that interference experiments face
signiﬁcant challenges. One is that the mechanism sometimes compensates
for the intervention. A second is that the intervention can sometimes
inﬂuence the behavior of the mechanism as a whole indirectly.
(F1) Compensation: there are circumstances under which S’s ψ-ing does
not change after X and its φ-ing are disrupted, even though X and its
φ-ing are relevant to S’s ψ-ing. X could be redundant. The work of
one kidney, or of one bilateral brain region, can sometimes be assumed
by its partner with no diminution of function. In other cases, the mech-
anism might compensate for the loss of a part by recovering (healing
the part), by making new use of other parts, or by reorganizing the
remaining parts. Each of these possibilities is illustrated in people who
have suffered strokes. Over the weeks following their stroke, many of the
affected functions often return because the affected brain regions recov-
er or reorganize, or because the person learns new ways to perform
old tasks. The failure to see effects of interference is, as all neuro-
scientists know, insufﬁcient to show that the part is irrelevant to the
mechanism.²⁸
(F2) Indirect interference: there are also circumstances in which interfering
with X’s φ-ing can change S’s ψ-ing even though X’s φ-ing is irrelevant
to S’s ψ-ing. For example, a brain lesion can disrupt the blood supply to
surrounding brain regions, or it can produce swelling in the surrounding
tissue that disrupts normal functioning in those areas. In these cases, the
lesion delivered to brain region X has indirect effects on other areas,
and those indirect effects are responsible for the observed deﬁcit in S’s
ψ-ing. For example Anand and Brobeck ( 1951) report that lesions to the
lateral hypothalamus stop rats from eating. They conclude that the lateral
hypothalamus is a hunger center. Subsequent research conﬁrms that the
rats stop eating. They also stop moving. Electrolytic lesions to the lateral
hypothalamus damage not only indigenous cells, but also a pathway of
²⁸ Compensatory responses are frequently incomplete. I am assuming the worst-case epistemic
scenario for the neuroscientists and, conversely, the best-caserecovery scenario for the patient, in order
to make the interpretive challenge as stark as possible. Thanks to John Bickle for urging me to make
this point.


=== PAGE 170 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 149
neurons passing through the hypothalamus (the nigrostriatal bundle) that
is thought to be a component in mechanisms regulating general arousal. ²⁹
Again, neuroscientists are aware of this problem; Anand and Brobeck’s paper
would not be accepted for publication in any contemporary neuroscience
journal because it does not conform to the norms that have subsequently
evolved for evaluating interference experiments. In cases of this sort,
however, one intervenes to change X and detects a change in S’s ψ-ing,
although the observed relationship is not due to the fact that X is a
component, but rather to the fact that the disruption of X changes A, and
A is a component in the mechanism of S’s ψ-ing.³⁰
An adequate account of constitutive relevance should help us to under-
stand how each of these interpretive difﬁculties (compensation and indirect
interference) is met. I return to this in the next major section.
8.2.2. Stimulation experiments Stimulation experiments are bottom-up,
excitatory experiments. They are represented along with inhibition exper-
iments on the left side of Figure 4.7b. In stimulation experiments, one
intervenes to excite or intensify some component in a mechanism and then
detects the effects of that intervention on theexplanandum phenomenon.T h e
assumption is that if X’sφ-ing is a component in S’sψ-ing, then one should
be able to change or produce S’s ψ-ing by stimulating X. In the clearest
case, one could make S ψ by making X φ. If X and its φ-ing play an
inhibitory role in the mechanism, then stimulating X to φ would diminish
or eliminate S’s ψ-ing. If X or its φ-ing has only a modulatory role in S’s
ψ-ing, then stimulating X would change S’s ψ-ing.
The classic example of stimulation experiments is Gustav Fritsch and
Eduard Hitzig’s (1870) work on the motor cortex (see Bechtel forthcoming).
Fritsch and Hitzig performed a series of experiments on dogs in which
they delivered low-grade electrical stimuli to a cortical area now known
as the motor strip (see Bechtel forthcoming). Localized stimuli along
²⁹ One can dissociate these possibilities by using techniques that kill the dopaminergic ﬁbers passing
through the hypothalamus but that leave the indigenous cells intact and vice versa.
³⁰ Again, I am not arguing for skepticism about the results of these experiments. There are
standards for distinguishing good interference experiments from bad, and one task of the philosophy of
neuroscience is to make those explicit and to justify them. Here, I am using the well-known problems
of interference experiments as a basis for showing what neuroscientists mean when they say that a part
is a component in a mechanism. I am merely explaining why neuroscientists often claim that mere
lesion experiments are insufﬁcient for that purpose.


=== PAGE 171 ===

150 the norms of mechanistic explanation
this area produce regular and repeatable movements in speciﬁc muscles,
including the legs, the tail, and the facial muscles. The ability to produce
focal movements predictably by stimulating areas of the brain is potent
evidence that the stimulated area plays a role in motor mechanisms. Many
of the electrophysiological experiments leading to the discovery of the
mechanism of the action potential involve stimulating cells by injecting
current.
Stimulation experiments give rise to interpretative complexities similar to
those generated by interference experiments, as shown below (see Bechtel
and Stufﬂebeam 2001 for examples).
(S1) Compensation: just as a neural mechanism can sometimes recover
from interference, it can also sometimes recover from stimulation. Stimu-
lating X to φ thus might not lead to S’s ψ-ing even though X’s φ-ing is
relevant to S’sψ-ing. For example, homeostatic mechanisms might work to
‘‘siphon off’’ the stimulation or to adjust activities elsewhere in the mech-
anism to compensate for its effects. One example of such compensatory
responses is drug tolerance, in which repeated exposure to a drug might
lead to the need for larger doses to achieve the required effect. Tolerance
to morphine is thought to result from compensatory responses within the
endogenous opioid receptors, and the diminishing returns from L-Dopa in
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease are thought to result, at least in part,
from downregulation of dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia. In most
cases of stimulation, such compensatory responses are sufﬁciently delayed
that they pose no threat to the interpretation of controlled experiments that
test for a drug’s effect, but it is not always possible to rule out short-term
compensatory responses that would not be so evident.
(S2) Indirect effects: another challenge facing stimulation experiments arises
from the possibility of indirect effects of the stimulation. For example, the
stimulation delivered to X might spread to some other component B,
where B is a component of S’s ψ-ing. In that case, one can manipulate
S’s ψ-ing by manipulating X’s φ-ing, but X’s φ-ing is not a component
in the mechanism for S’s ψ-ing. Fritsch and Hitzig worried that their
stimuli spread to other portions of the cortex. Subsequent experimenters
reﬁned the intensity of the electrical stimulus to localize the effects of the
stimulation to just the brain regions under study. Similar reﬁnement has
taken place in experimental protocols involving pharmacological agents


=== PAGE 172 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 151
and genetic manipulations. One goal in designing a good stimulation
experiment is to conﬁne the stimulus to just the putative component or
property under study.
8.2.3. Activation experiments The last kind of interlevel experiment is acti-
vation experiments. In activation experiments, one intervenes to activate,
trigger, or augment the explanandum phenomenon and then detects the prop-
erties or activities of one or more putative components of its mechanism.
These excitatory, top-down experiments are represented on the right side
of Figure 4.7b. The basic assumption behind activation experiments is that
if X is a component in S’s ψ-ing, then there should be some difference in
X depending on whether S is ψ-ing or not. In the most intuitive case, X
would become active, or would increase its activity from baseline, when S
begins to ψ. In parallel with cases of omission and prevention, however,
it is also possible that X’s φ-ing inhibits S’s ψ-ing, and that activating S’s
ψ-ing therefore attenuates or eliminates X’s φ-ing. Regardless, the point
of an activation experiment is to show that interventions that change S’s
ψ-ing are accompanied by changes in X’s φ-ing.
There are several common varieties of activation experiment at all levels
in neuroscience. In PET and fMRI studies, one activates a cognitive system
by engaging the experimental subject in some task while monitoring the
brain for markers of activity, such as blood ﬂow or changes in oxygenation.
(For philosophical discussion of these techniques, see, for example, Bechtel
and Stuffelbeam 2001;B o g e n2001, 2002. For a state of the art look at the
techniques and its challenges, see Raichle and Mintun2006). In single- and
mutli-unit recording experiments, one engages the subject in a task while
recording the electrical activity in neurons. In other studies, researchers
monitor the production of proteins, or the activation of immediate early
genes such as c-fos and c-jun. The experiments leading up to Hodgkin
and Huxley’s model of the action potential involved generating action
potentials and monitoring single ionic currents while the neuron spiked.
Activation experiments also face inferential perils, as described below.
(A1) Mere correlates: one challenge for activation experiments is that the
activated component might be a mere correlate of the phenomenon. For
example, engaging a subject in a cognitive task increases blood ﬂow to brain
regions activated by the task. PET researchers routinely take the increase


=== PAGE 173 ===

152 the norms of mechanistic explanation
in blood ﬂow as a marker of activity in components, but no researcher
believes that the increase in blood ﬂow is itself part of the mechanism for
such cognitive tasks. Instead, the changes in blood ﬂow are treated as poorly
understood background conditions rather than as established components
in the mechanism under study. ³¹ More generally, intervening to make
S ψ might activate some component X of S, but the activation of that
component has sterile effects, relative to S, on some irrelevant part, C. C
would then be strongly correlated with task activation, but it would not
be part of the mechanism. The lesson is that compelling top-down results,
while an important part of establishing constitutive relevance, cannot alone
establish constitutive relevance.
(A2) Tonic contributions: a major assumption of activation experiments is
that X and its φ-ing must change during S’s ψ-ing. Yet it is possible that
a component plays a static role in the mechanism. Consider, for example,
the contribution of the non-channel regions of the membrane, or perhaps
Schwann cells, to the action potential. There can be no potential difference
without a membrane that is largely impermeable to ions. Although channels
change the permeability of the membrane, other portions of the membrane
remain crucially impermeant. The existence of insulating Schwann cells that
wrap the axon of a nerve cell allow the action potential to propagate quickly
along its length. Schwann cells do not change during the propagation of
action potentials; their insulating effect is a static, or tonic, contribution (or
at least they are often described this way).
These experimental strategies—interference, stimulation, and activa-
tion—cannot be understood fully in isolation. They are typically used
in conjunction because the strengths of one strategy compensate for the
weaknesses of the others.³²
8.3 Constitutive relevance as mutual manipulability
The close analogy between causal experiments and interlevel experiments
suggests that the manipulability account of etiological relevance might
provide a model for thinking about constitutive mechanistic relevance. My
³¹ If one were to cut off blood ﬂow for very long, the brain region would no longer function, but
that is not the point. I am referring to the increase in blood ﬂow subsequent to activation.
³² Philosophers of neuroscience have said very little a bout the structure and limitations of these
experimental strategies; see Bogen 2002; Hardcastle 2002; Uttal 2001.


=== PAGE 174 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 153
working account of constitutive relevance is as follows: a component is
relevant to the behavior of a mechanism as a whole when one can wiggle
the behavior of the whole by wiggling the behavior of the component and
one can wiggle the behavior of the component by wiggling the behavior
as a whole. The two are related as part to whole and they are mutually
manipulable. More formally: (i) x is part of S; (ii) in the conditions relevant
to the request for explanation there is some change to X’s φ-ing that
changes S’s ψ-ing; and (iii) in the conditions relevant to the request for
explanation there is some change to S’s ψ-ing that changes X’s φ-ing. This
simple formulation needs considerable reﬁnement. ³³
There are signiﬁcant differences between etiological and constitutive
relevance. Because X is part of S (and φ is part of ψ), the relationship
between them is only uncomfortably viewed as causal. Constitutive rel-
evance is symmetrical in a way that etiological (that is, causal) relevance
typically is not. In constitutive mechanistic relations, one can change the
explanandum phenomenon by intervening to change a component (as illus-
trated by interference and stimulation experiments), or one can manipulate
the component by intervening to change the explanandum phenomenon (as
illustrated by activation experiments). Although there are some cases of
cause and effect variables in which the manipulability relationships are bidi-
rectional (as in cases of feedback), many, if not most, causal relationships
are unidirectional. In contrast, all constitutive dependency relationships are
bidirectional. This is the core reason why constitutive relevance should be
understood in terms of mutual manipulability rather than in terms of the
unidirectional variety introduced in Chapter 3. Second, in the constitutive
relation, a token instance of the property ψ is, in part, constituted by an
instance of the property φ; as such, the tokening of φ is not logically inde-
pendent of the tokening ofψ. At least since Hume, many philosophers have
held that causes and effects must be logically independent. If one endorses
this restriction on causal relations, then one should balk at positing a causal
relationship between constitutively related properties. Finally, because the
constitution relationship is synchronic,φ’s taking on a particular value is not
³³ This should not be confused with a claim about supervenience. Supervenience, in this case,
amounts roughly to the claim that there can be no difference in S’s ψ-ing without a difference in
the mechanism for S’s ψ-ing. Supervenience so stated is a relation between a phenomenon and the
corporate behavior of the organized components. The relevance relation, in contrast, holds between
the phenomenon and one of the components. The supervenience claim, note, is not symmetrical. I
have no reason to deny weak and global forms supervenience, but that is not what I am discussing here.


=== PAGE 175 ===

154 the norms of mechanistic explanation
temporally prior to ψ’s taking on its value.³⁴If one is committed to the idea
that causes must precede their effects, then constitutive relationships are not
causal relationships. These differences warrant caution in thinking of con-
stitutive (interlevel) relations as causal. It seems appropriate to acknowledge
these differences by marking the linguistic distinction between causation
and componency, and so between etiological relevance and constitutive
relevance.
I return now to the proposed sketch of constitutive relevance. According
to that sketch, X’s φ-ing is constitutively relevant to S’s ψ-ing if the two
are related as part to whole and the relata are mutually manipulable. There
should be some ideal intervention on φ under which ψ changes, and there
should be some ideal intervention on ψ under which φ changes.
With respect to the ﬁrst of these conditionals, an ideal intervention I on
φ with respect to ψ is a change in the value of φ that changes ψ, if at all,
only via the change in φ. This implies that:
(I1c) the intervention I does not change ψ directly;
(I2c) I does not change the value of some other variable φ∗ that changes
the value of ψ except via the change introduced into φ;
(I3c) that I is not correlated with some other variable M that is causally
independent of I and also a cause of ψ;a n d
(I4c) that I ﬁxes the value of φ in such a way as to screen off the
contribution of φ’s other causes to the value of φ.³⁵
Consider these brieﬂy. Requirement (I1 c) is intended to rule out cases
in which the putative intervention on X and its φ-ing directly ﬁxes the
value of ψ. (Remember, ψ does not supervene on φ. Rather, φ is part
of the mechanism for ψ-ing.) If one were testing whether Na + channels
are relevant to changes in membrane voltage, and one intervened to
activate Na+ channels by raising membrane voltage, the observed change
in membrane voltage might be due to the intervention rather than to
the activation of Na + channels. Requirement (I2 c) excludes those cases
of indirect effects mentioned in F 2 and S 2 above. In those cases, an
intervention has indirect effects (φ∗) that account for the observed changes
to ψ.( I 3c) is required to rule out cases in which the intervention is
³⁴ For a detailed discussion, see Kim (2000) and Craver and Bechtel (forthcoming).
³⁵ The numbering here is intended to parallel that for etiological causal claims introduced in
Chapter 3.


=== PAGE 176 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 155
correlated with other determinants of the value of ψ. For example, the
control organisms in lesion experiments typically undergo sham surgeries to
ensure that the observed effects are not due to anesthesia or other correlated
aspects of the surgical procedure rather than the lesion. It is not intended to
rule out cases in which, for example, M is causally intermediate between
I and X, as ruled out by (I2 c). Finally, (I4c) is required to ensure that the
intervention in fact changes the value of φ as intended.
Consider the ﬁrst of the two conditionals that constitute the mutual
manipulability account, that which asserts a conditional relationship
between low-level interventions and high-level consequences. Putting
it roughly:
(CR1)W h e nφ is set to the value φ1 in an ideal intervention, then ψ
takes on the value f(φ1).
CR1 reﬂects the importance of bottom-up experiments, such as interference
and stimulation experiments, for testing claims of constitutive relevance.
Let φ be a variable representing the activity of a brain region, and let φ
1
represent the activity produced by ablating the region (that is, φ1 = off).
If X’s φ-ing is necessary for S’s ψ-ing, then S should no longer ψ (that is,
f(φ1) = off). If one removes the ball-and-chain inactivation gate from Na+
channels, then the channel should not longer inactivate.
CR1 must be further restricted to conditions germane to a request for
explanation. This is required to accommodate the fact that in neuroscience
and elsewhere, one is not interested in whether just any change toφ could
change ψ, or in whether changes to φ under just any conditions could
change ψ, but rather in whether the changes can be observed in conditions
that are explanatorily salient. What counts as an experimentally salient
condition should be judged on a case-by-case basis, but the general idea is
that if one is trying to understand the way a mechanism works in a healthy
organism, and one is positing a constitutive explanatory relationship that
holds only under extreme laboratory or pathological conditions, then one
will not have identiﬁed a component of the mechanism in explanatorily
relevant conditions. If one is interested in explaining the behavior of
a mechanism under diseased or industrial conditions, then one will be
interested in componency relations under those conditions. Although we
are often interested in states of health or features that have been selected
for, there is no reason to insist upon this restriction. There is no way to


=== PAGE 177 ===

156 the norms of mechanistic explanation
know what constitutes the ‘‘appropriate’’ conditions without specifying the
pragmatic context in which one is operating.
One can exclude sterile effects and other mere correlates by requiring
that the experiment satisfy CR 1. Sterile effects are properties or behaviors
of a component that are irrelevant to the behavior of a mechanism as a
whole. Performance of cognitive tasks, for example, is routinely correlated
with hemodynamic changes, but this does not mean that the hemodynamic
changes are part of the mechanism involved in task performance (as all MRI
researchers know). Hemodynamic changes can be ruled out as components
of the mechanism on the grounds that intervening to prevent the increase
in blood ﬂow during a task will not prevent one from performing the task.
Of course, preventing blood ﬂow to a region can quickly degrade task
performance, and perhaps preventing the increase in blood ﬂow would have
long-term consequences as well. However, because hemodynamic changes
typically follow the performance of a task, it is safe to assume that preventing
those changes cannot alter task performance. Most generally, CR1 excludes
correlations from constitutive explanations because intervening to change
a mere correlate will not alter the phenomenon. Knowing that one can
manipulate S’s ψ-ing by manipulating X’s φ-ing in various ways allows
one to say how S’s ψ-ing is different when X is removed, or when X’s
φ-ing is altered. In other words, a relationship that satisﬁes CR 1 allows
one to answer a range of what-if-things-had-been-different questions about
how the mechanism will behave under a variety of interventions into its
components. Mere correlations across levels do not allow one to answer
such a range of questions.
Nonetheless, satisfying CR 1 is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for X’s
φ-ing to be relevant to S’s ψ-ing. Consider these in turn.
Satisfying CR 1 is unnecessary because compensatory responses (such
as recovery, redundancy, and reorganization) can prevent changes to S’s
ψ-ing (as noted in (P 1) and (S 1) above). One way that scientists solve
problems of this sort is to design experiments that avoid or prevent the
compensatory response. They try to show that the intervention on X’s
φ-ing induces changes in S’s ψ-ing if one detects S’s ψ-ing before S has
had time to recover, or if the other redundant components are occluded
or taxed, or if one prevents the system from reorganizing. More formally,
there should be an ideal intervention on X’s φ-ing that changes the value
of S’s ψ-ing under the conditions (CR1a) that the intervention, I, leaves all


=== PAGE 178 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 157
of the other dependency relations in S’sψ-ing unchanged and (CR1b) that
other interventions have removed the contributions of other redundant
components. CR1a rules out cases of recovery and reorganization in the
mechanism. CR1b rules out cases of redundancy. These two conditions are
not merely ad hoc additions to the account. They correspond to the kinds
of experiment that researchers do to overcome these inferential challenges.
Although a system might reorganize in response to an intense stimulus
(as in cases of drug tolerance), such effects are often delayed, allowing
researchers to observe short-term changes before recovery or reorganization
is complete. In some cases, researchers may be able to intervene to prevent
the system from reorganizing. Problems of redundancy, likewise, can be
met with experiments that inhibit the redundant mechanisms and, thereby,
unmask the causal contribution of the part in question. Even if removing
one kidney has little physiological effect, removing the second has dire
physiological consequences. A ﬁnal way that experimentalists deal with this
kind of problem is by intervening in a way that does not prompt the system
to compensate. As I show below, activation experiments can be used to
detect correlated activity in multiple redundant parts, and they can usually
be carried out in ways that do not prompt the system to reorganize. One of
the virtues of such top-down experiments is that they sidestep inferential
perils that bottom-up experiments cannot.
CR1 is also insufﬁcient to establish a component’s constitutive relevance
because interventions into background conditions can change S’s ψ-ing even
though they are not part of the mechanism (see (F 2) above). Lesioning
the heart can prevent word-stem completion, but the heart is not part
of the word-stem completion mechanism. In such cases, the lesioned or
stimulated item is relevant to explanandum phenomenon in the sense that one
can manipulate the phenomenon by intervening to change parts, but the
parts are not components in the mechanism.
No doubt, the distinction between background conditions and com-
ponents is often drawn on pragmatic grounds. However, such pragmatic
decisions can be made on an objective base. Here are some ways of
doing so. First, sometimes mere background conditions are identiﬁed by
conjoining interference and stimulation strategies. Intervening to inhibit
a background condition B’s φ-ing may inhibit S’s ψ-ing, but one cannot
stimulate S’s ψ-ing by stimulating B’sφ-ing. For example, while interfering
with the heart interferes with word-stem completion, one cannot produce


=== PAGE 179 ===

158 the norms of mechanistic explanation
word-stem completion by stimulating the heart. Second, sometimes back-
ground conditions can be ruled out on the basis of activation experiments.
Although one can interfere with S’s ψ-ing by interfering with background
condition B’s φ-ing, at least in many cases, one cannot alter B’s φ-ing by
manipulating S’s ψ-ing. For example, lesioning the heart might produce
deﬁcits in word-stem completion, but engaging a subject in word-stem
completion will not change the behavior of the heart (except under tor-
turous word-stem completion tasks outside of the context of the request
for explanation). Third, the effects of interfering with background condi-
tions tend to be nonspeciﬁc, that is, they affect many phenomena besides
the one under study. Researchers learned, for example, that the lateral
hypothalamus is not a hunger center by recognizing that the hypothalamic
lesions prevent the animals from doing most of the things that animals
do. Lesions to the heart would impair not only word-stem completion
but also everything else distinctive of a living organism. Finally, the effects
of interventions that change background conditions on the behaviors of
mechanisms are often unsubtle. One cannot reliably produce subtle changes
in word-stem completion by even arbitrarily subtle interventions to change
the heart; interventions on the heart that have any effect seem to have
switch-like effects. Slowing the heart, for example, will have no effect
up to a threshold beyond which word-stem completion rapidly ceases.
One who truly understood word-stem completion, however, if provided
with the appropriate tools (a sizeable if), would be able to intervene into
the mechanism to subtly manipulate the mechanism’s output. ³⁶ Criteria
of this sort might provide a means for drawing the distinction between
background conditions and components in a mechanism and for showing
how CR1 might be supplemented to meet this problem case.
Part of the motivation for associating constitutive relevance with mutual
manipulability is that bottom-up and top-down experiments are mutually
reinforcing in the search for components in a mechanism. The inferential
complexities involved in interpreting one such experimental strategy are
often resolved by applying another strategy. None of the strategies is,
by itself, sufﬁcient to establish the constitutive relevance of a putative
component. The strategies cannot be assessed fully in isolation from one
another.
³⁶ James Woodward mentioned the third and fourth of these criteria in personal conversation.


=== PAGE 180 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 159
For this reason, the mutual manipulability account contains the second
conditional:
(CR2): if ψ is set to the valueψ1 in an ideal intervention, thenφ takes
on the value f(ψ1).
CR2 is intended to describe the effects of top-down experiments, such
as the use of functional imaging or the use of other biological markers of
activity. One compares, for example, brain scans taken during a task (ψ1)t o
brain scans during rest (ψ2) in order to see which areas of the brain change
across these two conditions. One compares, for example, cfos and cjun
expression in cells during a task and not during the task to see if the cells
are producing proteins relevant to the task. As discussed in the preceding
section, these experimental strategies are common and useful.
Nonetheless these strategies face the challenges of mere correlation and
tonic activation. Blood ﬂow might increase during a task even if the
increase in blood ﬂow is not part of the mechanism performing the task.
The tonic activity of a part might be relevant to performance of a task
even if task performance does not change its level of activity (that is, not
all parts of a mechanism have to change when the mechanism is working).
In practice, these problems can be overcome by bottom-up experiments.
Mere correlates of task performance cannot be manipulated to change task
performance, but task performance can be manipulated by manipulating
tonic activities. This is why I argue that constitutive relevance should be
understood as mutual manipulability. What the second conditional adds, as I
argued above, is a tool for dealing with problems of compensatory responses
and for sorting components from background conditions. For these reasons,
in addition to recognizing that such experiments are crucial in contemporary
neuroscience, I include CR2 in the account of constitutive relevance.
In sum, I conjecture that to establish that X’s φ-ing is relevant to
S’s ψ-ing it is sufﬁcient that one be able to manipulate S’s ψ-ing by
intervening to change X’sφ-ing (by stimulating or inhibiting) and that one
be able to manipulate X’s φ-ing by manipulating S’s ψ-ing. To establish
that a component is irrelevant, it is sufﬁcient to show that one cannot
manipulate S’s ψ-ing by intervening to change X’s φ-ing and that one
cannot manipulate X’s φ-ing by manipulating S’s ψ-ing. The complexities
in the componency relationship make it difﬁcult to say more about the
intermediate cases in which only one half of the mutual manipulability


=== PAGE 181 ===

160 the norms of mechanistic explanation
account is satisﬁed. What to say in such cases, I suspect, depends on
details peculiar to given experiments that admit of no general formulation.
Nevertheless, the mutual manipulability approach is a suitable starting point
for an account of constitutive relevance.
Relationships of mutual manipulability can and should replace the
requirement of derivability as a regulative ideal on constitutive explanations
in neuroscience. One need not be able to derive the phenomenon from a
description of the mechanism. Rather, one needs to know how the phe-
nomenon is situated within the causal structure of the world. That is, one
needs to know how the phenomenon changes under a variety of interven-
tions into the partsand how the parts change when one intervenes to change
the phenomenon. When one possesses explanations of this sort, one is in
a position to make predictions about how the system will behave under a
variety of conditions. Furthermore when one possesses explanations of this
sort, one knows how to intervene into the mechanism in order to produce
regular changes in the phenomenon. Explanations in neuroscience are moti-
vated fundamentally by the desire to bring the CNS under our control. The
mutual manipulability account of constitutive relevance makes that con-
nection explicit. Finally, the possibility of multiple realization does not even
arise for the mechanistic account. It is not required that all instances of ψ-
ing be explained by the same underlying mechanisms. What matters is that
each instance of ψ-ing is explained by a set of components that are relevant
to ψ in that particular mechanistic context. There are no doubt epistemic
difﬁculties of determining when two mechanistic contexts are equal, but
there is no conceptual difﬁculty seeing how the same type of phenomenon
could be explained by different components in different contexts.
9. Conclusion
Both the systems tradition and the reduction tradition share a common goal
of understanding constitutive explanation—that is, of understanding how
the behavior of a whole is explained in terms of the behavior of its parts. For
reasons that I discuss in the introduction to this chapter, most reductionists
have now abandoned the classical model of reduction (sometimes called
‘‘strong reduction’’) according to which constitutive explanations involve
forming transtheoretic identities and deriving one theory from another.


=== PAGE 182 ===

the norms of mechanistic explanation 161
Those who have abandoned strong reduction commonly replace it with a
weaker alternative, according to which reduction merely involves explain-
ing higher-level phenomena in terms of underlying mechanisms (Kim
1989; Sarkar 1992;S m i t h1992; Wimsatt 1976b). This move comes at a
cost. When reductionists abandon strong reduction they also abandon the
model of explanation that lies at its heart: namely, the CL model and the
nomic expectability thesis. The problem is that there is no available account
of constitutive mechanistic explanation to take its place.
My causal-mechanical account of constitutive explanation is a restricted
and elaborated variant of accounts developed within the systems tradition
(especially those found in the work of Bechtel, Cummins, Haugeland,
Simon, and Wimsatt). The primary worry about previous such models is
that they focus more on describing mechanistic explanations than they do
on revealing the norms by which mechanistic explanations are and should
be assessed. My friendly criticisms of Cummins’s model are intended to
illustrate how an accurate description of constitutive explanation can fall
short of satisfying this normative objective. Because of their limitations as
normative models, the models of the system tradition are not yet suitable
competitors to classical reduction, the primary value of which is that it
provides a regulative ideal on explanations. If the systems tradition is to
challenge classical reduction as an account of constitutive explanation, it
must provide an alternative regulative ideal. In this chapter, I take some
steps towards rectifying that problem as well.
To see the progress that has been made, let us ask: How must Cummins-
style functional analysis be restricted to provide a normatively adequate
account of mechanistic explanation?
First, one needs to add the core normative requirement that mechanisms
must account fully for the explanandum phenomenon .I d e a l l y ,i ti sn o t
enough to account for just normal input–output conditions. One must
also account for the multiple features of a phenomenon, including its
precipitating conditions, manifestations, inhibitory conditions, modulating
conditions, nonstandard conditions, and byproducts. Good explanations
account for all of the features of a phenomenon rather than a subset.
Second, one needs to add that mechanistic explanations are constitutive.
They explain the behavior of the mechanism as a whole in terms of the
activities of its component parts. The parts should not be mere how-
possibly ﬁctions. Instead, they should exhibit clusters of properties, they


=== PAGE 183 ===

162 the norms of mechanistic explanation
should be robustly detectable, they should be able to be used for purposes
of intervention, and that they should be physiologically plausible.
Third, one needs to add that the activities appealed to in a compositional
analysis should satisfy the criteria discussed in Chapter 3. This addition is
required to rule out mere time-courses, effect-to-cause pairs, effects of
common causes, and irrelevant causes.
Fourth, one needs to add a notion of organization. Organization is not
merely a matter of being describable in terms of a box-and-arrow diagram or
a program. Instead, it involves the active, spatial, and temporal organization
of different components. This addition is required to distinguish mechanistic
explanations from aggregate explanations, morphological explanations, and
taxonomies.
Finally, one needs to supplement functional analysis with an account of
constitutive relevance. Without such an account, functional analysis fails
to offer an alternative to reduction, and it does not have the resources to
exclude irrelevant components from the mechanism. The mutual manip-
ulability account is a plausible condition of constitutive relevance because
it ﬁts well with experimental practice and because it is an extension of the
view of etiological relevance advanced in Chapter 3.
My emphasis on constitutive mechanistic explanation (and its status as
a competitor to classical reduction) should not lead one to forget that
I am primarily interested in defending a multilevel view of explanation.
Constitutive explanation is one important kind of explanation in neuro-
science. But saying so does not commit me to the view that all explanations
are constitutive. Nor does it commit me to the fundamentalist view that
all explanations are achieved by looking to the lowest possible levels. In
the next three chapters, I develop a view of levels (Chapter 5), I argue
against fundamentalist claims that causal explanations can be given only
at the lowest possible levels (Chapter 6), and I argue that the unity of
neuroscience is constructed in the effort to build multilevel mechanistic
explanations (Chapter 7).


=== PAGE 184 ===

5
A Field-Guide to Levels
Summary
Explanations in neuroscience typically span multiple levels. The term level,
however, is multiply ambiguous. I develop a taxonomy of different kinds of
levels, and I show why one must be careful to keep these different kinds dis-
tinct. Using an example from contemporary neuroscience—the multilevel
mechanisms of spatial memory—I argue that ‘‘levels of mechanisms’’ cap-
tures the central explanatory sense in which explanations in neuroscience
(and elsewhere in the special sciences) span multiple levels. The multilevel
structure of neuroscientiﬁc explanations is a consequence of the mecha-
nistic structure of neuroscientiﬁc explanations. I emphasize the importance
of levels of mechanisms by showing how other common notions of levels
(such as levels of science, levels of theories, levels of control, levels of
entities, levels of aggregativity, and mereological levels) fail to describe the
explanatory levels appearing in the explanation for spatial memory.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
The descriptive fact that explanations in neuroscience typically span multiple
levels gives rise to scientiﬁc disputes about the relative signiﬁcance of
different levels and to philosophical disputes about the existence and
explanatory relevance of nonfundamental levels. Yet the term ‘‘level’’ is
multiply ambiguous. Its application requires only a set of items and a
way of ordering them as higher or lower. Not surprisingly, then, the
term ‘‘level’’ has several common uses in contemporary neuroscience.¹ To
¹ Machamer (personal communication), Churchland and Sejnowski ( 1992), and Hardcastle ( 1998)
called my attention to this fact.


=== PAGE 185 ===

164 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
name a few, there are levels of abstraction, analysis, behavior, complexity,
description, explanation, function, generality, organization, science, and
theory. Consequently, scientiﬁc and philosophical disputes about levels
cannot be addressed, let alone resolved, without ﬁrst sorting out which of
the various senses of ‘‘level’’ is under discussion.
In this chapter, I develop a taxonomy of ways to think and talk about
levels. My taxonomic approach contrasts with Wimsatt’s ( 1976a, 1994)
prototype of levels, which characterizes levels in terms of a cluster of
rankable features. Wimsatt’s classic treatment of levels is the appropriate
starting place for any scientiﬁcally informed discussion of that topic. In his
view, levels are distinguished in part by the sizes of objects. Objects at
different levels also stand in composition relations. Objects at the same level
are governed by the same laws and exhibit forces of similar magnitudes.
Objects at the same level also have regular and predictable relations with one
another and are reliable detectors of one another. Theories are found at levels
because that is where the regularities are. Finally, everything at a given
level is investigated with the same set of techniques and according to similar
disciplinary perspectives. Wimsatt’s reason for offering a prototype of levels, as
opposed to a deﬁnition, is that some examples of levels lack one or more of
these central features. Because the levels metaphor is ambiguous, however,
the prototype account obscures the distinctions among different senses of
‘‘level.’’ My taxonomic approach highlights the similarities and differences
among different senses of level.
Because I am primarily interested in the multilevel structure of expla-
nations in neuroscience, I begin in Section 2 with an uncontroversial
example of such: the mechanisms of spatial memory. Charles Stevens
praises this explanation as approaching the ‘‘dream of neurobiology ... to
understand all aspects of interesting and important cognitive phenome-
na—like memory—from the underlying molecular mechanisms through
behavior’’ (Stevens 1996: 1147). Squire and Kandel claim that ‘‘Memory
promises to be the ﬁrst mental faculty to be understandable in a language
that makes a bridge from molecules to mind, that is, from molecules to
cells, to brain systems, and to behavior’’ (2000: 3). My goal is to ask which
of the different senses of level best describes the levels in this example
of multilevel explanation. I develop the taxonomy of levels in Section 3.
Finally, in Section 4, I introduce levels of mechanisms as the sense most rel-
evant to understanding the spatial memory example and similar multilevel


=== PAGE 186 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 165
explanations. I show that this way of thinking about levels is consistent
with many presumed features of levels (for example, that things at lower
levels are smaller than things at higher levels and are studied with differ-
ent techniques) but inconsistent with others (for example, that levels are
monolithic strata in nature; that things at different levels interact causally;
and that levels, ﬁelds, and theories correspond to one another).
I leave one signiﬁcant sense of ‘‘level’’ out of my taxonomy for now:
‘‘levels of being,’’ or, as I will call them, levels of realization (cf. the sense
of ‘‘orders’’ in Kim1998²). This is perhaps the dominant notion of ‘‘level’’
under discussion in metaphysics and the philosophy of mind. In levels of
realization, a property or activity at a higher level is realized by a property
or activity at a lower level of realization. The item at a lower level of
realization is not part of the item at a higher level; the realized and realizing
properties are properties of one and the same thing. Marr’s levels of
analysis (computational, algorithmic, and hardware/implementation levels)
are levels of realization. Levels of mechanisms, in contrast, are a variety
of part–whole relation. The property or activity at a higher level of
mechanisms is the behavior of the mechanism as a whole (the explanandum
phenomenon); the parts of the mechanism and their activities are at a lower
level. I do not include levels of realization in the present discussion because
any attempt to locate them within the taxonomy would be contentious. I
discuss the causal relevance of realized variables in Chapter 6.
2. Levels of Spatial Memory
The explanation of spatial memory (henceforth LM), as represented
schematically in Figure 5.1, is commonly said to have roughly four levels.³
The topping-off point in this hierarchy is the spatial memory phenomenon.
Call this the level of spatial memory .⁴ This level is typically associated with
scientiﬁc ﬁelds, such as experimental psychology and ethology, and with
different techniques, such as mazes, for assaying different forms of spatial
² Kim (1998) describes levels of realization as ‘‘orders,’’ and he talks about higher- and lower-order
properties.
³ I take no stand on whether this example of explanation is ultimately the right explanation. What
matters is not the speciﬁc details, but rather the overall explanatory pattern of ﬁtting items into a
multilevel structure.
⁴ There are many different spatial memory phenomena, but for now I gloss over that matter.


=== PAGE 187 ===

166 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
Mouse Navigating
Morris Water Maze
Hippocampus
Generating Spatial Map
Neurons Inducing
Long-Term Potentiation
NMDA
Receptor Activating
Ca2+
Mg2+
Figure 5.1. Levels of spatial memory
memory. Spatial memory is tested in radial arm mazes, sunburst mazes,
three-table problems, and the Morris water maze. The last of these is a
circular pool ﬁlled with an opaque liquid covering a hidden platform. Rats
are trained to use various cues from the pool’s environment to ﬁnd the
platform and escape the water. The liquid environment in the pool allows
researchers to mask the olfactory cues, which is a problem with standard


=== PAGE 188 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 167
box mazes. In order to test different aspects of spatial memory, researchers
can vary where they put the rat in the maze, features of the environment,
and other cues pointing to the location of the platform. Researchers mon-
itor the time that it takes the rat to ﬁnd the platform and, in some cases,
the trajectory of the rat through the pool. Experiments of this sort are used
to deﬁne the phenomenon of spatial memory.
At a lower level—the level of spatial map formation —are the compu-
tational properties of neural systems, including brain regions such as the
hippocampus and other areas in the temporal and frontal cortex. Consid-
erable evidence suggests that the hippocampus, a structure in the medial
temporal lobe, is necessary for forming spatial memories. A transverse slice
of the hippocampus, with its characteristic tri-synaptic loop, is shown in
Figure 5.2a. This loop runs from the perforant path ﬁbers coming from
the entorhinal cortex, through the granule cells ( ◦) of the dentate gyrus,
and from there to the pyramidal cells △ of the cornu Ammonis region
(labeled CA 1 and CA 3). Rats with bilateral lesions to the hippocampus
exhibit profound deﬁcits in maze learning and other tasks. Similar results
can be obtained by using pharmacological agents to block the activities
of crucial neurotransmitters in the hippocampus, or to prevent protein
synthesis in hippocampal neurons. The results of such interference experi-
ments have also been supported by activation experiments. If one records
from single cells in the hippocampus as the rat navigates a familiar space,
one will ﬁnd that speciﬁc cells in the hippocampus (now known as ‘‘place
cells’’) ﬁre preferentially when the rat enters a given location in the
maze in a particular orientation (O’Keefe and Dostrovsky 1971; Wilson
and McNaughton 1993). For this reason, researchers hypothesize that the
hippocampus functions as a spatial map.
How does the hippocampus generate spatial maps or contribute to the
storage of spatial memories? The answer is still controversial, but answers
typically appeal to phenomena at the cellular-electrophysiological level .T h e
dominant hypothesis since the 1970s has been that spatial maps are formed
through LTP in hippocampal synapses. This hypothesis is supported by
evidence that interventions to inhibit LTP prevent spatial learning, that
interventions to strengthen LTP can prime learning, and that synapses
undergo LTP during learning and memory tasks.
In Figure 5.2b (top), LTP is represented as a lasting enhancement of the
post-synaptic response to the same pre-synaptic electrical signal following


=== PAGE 189 ===

168 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
CA1
CA3
Test
Test Test
LTP
No LTP
Hours
Hours Time
Tetanus
Tetanus
Strong Tetanus
Granule Cells
Granule
Cell
Voltage
Clamp
Voltage
Clamp
During
Tetanus
No Voltage
Clamp
Post-synaptic
Depolarization
Granule Cell
EPSP
EPSP Amplitude
Pyramid Cells
Perforant Path Fiber
from Entorhinal Cortex
Perforant Path
Stimulus
Perforant
Path Fiber
1
2 3
a
b
c
Figure 5.2. A textbook depiction of LTP
Source: Reprinted with permission from Levitan and Kaczmarek ( 1991)


=== PAGE 190 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 169
a tetanus (rapid and repeated stimulation). The top line represents stimuli
delivered to the pre-synaptic cell. The bottom line records the post-synaptic
response. As shown in the ﬁrst third of the diagram, a test stimulus to the pre-
synaptic cell produces a regular depolarization of the post-synaptic cell (that
is, an excitatory post-synaptic potential, or EPSP). The experimental inter-
vention (in the middle third) involves applying a tetanus to the pre-synaptic
cell. Following this intervention (in the last third), the same test stimulus
produces a much greater EPSP than before. This facilitation lasts for hours,
days, or weeks, as shown in Figure5.2b (bottom). Figure 5.2c illustrates that
LTP requires the simultaneous activation of both pre- and post-synaptic
neurons. The top record is the same as in Figure5.2b. In the bottom record,
the post-synaptic cell is voltage clamped during the tetanus (in the middle),
that is, an external source of current counters any voltage changes in the
post-synaptic neuron. LTP is not induced in the absence of post-synaptic
depolarization (in the last third). The idea is that spatial maps are created
or stored by adjusting the strengths of synapses in the hippocampus.
The bottom of this hierarchy—the molecular level —consists of the
molecular mechanisms that make the chemical and electrical activities
of nerve cells possible. These molecular mechanisms are studied with
molecular tools such as gene knockouts and with pharmacological agonists
and antagonists that excite and inhibit different biochemical pathways. As
I discuss in Chapter 3, if the post-synaptic cell remains polarized (as in
Figure 5.2d), the channel through the NMDA receptor remains blocked
by large, positively charged Mg
2+ ions. But if the post-synaptic cell
is depolarized, the Mg 2+ ions are driven out of the channel, allowing
Ca2+ ions to diffuse into the cell. The Mg 2+ blockade is a coincidence-
detection device that ensures that LTP is induced only when both the
pre- and post-synaptic cells are simultaneously active. Interfering with
this coincidence-detection device by, for example, removing the NMDA
receptor or changing its conformation has effects that ramify throughout
this hierarchy, producing deﬁcits in LTP, spatial map formation, and
performance in the Morris water maze (see Tsien et al. 1996a, 1996b;
McHugh et al. 1996, which I discuss in greater detail in Chapter 7).
My decision to break this explanation into four levels is surely an
oversimpliﬁcation. There might be more levels. One might choose to
identify networks of cells in the hippocampus, or cascades of molecules
beneath a properly electrophysiological level. The hierarchy could also


=== PAGE 191 ===

170 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
be expanded upward and downward. Upward, one can consider memory
systems in the context of other cognitive and physiological mechanisms
(such as emotion and sleep) or in the context of social groups and cultures.
Downward, one can consider the protein folding mechanisms that give
NMDA receptors their characteristic shapes and activities.
Even without these amendments, this explanatory sketch exhibits the
kind of hierarchical structure found elsewhere in the neurosciences and
beyond. The mechanisms of osmoregulation discussed in Chapter 1 span
from behaviors (such as drinking and urination) to molecules (such as
aquapores and oxytocin). The mechanism of the action potential discussed
in Chapters 2 and 4 exhibits a similar telescoping structure from the
behavior of whole cells and patches of membrane to the ﬁne-grained
conformation changes in voltage-gated ion channels. In investigating the
visual system, one can focus on the visual system as a whole, on the
contributions of distinct brain regions, on neural networks such as optical
dominance columns, and on the chemical reactions in the retina. This
kind of hierarchical structure is also used to relate Alzheimer’s disease
and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease to physiological and molecular mechanisms,
to link phenotypes to genotypes, and to tie polymer structure to atomic
structure. LM levels are representative of multilevel explanations across the
sciences, and so they are a good test case for identifying an explanatorily
interesting sense of level.
3. A Field-Guide to Levels
My view is that the levels in this multilevel explanation are best understood
as levels of mechanisms. Lower levels in this hierarchy are the components
in mechanisms for the phenomena at higher levels. Components at lower
levels are organized to make up the behaviors at higher levels, and lower-
and higher-level items stand in relationships of mutual manipulability (as
established with the interlevel experiments I discuss in Chapter4). Thinking
of levels in this way shows why the notion of ‘‘level’’ is so closely bound
up with the notions of explanation and organization, and it allows one
to integrate the notion of ‘‘level’’ with the view of explanation I have
developed in the preceding chapters. In talking with other neuroscientists
and philosophers, I ﬁnd that most of them readily accept this view of levels.


=== PAGE 192 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 171
Levels
Levels of
Products
Levels of
Units
Levels of
Causation
Levels of
Size
Levels
of
Mereology
Levels
of
Mechanisms
Levels
of
Aggregativity
Levels of
Mere
Material/Spatial
Containment
Levels of
Composition
Levels of Science Levels of Nature
Figure 5.3. A taxonomy of levels
However, I also ﬁnd that most of them confuse this view of levels with a
host of unrelated and sometimes misleading associations. To guard against
these misleading associations, I develop a taxonomy of levels (represented
diagrammatically in Figure 5.3) to demarcate my notion of levels from its
nearest neighbors. I distinguish the nodes in this taxonomy by examining
three deﬁning questions.
The ﬁrst deﬁning question is: what are the relata? That is, what kinds
of things are sorted into levels? The top node of Figure 5.3, for example,
marks a distinction between levels of science and levels of nature. The
relata in levels of science might be either products of science or units of
science (as shown one node down on the left). Products of science are
epistemic constructs, such as analyses, descriptions, explanatory models, and
theories. When one says that theories about molecules are at a lower level
than theories about cells, or that brain regions and cells occupy different
levels of description, one is talking about levels of products of science.
Units of science include such groups as ﬁelds (Darden 1991), paradigms
(Kuhn 1962), perspectives (Wimsatt 1994), and research programs (Lakatos
1977). When one says that nuclear physics (a ﬁeld) is at a lower level than
molecular biology (another ﬁeld), one is talking about relationships among
scientiﬁc units. One can also understand the term ‘‘levels’’ as describing
levels of nature. These are represented on the right branch of Figure 5.3.
Levels of nature relate items in the world, such as activities, entities,
properties, and states. As I argue, the levels metaphor is not univocal across
these different relata. Nor, I argue, do these notions of level correspond
neatly to one another. To use the term level clearly, one must specify the
relata (see Wimsatt 1976a: 215).


=== PAGE 193 ===

172 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
The second deﬁning question is: what is the interlevel relation? That
is, by virtue of what are two items at different levels? The three divisions
under ‘‘levels of nature’’ in Figure 5.3 correspond to different kinds of
relation: causality, size, and composition. The levels metaphor is frequently
articulated as a size relationship: things at lower levels are smaller than
things at higher levels (for example, Wimsatt1976a; Kim 1998). Sometimes
levels are spoken of as levels of ‘‘complexity,’’ according to which things at
higher levels are more organized than things at lower levels. Some say that
things at different levels are causally related (for example, Campbell 1974).
It is easy to slide from one sense of interlevel relation (for example, size) to
another (for example, complexity) without noticing or acknowledging it.
The last deﬁning question for a sense of levels is the placement question:
by virtue of what are any two items at the same level? Different expositors
of the levels metaphor appeal to different features in order to place items
together at the same level. Some locate things at the same level if they are
roughly the same size. Gould ( 1980) claims, in addition, that items at the
same level are acted on by similar forces, are governed by the same laws,
and interact (most often) with one another (see also Wimsatt1994). I argue
below that there may not be a uniquely correct answer to this question for
all senses of levels. I argue, in fact, that there is no unique answer to the
placement question for levels of mechanisms.
In the rest of Section 3, I move from left to right in Figure 5.3.I
show that none of the notions of level, except for levels of mechanisms,
adequately describes the notion of level implicit in the LM explanation.
Moreover, I show that the different senses of level fail to correspond to
one another, contrary to what the prototype model suggests. Once I have
cleared this ground, I return to levels of mechanisms in Section 3.3.
3.1 Levels of science (units and products)
Philosophers frequently deﬁne levels by reference to divisions in science
rather than by reference to divisions in the structure of the world. In
this, they follow Oppenheim and Putnam’s (1958) view in their ‘‘Unity of
Science as a Working Hypothesis.’’ For them, the unity of science comprises
unity among either units of science (for example, ﬁelds, disciplines, and
research programs) or among its products (for example, descriptions,
explanations, and theories). Oppenheim and Putnam presume that units
and products of science correspond to one another and that these, in turn,


=== PAGE 194 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 173
correspond to divisions in the structure of the world. In particular, they
identify six ‘‘mereological’’ levels of nature: elementary particles, atoms,
molecules, cells, organisms, and societies ( 1958: 9). Each level of nature,
they suggest, also corresponds to a unique theoretical vocabulary (1958: 10)
and a unique set of explanatory principles (that is, laws) that constitute a
theory speciﬁc to that level ( 1958: 4). Each level-speciﬁc theory, in turn,
corresponds to a different science, from particle physics at the bottom to
the social sciences at the top. The unity of science is achieved by explaining
the phenomena in the domain of one ﬁeld of science with the theories of
another ﬁeld of science.
Oppenheim and Putnam intend this view of levels and the unity of
science to be an accurate description of the science of their day. However,
it is at best a caricature. The most obvious oversimpliﬁcation is the six-level
image of the world. Surely they did not intend these six levels to describe
the world in all of its complexity, and surely they could acknowledge
that science might add, delete, or modify any level in this hierarchy.
Nonetheless, the descriptive shortcomings of this simplistic image help to
show what would be required of a more adequate view of the multilevel
structure found in many scientiﬁc explanations. First, their hierarchy has
gaps. It does not include stable units formed of molecules (such as NMDA
receptors), networks of cells (such as the CA 1 region), organs (such as the
hippocampus), or units of organization between organisms and societies
(such as families or friendships). The hierarchy has no place for ecosystems,
gases, planets, or solar systems. Are solar systems at a higher level than
societies (because they are bigger) or are they at a lower level (because
they are associated with physics)? Solar systems cannot be at a higher level
than societies, because societies are not mereological parts of solar systems.
Nor can they be at the same level as elementary particles, given that solar
systems are composed of elementary particles. Wimsatt’s branching diagram
in Figure 5.4 is more accurate in these respects. There are more nodes,
and the levels branch as they ascend. In this ‘‘reductive illustrative,’’ as
Wimsatt calls it, the world is structured in many different hierarchies that
converge only at the lowest level. One hierarchy extends from atoms to
solar objects. Another extends from atoms, through a ‘‘biopsychological
thicket,’’ to ‘‘individual thought and language.’’ On this view, atoms are at
a lower level than both plasma and organic molecules, although plasma and
organic molecules are not in the same hierarchy. These changes transform


=== PAGE 195 ===

174 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
larger (conspecific)
evolutionary
units   [c,d]
larger [d]
ecological
units
higher levels
[a] neutron
stars
[a] solor
      objects
[a] gas clouds
[a] jovian planets
[a] higher level cultural
units
[a] composites
[a] neutron gas
[a] plasma
[f] molecular gas
[f] amorphous solids
[f] inorganic molecular
organic molecular [f]
lower levels subatomic particles [f]
atomic level [f]
[f] crystalline solids
[a] composite crystals
[a] regular polymers
[g] public abstract systems and
languages
[d] individual
    thought and language
[h] A reduc nistic (?) illustrative ∗
     Phylogenetic ontology of our world as we see it.
     [letters in parentheses refer to local character of network around that node]
∗ A diagram like this is obviously highly tenative. Although it has been constructed
with many specific relations in mind, I would claim accuracy only of a general qualitative
sort - i.e., for the rough general distribution of network properties, as indicated, e.g.,
by the distribution of letters.
biological macro-molecules [c,f,g]
biological "network" [d,g]
psychological "cloud" [e,f]
socio-ecology of man [d]
individual ecology of
man [d]
bio-psychological
"thicket" [c,d,e,f,g]
cosmological
objects
"physical" world
(mostly a,f )
socio-cultural
"third world"
socio-ecological
"fourth world"
W .C.Wimsatt 1976
Figure 5.4. Wimsatt’s branching diagram of levels
Source: Reprinted with permission from Wimsatt ( 1976: 253)
Oppenheim and Putnam’s six levels into a much more accurate description
of the hierarchies described by contemporary science.
My primary criticism, however, is not of the simplicity or descriptive
inadequacy of this six-layered vision of the world. Oppenheim and Putnam
could clearly grant that the world is not so tidy. Rather, I object to the
supposed correspondence between levels of nature, levels of units, and levels
of products of science. Oppenheim and Putnam do not seem to recognize


=== PAGE 196 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 175
any difﬁculty in moving freely between these different conceptions of
levels. Consider the following passage as just one example:
It has been contended that one manifestly cannot explain human behavior by
reference to the laws of atomic physics. It would indeed be fantastic to suppose that
the simplest regularity in the ﬁeld of psychology could be explained directly—that
is, ‘‘skipping’’ intervening branches of science—by employing subatomic theories.
But one may believe in the attainability of unitary science without thereby
committing oneself to this absurdity. (1958: 7)
In this passage, Oppenheim and Putnam shift without notice from describ-
ing structures of the world (human behavior), to describing products
(explanations and theories), to describing ﬁelds of science (psychology and
atomic physics).
In neuroscience, this tidy correspondence breaks down. Consider the
above sketch of LM levels from the perspective of Oppenheim and
Putnam’s view of levels. The LM explanation constitutes a theory. It is
not a deductively closed and interpreted axiomatic system, as Hempel
characterizes theories, but it nonetheless satisﬁes a view of theories as
models of systems (Craver 2002a; Giere 1999; Glennan 2005; Suppe 1989).
These different items are integrated in a single theory not because they
can all be described by theoretical predicates appropriate to a level of
nature, but because they can be used together to describe, predict, explain,
and test aspects of spatial memory. This theory is composed of items
drawn from multiple Oppenheim and Putnam-style levels. The inﬂux of
Ca
2+ ions (atoms) through the NMDA receptor (molecules) initiates the
sequence of events leading to LTP (cells), which is part of the mechanism
for forming a spatial map in the CA 1 region (organs). Map formation is
part of the explanation for how the mouse (whole organism) navigates
through familiar environments (ecosystems) and among conspeciﬁcs and
predators (societies). As Schaffner ( 1993a, 1993b) argues, most biological
and biomedical theories span levels from molecules to physiological systems.
The theories of neuroscience are no exception.
There can also be multiple theories at a single level of nature on
any reasonable deﬁnition of a single level. If one orders levels by size,
for example, then Wimsatt’s diagram picks out a single level contain-
ing neutron gases, plasma, molecular gases, amorphous solids, crystalline
solids, regular polymers, and biological macromolecules. These phenomena


=== PAGE 197 ===

176 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
occupy different domains of investigation, they are characterized by differ-
ent theories, and different kinds of scientists study them even though all
the objects under investigation are the same size. Similarly, an electrophys-
iologist and a cellular anatomist might be interested in the structures and
activities of cells in the hippocampus, and thus focus their attention at the
same level (on many standard accounts of sameness of level). Nonetheless,
they approach the same level with two distinct bodies of theory. Part of
what Wimsatt intends to capture in his depiction of the ‘‘biopsychological
thicket,’’ I believe, is the fact that in such domains of science, there are
multiple different theories, many of which are difﬁcult to order neatly
into levels, and most of which are reticulately connected to one another.
Theories in neuroscience, in short, do not correspond to tidy levels of
nature.
For similar reasons, there is no tidy correspondence between the distinct
ﬁelds of neuroscience (units) and Oppenheim and Putnam-style levels of
nature. Single ﬁelds increasingly reach across multiple levels of nature,
and different ﬁelds often approach items at the same level of nature
from different perspectives. The LM theory is the combined product
of anatomy, biochemistry, computational neuroscience, electrophysiol-
ogy, molecular biology, neuroanatomy, pharmacology, psychiatry, and
experimental psychology. Cognitive neuroscience is, by its very nature, a
ﬁeld that encompasses psychological, physiological, cellular, and molecular
items within its domain. In the experiment mentioned above, researchers
intervene to knock out the NMDA receptor and then detect the delete-
rious effects of that manipulation on LTP, spatial maps, and performance
in the Morris water maze (McHugh et al. 1996). In a similar experiment,
researchers altered the structure of the NMDA receptor and noted enhanced
LTP, sharper spatial maps, and improved learning curves (Tang et al.1999).
Experiments of this sort, which are increasingly the norm in neuroscience,
require contributions from several different ﬁelds. In the interdisciplinary
climate of contemporary neuroscience, individual researchers often acquire
competence with techniques drawn from different ﬁelds and with tech-
niques that target various levels of nature. Contemporary neuroscience
thus does not ﬁt Oppenheim and Putnam’s hierarchical structure. Fields,
journals, and scientiﬁc organizations are now organized around interﬁeld
collaboration to such an extent that it is no longer possible to resolve
neuroscience into well-deﬁned strata of research.


=== PAGE 198 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 177
In the case of LM levels and other hierarchically organized explanations,
theories, ﬁelds, and levels of nature (in Oppenheim and Putnam’s sense)
dissociate from one another. Researchers in single ﬁelds do research at
multiple distinct levels of nature, and sometimes multiple ﬁelds bring their
resources to bear on a single level. For these reasons, I conﬁne my attention
from this point on to levels of nature rather than to levels of science.
3.2 Levels of nature
I propose then that we start by thinking of levels as primarily features of
the world rather than as features of the units or products of science. ⁵ As
possible relata in levels of nature, I include entities, activities, properties, and
mechanisms. I also distinguish among three interlevel relations: causation,
size, and composition. In this section, I consider each of these different
relations, along with a few permutations of different relata, to illustrate how
ambiguities arise from failing to keep these different relations distinct.
3.2.1. Causal levels (processing and control) Sometimes the levels metaphor
is used to describe causal relations. Two examples are levels of processing
and levels of control.
In levels of processing , the relata are the stages of a task or an extended
process. These stages are related to one another sequentially and causally (see
Churchland and Sejnowski 1992: 23). Levels of processing are sometimes
inscribed in the names of brain regions with such terms as ‘‘primary’’
and ‘‘secondary,’’ as in ‘‘primary somatosensory cortex’’ and ‘‘secondary
auditory cortex.’’ For example, the ﬂow of information through the visual
system is commonly said to begin with the retina, passing through the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and the primary visual cortex (V1) before
being sent on to ‘‘higher-level’’ visual areas (such as V 2,M T ,o ra n yo f
roughly twenty-ﬁve other major visual processing regions). The LGN is
frequently said to be responsible for ‘‘lower-level’’ visual processing. V1 is
responsible for higher-level processing, and MT (among others) processes
information at a higher level still. Levels of processing are ranked relative to
one another by their place in a causal (and derivatively, temporal) sequence.
Processing in the retina occurs earlier than processing in the LGN, and the
⁵ Levels of sciences and theories could then be s een as derivative upon, and at best approximations
of, these ontic structures.


=== PAGE 199 ===

178 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
processing in the LGN occurs earlier than the processing in V1. Processing
in the retina is causally required for, prepares the information for, or ﬁlters
information into, later processing in the LGN, V 1,a n dM T .F o rt h i s
reason, hydrodynamic metaphors are more appropriate for describing levels
of processing than are stratigraphic metaphors: later stages are downstream
in the ﬂow of information from earlier stages. ⁶
Levels of processing are relevant to understanding aspects of the LM
mechanisms as well. The hippocampal trisynaptic loop shown in Figure5.2a
can be idealized into levels of processing. Perforant path ﬁbers from the
entorhinal cortex synapse on the granule cells of the dentate gyrus regions.
Granule cells then project to the pyramidal cells in CA 3, which, in turn,
project to CA 1. In this hippocampal circuit, CA 1 is downstream from
CA3, which is downstream from the dentate gyrus. Each region is at a
higher level of processing than its predecessor.
However, the LM levels described in Section 2 are not levels of pro-
cessing. The primary difference is that LM levels are relationships between
a whole and its parts, while levels of processing are relationships between
distinct items. LTP is part of forming spatial maps, and forming spatial maps
is part of learning to navigate a novel environment. The retina is not part
of the LGN. Furthermore, higher levels of processing are later in the ﬂow
of information than lower levels. They receive information that has been
prepared by items at lower levels. They are ‘‘downstream’’ from earlier
levels of processing, and items that are ‘‘upstream’’ causally inﬂuence them.
Activities at lower LM levels, in contrast, are temporally contained within
the activities at higher levels. The formation of spatial maps is not later
than the induction of LTP; LTP is part of the process by which spatial
maps are formed. LTP does not prepare information for consumption by
the hippocampus; it is part of the consumption of information by the
hippocampus. Finally, LM levels also lack the causal relations characteristic
of levels of processing. This is because entities at lower levels are parts of
⁶ The tidy division of processing units into ‘‘earlierand later’’ may break down in mechanisms with
multiple parallel and feedback connections. Indeed, one might even suggest that it breaks down for
the visual system as well, given the complex feedback from V 1 to LGN to the retina. As the number
of relevant causal relations in a mechanism increases, the clear temporal order among the component
stages begins to break down. (See the discussion of complex mechanisms in Bechtel and Richardson
1993.) In such cases, speaking of stages as higher or lower in a hierarchy of information processing
requires one to idealize away from the reticulate interconnections among components in order to see a
predominant direction of causal inﬂuence.


=== PAGE 200 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 179
entities at higher levels, and activities at lower levels are stages of activities
at higher levels. To view LM levels as causally related, one must violate
the common assumptions that causal relationships are contingent and that
cause and effect must be wholly distinct. If one confuses levels of processing
with LM levels, one might think of the interlevel relationship as a causal
relationship despite these disanalogies.
A similar issue arises if one construes LM levels aslevels of control. In levels
of control, the relata are agents or actors (literally or metaphorically). They
are related by subordination. Higher levels of control direct, dominate,
or regulate activities at lower levels. Bosses and employees, generals and
privates, teachers and students are all related by levels of control. The
metaphor of control and subordination invites confusion when applied to
nonintentional contexts, but often the metaphor is entirely appropriate.
Genes are sometimes described as controlling development, ⁷and the pre-
frontal cortex and cingulate cortex are sometimes said to exhibit executive
control over other brain regions and behavior (Fuster 1997; Smith and
Jonides 1999; Posner and DiGirolamo 1998). More formally, the apparatus
of control theory, with controllers, plants, and feedback connections, has
been useful in many areas of biology and neuroscience (for a recent
discussion, see Grush 2004). Very roughly, formal applications of this
control metaphor describe controllers as receiving input from the output
of the controlled system (that is, the plant), as comparing the output to a
target output, and as then manipulating the plant in such a way as to bring
it closer to producing the target output. Not all systems described with
the language of control have these features. Sometimes the language of
‘‘control’’ is used merely to describe a predominant cause (as in the case of
genes and the pre-frontal cortex). The important thing is that the controller
and the plant are distinct parts of a larger system. Each part feeds input into
and receives output from the other parts. Like a boss and subordinates, the
pre-frontal cortex is said to monitor and regulate the behavior ofother brain
regions. This is unlike LM levels, in which objects are related as parts to
wholes. The hippocampus is part of the mouse, and the synapses are parts
of the hippocampus. An analogous understanding of the control system
described above is to understand the whole system (including controller,
⁷ Of course, this view is hotly debated. Genes are parts of complex mechanisms, and different
perspectives lead people to privilege different components of the mechanism (or none at all) as being
‘‘in control.’’


=== PAGE 201 ===

180 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
plant, and feedback) as controlling the plant. This is the sort of situation
envisioned by many advocates of ‘‘top-down causation.’’ To describe LM
levels in terms of levels of control is thus to import a strained understanding
of the dependency relationship between levels.⁸
3.2.2. Levels of size It is perhaps most common to describe levels of nature
as levels of size. In such levels, the relata are entities (for example, mice,
hippocampi, and cells), and they are ranked by relative size. Churchland and
Sejnowski (2000: 16), in the classic diagram of levels shown in Figure 5.5,
rank entities from molecules measured in Angstrom units to organisms
measured in meters. Size is also a core feature of Wimsatt’s prototype of
levels (shown in Figure 5.6). Wimsatt represents levels as local maxima
1 m
10 cm
1 cm
1 mm
100 µm Neurons
Networks
Maps
Systems
CNS 7A
MT V4
V4-VAV3A
V3
V2
V1
VP
MST VIP LIP
TF
DP
AIT
PIT
Synapses
Molecules1 Å
1 µm
Figure 5.5. Churchland and Sejnowski’s classic diagram of levels in neuroscience
Source: Reprinted with permission from Churchland and Sejnowski ( 1988)
⁸ Those who suspect that the hierarchical world-view is associated with a male-centered and
dominance-oriented hierarchy transparently confuse levels of the sort represented in LM levels with
levels of control.


=== PAGE 202 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 181
a.: regular periodic
atomic molecular
macro-
molecular
socio-cultural
ecologicaluni-
cellular
smaller
metazoan
larger
metazoan
W .C.Wimsatt
1978
b.: random
    fluctuation
(wrong choice of variables?)
c.: dissipative wave: (pro-reductionistic?)
OUR
WORLD?
entification greater at lower levels
0
0
0
regularity and predictability
Figure 5.6. Levels as local maxima of regularity and predictability ∗
∗ Appearing over a roughly logarithmic size scale
Source: Reprinted with permission from Wimsatt ( 1976: 240)
of regularity and predictability in the phase space of possible ways of
organizing matter. Levels appear as peaks of regularity and predictability
when graphed against a ‘‘roughly logarithmic’’ size scale. An orderly world,
with well-deﬁned peaks of regularity and predictability at different size
scales, is shown at the top. A world without levels, where regularity and
predictability vary randomly with no well-deﬁned peaks or valleys in any
size range, is drawn beneath it. The bottom world (Wimsatt labels it
‘‘Our World?’’) shows a dissipating wave, with regularity and predictability
diminishing and spreading out over broader size ranges as size increases.
Wimsatt’s and Churchland’s diagrams vividly illustrate the idea that
levels correspond to sizes. They also illustrate an empirical hypothesis about
the structure of the world, that is, that regularities tend to be found in
certain size ranges and not in others. LM levels satisfy the ﬁrst intuition:
rats are larger than hippocampi, which are larger than cells, which are
larger than molecules. The second hypothesis, concerning the clustering of
regularities within size ranges, is more difﬁcult to evaluate. One reading
of this hypothesis is that those items that participate in regularities tend to
be found at levels. This reading is trivial, however, because any putative
between-level item for which there are robust regularities will, ipso facto,


=== PAGE 203 ===

182 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
deﬁne a level. On a more substantive reading, Wimsatt’s claim is that
regularities hold more between items at the same level than between items
at different levels. Wimsatt is led to this idea by his belief that objects
tend to interact with other objects of roughly the same size (and so at the
same level), and that things in the same size-range are acted on by the
same forces ( 1976a: 237). When Wimsatt introduces Figure 5.6,h es a y s ,
‘‘Still supposing that levels are to be individuated solely on the basis of
size factors, imagine a picture like that of Figure [ 5.6], in which regularity
and predictability of interactions is graphed as a function of the size of the
interacting entity’’ (1976a: 238; italics added). For Wimsatt, things at a level
‘‘interact most strongly and frequently’’ (1976a: 215) with things at the same
level. This explains why he believes that regularities cluster within levels.
There are two problems that need to be kept separate. The ﬁrst concerns
causal interactions across size scales. There is a question (i) whether there
can be causal interactions between things at different size scales, and a
second question (ii) whether causal interactions between things at different
size scales are less frequent than causal interactions between things at the
same size scale. As to (i), Wimsatt and I agree that the answer is yes: large
things (even arbitrarily large things) can interact with small things (even
arbitrarily small things). Elephants squash ﬂeas, planets attract molecules,
and I breathe atoms. No one should disagree about any of this. However,
if one recasts (i) as (i
∗), whether there can be causal interactions between
things at different levels, the matter is more controversial. If one understands
levels as involving a compositional relationship (as I am inclined to do,
and as Wimsatt is sometimes inclined to do), then, as I have explained
above, there is reason to be skeptical about interlevel causal claims. The
skepticism arises from the fact that the ordinary concept of causation seems
to carry with it a number of assumptions about the logical independence
of causes and effects, the temporal precedence of causes and effects, and so
on that are difﬁcult, if not impossible, to square with the idea of interlevel
(compositional) relations (see Chapter 4). The point is that the notion of
levels of size carries very different implications for thinking about interlevel
causes than does the notion of levels of composition. Wimsatt’s prototype
account makes this more confusing than it needs to be. As to (ii), I make
no bets. It is an intriguing hypothesis.
The second problem to be sorted out concerns regularities. There
are questions about (iii) whether there are regularities between things


=== PAGE 204 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 183
at different size levels, and (iv) whether regularities between things at
different size scales are less common than regularities between things at
the same size scale. As to (iii), the answer certainly seems to be yes
again, using the same examples referenced above. As to (iv), I make no
commitment. Suppose, however, that we ask the same questions about
interlevel relationships and that we construe the interlevel relationship
as involving a compositional relationship. Unlike the case of causation
discussed in the preceding paragraph, this reconstrual makes no difference
to the discussion of regularities. There are regularities between wholes and
their parts. The most mundane examples are regularities of composition
(for example, the fact that diamonds are composed of carbon atoms).
More complex cases include the kinds of regularities revealed by interlevel
experiments. The behavior of the whole is dependent on the behavior of
the components in such a way that interventions to change the components
can change the behavior of the whole and vice versa. While there are not
interlevel causal relations in LM levels, there are many interlevel relations of
dependency, and thereby interlevel relations of regularity and predictability.
One can disrupt spatial memory by ablating the hippocampus or knocking
out NMDA receptors. Building theories in sciences with multilevel domains
involves discovering regularities that span levels and that allow prediction
of how changes at one level inﬂuence changes at other levels. Regularities
can be found both at and across levels.
The primary problem with understanding LM levels as levels of size is
that size relations among LM levels are incidental by-products of a more
fundamental compositional relationship among those levels. What matters is
that navigating rats are partly composed of hippocampi generating spatial
maps, not that navigating rats are larger than their hippocampi. These
hippocampi are, in turn, composed of potentiating synapses and activating
NMDA receptors. Wimsatt mentions composition as one of the features in
his prototype of levels, but he is not committed to the idea that all things at
different levels relative to one another also are compositionally related. This
is evidenced ﬁrst by his willingness to talk about the frequency of causal
interaction among levels, as I discuss above. This lack of commitment
to compositional relations in levels is also explicit in Figure 5.6.O nt h e
left are atoms, which are parts of molecules, which are parts of cells. On
the right, however, are unicellular organisms, smaller metazoan organisms,
and larger metazoan creatures. Except in very special circumstances (for


=== PAGE 205 ===

184 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
example, mitochondria), these latter items are not related compositionally.
The view of levels as local maxima of regularity within size ranges, while
an interesting empirical hypothesis about the structure of the world, does
not adequately describe the central feature of LM levels: composition.
3.2.3. Levels of composition LM levels exhibit a special kind of compo-
sition relation. In this section, I distinguish four kinds of composition:
mereological, aggregative, spatial/material, and mechanistic composition.
Mechanistic composition, I claim, is the crucial feature of LM levels.
3.2.3.1. Levels of mereology The mereological, or part–whole, rela-
tion is the most familiar variety of compositional relation appealed to in
discussions of levels (see Oppenheim and Putnam 1958; Kim 1993: 337;
Schaffner 1993a: 102). There are many accounts of the mereological rela-
tion, and it is not always clear which among them the authors intend to
endorse. Many mereological systems contain features that are ill matched
to the project of describing LM levels (Sanford 1993). Mereology, at least
in many cases, ignores relations among the parts, treating every complex
thing as an aggregate. This is not so much a shortcoming of mereology
as a by-product of the fact that mereological systems are not designed
to characterize levels in science. It might turn out that features of some
formal mereological system are appropriate for describing certain aspects
of levels in neuroscience. However, the best starting point for characteriz-
ing the containment relationship is to look at examples of neuroscientiﬁc
explanations, and then to evaluate whether or not the formal apparatus
adequately expresses that relationship. Starting with the formal apparatus of
mereology requires too many assumptions, and some of these assumptions
are misleading.
Consider ﬁrst the reﬂexivity theorem : every object is part of itself. This
theorem is in many classic formulations of mereology (including Tarski
[1929] 1956; Woodger 1937), and it is a cornerstone of many proofs
in formal mereology. However, the reﬂexivity theorem is unhelpful in
describing LM levels. If the levels relationship is a part–whole relation, and
every item in the LM hierarchy is a part of itself, then every item in the
hierarchy is at a higher and lower level than itself. This result ﬁts poorly
with many of the functions that the levels metaphor is supposed to serve in


=== PAGE 206 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 185
neuroscience. First, it violates the assumption that LM levels are exclusive,
that is, that each item appears at only one level in a given hierarchy. One
central function of the levels metaphor is to sort items into different taxa;
if the same item falls into different levels with respect to itself, that sorting
function is void. Second, the levels in the LM hierarchy are closely tied
to the notion of (ontic) explanation. The behavior of the hippocampus is
part of the explanation for the ability of organisms to navigate their spatial
environments, and LTP in hippocampal synapses is part of the explanation
for how spatial maps are formed. The hippocampus, on the other hand, is
not an explanation for itself. To avoid this problem, one could develop a
mereology without the reﬂexivity axiom (as suggested by Rescher 1955).
Another option is to develop an account of levels that places Y at a lower
level than X only if Y is part of X according to the mereological relationship
and, in addition, X is not identical with Y (that is, to specify that Y is a
proper part of X). I have little doubt that formal mereological systems can
be recast to accommodate the features of LM levels. My point, rather, is
that in building an appropriate mereology for levels in neuroscience, one
should begin with the sort of levels that appear in the LM hierarchy and ask
what the mereology must be to adequately reﬂect the relevant features of
those levels. One condition on an adequate mereology is that lower-level
items are proper parts of higher-level items.
A second component of many formal accounts of mereology is theexten-
sionality theorem: an object is completely determined by the set of its parts.
A consequence of this theorem is that two objects are identical if and only
if they share all their parts. This wording of the extensionality requirement
rules out one of the central features of LM levels, namely, that the parts at
a lower level are organized into the wholes that they compose (see Rescher
1955). Suppose that one took all of the cells in the hippocampus as shown
in Figure 5.2a and rearranged them into an entirely different network of
connections, say, a bust of Santiago Ramon y Cajal. According to the
extensionality theorem, the hippocampus and the bust would be identical
by virtue of the fact that they share all of their components. There is no
reason to prevent people from talking this way, but it is not a useful way
to talk about LM levels. LM-type levels are frequently spoken of as ‘‘levels
of organization’’ to reﬂect the fact that it matters how the components are
organized with respect to one another. In short: relations matter. Every
complex is a mereological sum, but mechanisms are always literally more


=== PAGE 207 ===

186 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
than the sum of their parts. Any account of the composition relation in LM
levels must accommodate this fact.
Finally, formal accounts of mereology are sometimes formulated to apply
equally to both abstract and concrete items. The NMDA receptor is, in
some sense, part of the synapse. The holdings of Jones’s Swiss bank account
are part of his total wealth. Concepts are sometimes thought of as parts
of propositions. But the part–whole relationship between Jones’s holdings
and his wealth is different from the part–whole relationship between
the NMDA receptor and the synapse. The NMDA receptor is materially
contained in the sense that the matter in the receptor is included in the
matter that constitutes the cell, and it is spatially contained within the cell’s
boundaries. Again, there may be some common way of talking about parts
and wholes that applies to both abstract and concrete objects, and this may
be useful for some purposes. Starting with LM levels, however, one would
not be led to this conclusion. Material and spatial containment are crucial
features of LM levels.
3.2.3.2. Levels of aggregativity There are several varieties of materi-
al/spatial containment. Some refer to LM-type levels aslevels of aggregativity.
This choice of words misleadingly suggests that properties of things at
higher levels are simple sums of the properties of things at lower levels. In
levels of aggregates, the relata are properties of wholes and the properties
of parts, and the relation between them is that higher-level properties are
sums of lower-level properties. The mass of a pile of sand is an aggregate
of the masses of the individual grains. When wholes are sums of their parts,
the wholes change continuously with the addition and removal of parts.
Intersubstitution of parts makes no difference to the property of the whole.
The parts do not interact in ways that are relevant to the aggregate property
(Wimsatt 1994). The pile gets heavier continuously as one adds new grains
of sand, and moving them about has no effect on the weight. Replacing
individual grains with equally weighted replicas has no effect on the weight
of the pile, and the grains do not interact with one another in ways that
inﬂuence the weight of the pile.
Aggregative properties are rarely interesting. The total alcohol content of
the gin in a glass, for example, is an aggregate of the alcohol contents of its
unit subvolumes. The volume of a glass of gin, on the other hand, is tech-
nically not a mere aggregate of the volumes of the component molecules;


=== PAGE 208 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 187
rather, the total volume depends on the average kinetic energy of, and
electromagnetic interactions among, the component molecules. Consider
synaptic transmission in hippocampal neurons. As an action potential reach-
es the axon terminal of the pre-synaptic neuron, Ca 2+ channels open and
Ca2+ rushes into the cell. As a result, a vesicle containing neurotransmitters
fuses to the neuronal membrane and releases its contents into the synaptic
cleft. The neurotransmitters diffuse across the cleft and act upon receptors
on the post-synaptic cell. The process relies crucially on near-aggregate
phenomena. Action potentials are aggregate ﬂuxes of ions across the cell
membrane, Ca2+ concentrations are aggregates of Ca2+ ions, and concen-
trations of neurotransmitters are aggregates of individual neurotransmitter
molecules. Each of these aggregates partially depends in part on the relative
spatial location of the component parts, concentration being parts per
volume. As these examples illustrate, it is much more common to ﬁnd
levels that violate the above-mentioned conditions on aggregativity; these
levels come closer to the forms of mechanistic organization that I describe
in Chapter 4.
3.2.3.3. Levels of mere material/spatial containment Before I
examine this mechanistic sense of levels, I examine another variety of
composition relation that falls short of characterizing LM-type levels. ⁹
While not exactly aggregates, these levels are properly thought of as lev-
els of mere material/spatial containment. In levels of mere material/spatial
containment, the relata are entities. One entity is at a lower level than
another entity if the lower-level entity is within the spatial boundaries of
the higher-level entity and makes up part of the matter in the higher-level
whole. I know of no one who advocates this view of levels, but the contrast
highlights crucial features of levels of mechanisms.
Levels of mere material/spatial containment are too permissive to char-
acterize the nature of LM levels. In particular, thinking of levels in this
way does not allow one to distinguish between mere pieces of a system
and its components.¹⁰Dividing a system or mechanism into material/spatial
pieces any which way will not break it into components. One might slice
⁹ One might argue, on the grounds presented here, that containment should not be understood as
a species of composition relation.
¹⁰ I am grateful to Tom Polger for suggesting this distinction, which is something like that originally
drawn by David Sanford (1993) in his effort to develop a common-sense mereology.


=== PAGE 209 ===

188 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
it, dice it, spiral cut it, or merely hack it to bits. Each of these methods of
decomposition would produce pieces, but unless one is very lucky, none
of those pieces would be components. Suppose that one were to divide a
rat into 1 cm cubes (cf. Haugeland 1998). Some cubes would contain no
components relevant to spatial memory, most cubes would contain parts
that are irrelevant to spatial memory, and no cubes (taken as a whole)
would be components of the spatial memory system. The cubes would
be haphazard collections of stuff that, as a whole, make no identiﬁable
contribution to anything rats do. You could not pluck many of them out
without a systematic collapse; the cubes contain crucial stuff. However,
the cubes are not themselves components. Components, in contrast, are
pieces that make identiﬁable contributions to the behavior of a mechanism.
Being a piece of S is nothing but a compositional relation. This kind of
relation holds between a glass of gin and one of its unit subvolumes. Being
a component of S involves, in addition, being relevant to the behavior of the
whole.
This example illustrates that decomposition into lower-level parts—com-
ponents rather than pieces—for the purposes of mechanistic explanation is
always a decomposition relative to a behavior of the system. It is framed by
an explanandum phenomenon. As Stuart Kauffman notes:
A view of what the system is doing sets the explanandum and also supplies criteria
by which to decide whether or not a proposed portion [that is, piece] of the system
with some of its causal consequences is to count as a part and process of the system
[that is, component]. Speciﬁcally, a proposed part will count as a part [component]
of the system if it, together with some of its causal consequences, will ﬁt together
with the other proposed parts [components] and processes to cause the system to
behave as described. (Kauffman 1971: 260)
The cubes ﬁt together spatially, but unless one is very lucky, they cut
across the relevant components in the mechanism. The idea of spatial
decomposition is by itself too weak to rule out decomposition of a
mechanism into cubes. Mechanistic decomposition cuts mechanisms at
their joints.
3.3 Levels of mechanisms
The point of the foregoing considerations is that LM levels are levels
of mechanisms. Levels of mechanisms are levels of composition, but


=== PAGE 210 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 189
the composition relation is not, at base, spatial or material. In levels of
mechanisms, the relata are behaving mechanisms at higher levels and their
components at lower levels. These relata are properly conceived neither
as entities nor as activities; rather, they should be understood as acting
entities. The interlevel relationship is as follows: X’s φ-ing is at a lower
mechanistic level than S’s ψ-ing if and only if X’s φ-ing is a component in
the mechanism for S’sψ-ing. Lower-level components areorganized together
to form higher-level components. Levels of mechanisms are represented in
Figure 5.7. At the top is a mechanism S engaged in behavior ψ. Below
it are the φ-ings of Xs that are organized in S’s ψ-ing. Below that are
the ρ-ings (pronounced ‘‘rho-ings’’) of Ps (English pronunciation) that
are organized in the φ-ing of Xs. By organization, I mean that the parts
have spatial (location, size, shape, and motion), temporal (order, rate, and
duration), and active (for example, feedback) relations with one another by
which they work together to do something. Organization is the interlevel
relation between a mechanism as a whole and its components. Lower-level
components are made up into higher-level components by organizing them
spatially, temporally, and actively into something greater than a mere sum
of the parts.
Sψ -ing
X1φ1-ing
XX3φ3-ing-ing
X2φ2-ing
X4φ4-ing
P1ρ1-ing
P3ρ3-ing
P2ρ2-ing
P4ρ4-ing
Figure 5.7. Three levels of mechanisms


=== PAGE 211 ===

190 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
Levels of mechanisms satisfy many of the central features of levels in
Wimsatt’s prototype. Levels of mechanisms are transparently componential,
unlike mere size levels. Because components are inside the mechanism by
deﬁnition, it follows that the entities in a mechanism are no larger, and
are typically smaller, than the mechanism as a whole. This is consistent
with the possibility that distributed components could be as large as the
mechanism as a whole (for example, the circulatory system takes up most
of the organism), but no component can be larger than the mechanism
as a whole, in part because this would imply that the mechanism is larger
than itself. Levels of mechanisms are also loci of stable generalizations, and
consequently can be seen as local maxima of regularity and predictability.
This is because parts of the mechanism that make an intelligible (that is,
regular and predictable) contribution to the behavior of the mechanism as
a whole are identiﬁed at levels. Levels of mechanisms thus satisfy many of
the central features associated with levels in the ﬁrst place.
However, levels of mechanisms fail to satisfy other widely held beliefs
about levels. First, in contrast to the common way of speaking about levels,
levels of mechanisms should not be conceived as levels of objects (for
example, societies, organisms, cells, molecules, and atoms). They are levels
of behaving components. In many cases, the components picked out in a
mechanistic decomposition fail to correspond to paradigmatic entities with
clear spatial boundaries. The synapse, for instance, is composed of part of
a pre-synapatic cell (the axon terminal), part of a post-synaptic cell (the
dendrite or bouton), and the gap between them. What uniﬁes these items
into a component is their organized behavior: the pre-synaptic cell releases
transmitters that traverse the cleft and act on the post-synaptic cell. Synapses
are not cells or parts of cells. Nor are they composed of cells alone. Rather,
they are components uniﬁed by their organization in an activity.
Second, unlike Oppenheim and Putnam’s six levels of nature, levels of
mechanisms are not monolithic divisions in the structure of the world.
The idea of monolithic levels is reinforced in Wimsatt’s diagrams in
Figure 5.4 and 5.6. Each size scale in Figure 5.4 contains identiﬁable strata
across branching nodes at similar size scales. In Figure 5.6, the peaks of
regularity and predictability span all atoms, all molecules, all unicellular
organisms, and so on. It may turn out, as Wimsatt suggests, that the world
exhibits such peaks of regularity and predictability. However, levels of
mechanisms are far more local than the monolithic image suggests. They


=== PAGE 212 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 191
are deﬁned only within a given compositional hierarchy. Different levels of
mechanisms are found in the spatial memory system, the circulatory system,
the osmoregulatory system, and the visual system. How many levels there
are, and which levels are included, are questions to be answered on a
case-by-case basis by discovering which components at which size scales
are explanatorily relevant for a given phenomenon. They cannot be read
off a menu of levels in advance.
To put the point differently, on my view of levels, it makes no sense
to ask if my heart is at a different level of mechanisms than my car’s
water pump because there is no mechanism containing the two (except
in bizarre science-ﬁction cases, in which case talk of levels might be
appropriate). Similarly, it makes no sense to ask if ocular dominance
columns are at a different level than kidneys because the two are not
parts of the same mechanism. Likewise, the question of whether a given
molecule and a given cell are at different mechanistic levels can be asked
only in the presumed context of a given mechanism and a presumed
decomposition of that mechanism. Similarities of size and functional role
are not deﬁnitive of levels. My central point is that levels of mechanisms
are deﬁned componentially within a hierarchically organized mechanism,
not by objective kinds identiﬁable independently of their organization in
a mechanism.
The idea of monolithic levels of nature that I reject can be generated by
abstracting from interlevel relations among particulars to interlevel relations
among types. Compare the following three sentences:
(a) This pyramidal cell is at a lower level of mechanisms than this
hippocampus.
(b) Pyramidal cells are at a lower level of mechanisms than hippocampi.
(c) Cells are at a lower level of mechanisms than organs.
Statement (a) has a clear mechanistic reading: a particular pyramidal cell is a
component of a particular hippocampal mechanism. This statement is true
if the cell is a component in a mechanism for a given task carried out by the
hippocampus. For example, a given pyramidal cell can be a component in
some hippocampal mechanisms but not others, and thereby be at a lower
level in some hippocampal mechanisms but not others.
When Wimsatt speaks of the compositional relationship between levels,
he asserts something like (b). He writes, ‘‘Intuitively, one thing is at a


=== PAGE 213 ===

192 a ﬁeld-guide to levels
higher level than something else if things of the ﬁrst type are composed
of things of the second type’’ ( 1976a: 215). However (b) is ambiguous. It
might mean:
(b1) The pyramidal cells that compose hippocampi are at lower levels
than hippocampi.
Or it might mean:
(b2) All pyramidal cells are at a lower level than all hippocampi.
Clearly (b1) is a generalization of (a), in which the compositional relation-
ship is straightforward. This reading is unproblematic and is consistent with
the view of levels of mechanisms that I recommend. However (b 2)h a s
exceptions. Pyramidal cells are found in many regions of the brain, and the
pyramidal cells that are not part of a hippocampal mechanism are not at
a lower level of mechanisms than hippocampi. As with my heart and the
water pump, it makes no sense to ask if pyramidal cells are at a lower level
than hippocampi generally. Some pyramidal cells are at a lower mechanistic
level than hippocampi, and some are not.
Precisely the same ambiguity attends (c), the monolithic view of levels
that Oppenheim and Putnam ( 1958) propose. It may be taken as asserting
that cells are at lower levels than the organs that they speciﬁcally compose,
or it might mean that all cells are at lower levels than all organs. The ﬁrst
option follows for levels of mechanisms; the second does not. Given that
not all cells are components of organs, not all cells are at lower levels of
mechanisms than organs.
One consequence of my mechanistic view of levels is that there can
be no unique answer to the question of when two items are at the same
level. I can provide only a partial answer: X and S are at the same level of
mechanisms only if X and S are components in the same mechanism, X’s
φ-ing is not a component in S’s ψ-ing, and S’s ψ-ing is not a component
in X’s φ-ing.¹¹ To say that S’s ψ-ing is at a higher level than X’s φ-ing,
is to say something of local signiﬁcance in contrast to the monolithic
¹¹ This has struck some readers as circular because it appears to state that X and S are at the same level
if they are not at different levels. Appearances to the contrary, this is not circular. I have deﬁned ‘‘same
level’’ in terms of the notion of ‘‘different level,’’ and the latter is deﬁned in terms of componency
relations. The appearance of circularity, I believe, results from the fact that most people assume that
the notion of ‘‘same level’’ must be primitive in comparison with the notion of ‘‘different level,’’ and I
have reversed that assumed order.


=== PAGE 214 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 193
relationships expressed by (b) and (c). This point is visually illustrated by
comparing Figures 5.7 and 5.8.F i g u r e5.7 depicts three mechanistic levels:
a level for S’s ψ-ing (the ‘‘topping-off’’ point for this model), a level for
the φ-ings of Xs, and a level for ρ-ings of Ps (the ‘‘bottom-out’’ point
for this model). Notice that this hierarchy, like the hierarchy that I sketch for
the mechanisms of spatial memory, traces a single local strand: from the
mechanism as a whole, to one of its components, and on to one of its
components in turn. In contrast, in Figure 5.8, S’s ψ-ing is decomposed
into two sequential activities ( φ1a n d φ2) of two entities (X 1 and X 2).
Beneath each are the mechanisms for those behaviors. These mechanisms
are composed of the ρ-ing of Ps and the τ-ing (tau-ings) of Ts (English
pronunciation). My claim that mechanistic levels are local entails that the
τ-ing of Ts is not at a lower level than the φ1-ing of X 1s. Mechanistic
levels are levels of containment, and objects that are not related to one
another as component to mechanism are not assigned to different levels.
This local view of levels provides a more solid foundation for understand-
ing the unity of neuroscience than Oppenheim and Putnam’s monolithic
view of levels. Facts about cells-in-general are not explained in terms of facts
about molecules-in-general. Rather, certain facts about cells are explicable
in terms of some molecular items and not others. Different physiological
systems have different levels of explanation and different kinds of com-
ponents. Different ﬁelds of neuroscience are uniﬁed as their experimental
tools, vocabularies, and conceptual structures are brought to bear upon
similar problems framed by a top-most explanandum phenomenon .W h a t
each ﬁeld contributes, and the relative importance of every contribution,
however, varies from explanatory context to explanatory context. Some
components appear in many different mechanistic hierarchies. Schaffner
(1993a) introduces yet another sense of levels, levels of generality ,t oc h a r -
acterize this fact. Mechanisms of protein synthesis, for example, appear in
several different neuroscientiﬁc explanations. The mechanism for the action
potential also has wide application. Still, the wide scope of a privileged few
components should not lead one to reintroduce the construct of mono-
lithic levels of nature. Other parts and levels appear in only a few systems.
Columnar organization, for example, appears in a few sensory systems such
as the visual system and the barrel cortex, but it is not a general feature of
all sensory systems, let alone all cortical systems. I develop an alternative
vision of the unity of science in Chapter 7.


=== PAGE 215 ===

Sψ -ing
XX1φ1-ing-ing
X3φ3-ing
X2φ2-ing
X4φ4-ing-ing
P1ρ1-ing
P3ρ3-ing
P2ρ2-ing
P4ρ4-ing T1τ1-ing T2τ2-ing T3τ3-ing
Figure 5.8. Levels are deﬁned locally within decomposition hierarchies


=== PAGE 216 ===

a ﬁeld-guide to levels 195
The mechanistic view of levels helps to resolve some confusion about
the nature of interlevel causation. First, one ought not to say that things
at different levels causally interact with one another. If levels are levels
of mechanisms, then there are very serious difﬁculties with the notion of
interlevel causation. The lower-level components and their organization
compose the higher level, meaning that ‘‘interlevel causation’’ is an inter-
action between the behavior of a mechanism as a whole and the parts of
the mechanism. This idea is strained. On the other hand, in the case of levels
of mechanisms, there is no difﬁculty concerning how things of one size
scale can interact with things of another size scale. For example, elephants
carry viruses and squash ﬂeas. Any prejudice against these forms of causa-
tion, or prejudice in favor of rewriting them as interactions between items
at similar size scales, reﬂects the inﬂuence of continued adherence to a
monolithic view of levels (preserved as a vestige in Wimsatt’s work). In
the mechanistic view, what places two items at the same mechanistic level
is that they are in the same mechanism, and neither is a component of the
other. Two items at very different size scales can satisfy this relationship.
4. Conclusion
Talk of levels is multiply ambiguous. The levels metaphor is very ﬂexible,
and it is often used without specifying the sense of level under discussion. To
prevent equivocation, I have developed a set of taxonomic principles for
distinguishing different senses of levels and a taxonomy or ﬁeld-guide
for distinguishing different readings of the levels metaphor. This taxonomy
also helps clarify a central interpretation of the levels metaphor: levels of
mechanisms. The mechanistic interpretation is central because it ﬁts core
cases of neuroscientiﬁc explanation, such as LM levels. It also extends the
view of mechanistic explanation I develop in the previous four chapters by
showing what it means for mechanistic explanations to be multilevel. In
Chapter 6, I defend the view that higher mechanistic levels are explanatorily
relevant. I also show that realized phenomena (that is, phenomena at higher
levels of realization) are often causally, and so explanatorily, relevant for
many of the explanantia of interest to neuroscientists.


=== PAGE 217 ===

6
Nonfundamental Explanation
Summary
I argue against a possible metaphysical objection to the idea that explana-
tions in neuroscience describe mechanisms at multiple levels. The causal
exclusion argument provides reason to believe that higher-‘‘level’’ phe-
nomena have no causal powers over and above those of lowest-‘‘level,’’
or physical, phenomena. I show that this argument, whatever its merits,
poses no threat to my view of explanation. First, the argument is targeted
at levels of realization, not levels of mechanisms. It thus does not support
the claim that higher levels of mechanisms have no causal powers over and
above their lower-level components. Second, experimental considerations
show that higher levels of realization are sometimes causally relevant in the
sense that they make a difference even if, as Kim’s arguments are sometimes
taken to suggest, they do not make that difference through the exercise
of causal powers or causal efﬁcacy. Whether there are causal powers, and
whether there are novel causal powers at higher levels of realization, are
additional metaphysical questions on which the present account is ofﬁcially
neutral. These questions need not be answered to assess whether adequate
neuroscientiﬁc explanations must span multiple levels.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
The fact that explanations in neuroscience span multiple levels of mecha-
nisms raises classic metaphysical questions about whether nonfundamental
(or higher-‘‘level’’) properties have real causal powers over and above the
powers of fundamental properties (see Heil and Mele 1993; Heil 2003;


=== PAGE 218 ===

nonfundamental explanation 197
Kim 1998). One popular argument for metaphysical physicalism is Jaegwon
Kim’s causal exclusion argument ( 1998). Given that every physical event
has a complete physical cause (the doctrine of the causal completeness
of the physical), there appears to be no work for nonfundamental causes
to do. Suppose that an instance of a physical property P is a complete
(that is, sufﬁcient) cause of an instance of another physical property, P ∗.
Suppose also that P is a lower-‘‘level’’ supervenience base for an instance
of a higher-‘‘level’’ property,¹ M, that is, suppose that there can be no
difference in M without a difference in P. Kim develops the argument as
a challenge to speciﬁcally mental causation (hence the letter M), but the
problem applies to any M that is higher-level in Kim’s sense, regardless of
whether it is mental or not. In any case, the question arises as to what work
is left for M to do. P alone is sufﬁcient for P ∗. M either makes no con-
tribution to the occurrence of P∗ over and above the contribution already
made by P (P being sufﬁcient for P ∗), in which case it exercises no causal
powers over and above those exercised by P, or M’s causal contribution is
entirely redundant with the contribution made by P, in which case P∗ has
two complete causes (in fact, as many causes as there are ‘‘levels’’). If one
ﬁnds the idea of widespread overdetermination metaphysically unpalatable,
then one seems forced to acknowledge that M does nothing beyond what
P is doing—that M has no causal powers over and above the powers of
fundamental properties. Either the property M is identical to the property
P, or M is a dispensable ontological extravagance.
The causal exclusion argument poses no threat to the idea that explana-
tions in neuroscience describe mechanisms that span multiple levels. There
are two independent reasons, discussed in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.
First, Kim’s argument, which is commonly understood as an argument
against higher-‘‘level’’ causal powers, is directed against levels of realization
(which are related by the role/occupant relation) rather than against levels of
mechanisms (which are related by a componency relation). Kim explicitly
¹ Here and throughout I follow Kim’s formulation of the argument in terms of relations between
higher- and lower-level properties. Some, such as Heil ( 2003), object to the very idea of higher-level
properties. I do not mean to beg any questions against him. The argument, and my commentary upon
it, could be formulated in terms that would be congenial to that way of thinking. When I speak of
higher-level properties, such a person can replace talk of properties with talk of clusters of property
instances (or tropes) related by family resemblance, falling within the extension of a given predicate, or
correctly characterized in terms of a given variable. Such locution would only obscure the relatively
simple points that I want to reinforce in this chapter.


=== PAGE 219 ===

198 nonfundamental explanation
accepts that wholes have causal powers that their parts individually do not
have (that is, they can do things that their parts individually cannot do),
and so he accepts that one can generate novel causal powers by organizing
components into mechanisms. His argument simply does not apply to the
central explanatory sense of levels in neuroscience. This simple point, to
which all parties should agree, is sufﬁcient to establish the importance of
explanations at multiple levels of mechanisms in neuroscience.
Second, Kim’s argument is designed to show that properties at higher
levels of realization have no causal powers over and above those of
their realizers. A multilevel mechanist need only hold that higher-level
phenomena are causally relevant, not that they exercise novel causal
powers. Belief in ‘‘causal powers,’’ not only at higher levels but also at
fundamental levels, is an additional metaphysical commitment beyond the
manipulationist account of causal relevance advanced in Chapter 3 and
extended in Sections 2 and 3 below. In this chapter, I argue that there are
true generalizations describing relations of causal relevance among realized
properties (that is, properties at a higher level of realization) that are not true
of the causal relevance relations among their realizers. One might argue that
these relations of causal relevance provide good reason to believe that there
are novel causal powers among realized properties, or one might insist that
these relationships can best be explained by the organized manifestation
of fundamental properties and causal powers. Whatever metaphysics one
chooses to endorse, however, the relations of causal relevance are robust
enough to satisfy constraints (E1)–(E 5), and they are useful for the purposes
of manipulation and control. I begin in Sections2 and 3 by emphasizing and
elaborating certain aspects of the manipulationist view of causal relevance
introduced in Chapter 3. I then return to Kim’s causal exclusion argument.
2. Causal Relevance and Making a Difference
The basic idea behind the manipulationist view I defend in Chapter 3 is
that a variable X is causally relevant to a variable Y if and only if there is
some ideal intervention on X that changes the value of Y or the probability
distribution over values of Y. Kim’s talk of properties can be translated into
talk of variables. In the simplest case, a variable can have two values, one for
the presence of the property and one for its absence. In more complicated


=== PAGE 220 ===

nonfundamental explanation 199
cases, the variable can have multiple values or a continuum of values, as
when the temperature of an object can take on any value above absolute
zero, or when a variable for color can take on values red, green, blue, and
yellow.
An ideal intervention (I) on X with respect to Y is an intervention on
X that changes the value of Y, if at all, only via a change in X. Controlled
experiments are designed to rule out the possibility that the change in
Y is due to the effect of variables other than I, or to the direct effect
of I, or to the effect of I on some causal intermediate between X and
Y, or to the fact that I is correlated with some cause of Y (expressed
in (I 1)–(I 4) in Chapter 3). For example, to say that intracellular Ca 2+
concentrations are relevant to neurotransmitter release implies that there
are conditions under which interventions that change intracellular Ca 2+
concentrations change the release of neurotransmitters (or the probability
of neurotransmitter release) and that this change comes about via the
intervention on Ca 2+, not via some other route. One can induce a
cell to release neurotransmitters by injecting Ca 2+, and one can regulate
the amount of neurotransmitters released by intervening to change Ca 2+
concentrations, and one can rule out other possible explanations for these
experimental ﬁndings by conducting controlled experiments. Causes make
a difference to their effects, and this view of causal relevance focuses
attention on those difference-making factors. Because this view of causal
relevance satisﬁes constraints (E 1)–(E 5), this manipulationist view serves as
the foundation of an account of explanatory relevance as well.
The manipulationist view should not be confused with the idea that
causal and explanatory relevance involve subsumption under strict laws.
Relationships of manipulability, it is true, can be expressed in generalizations
of the form: in conditions W, if one intervenes to change X from x
1 to
x2 in accordance with (I 1)–(I 4), then Y will take on the value f(x 2) or
the probability distribution over values of Y will change as a function of
x2. However, such generalizations lack many of the features traditionally
associated with strict laws. First, there is no requirement that the relationship
between X and Y must be universal, that it must hold for all times and
places, or that it must make no reference to particulars. Such generalizations
might be true only for a limited range of values of X or only in a given
species. For the relationships described by such a generalization to be
explanatory, it is required only that the relationship must hold in the


=== PAGE 221 ===

200 nonfundamental explanation
conditions relevant to the person requesting the explanation. Ca 2+ makes
a difference to neurotransmitter release under the conditions found in, for
example, normally functioning cells of a certain type in organisms of a
certain type. (Kim’s argument, recall, is premised on the idea that P is
causally sufﬁcient for P∗. The manipulationist view does not require that all
relevant properties are sufﬁcient for their effects.) Second, the requirement
is explicitly stochastic. Interventions on X might make a difference either
to the actual value of Y or to the probability distribution over values
of Y. A given intervention with Ca
2+ might produce no difference in
the actual release of neurotransmitters but might nonetheless have raised
the probability that neurotransmitters would be released on that occasion.
Third, such generalizations are often mechanistically fragile. That is, their
stability often depends upon the appropriate behavior of an underlying
mechanism. If the mechanism were to break, or if one were to interfere
with other components of the mechanism, the relationship would no longer
hold. Finally, it does not follow from the fact that X is nomologically
sufﬁcient for Y that X is relevant to Y. X could be a mere correlate, or an
effect of a common cause, or it could include irrelevant details (such as the
blessing of the neurons or Jones’s taking birth control pills).
To explain a phenomenon, it is neither required, nor is it enough, to
show that there is a strict law of nature (one that is universal, deterministic,
and insusceptible to failure) between the variable and the explanandum phe-
nomenon. Such subsumption under laws would be necessary if explanations
were arguments, as defenders of the epistemic accounts hold. In contrast,
I advocate an ontic view of explanation according to which one explains
a phenomenon by showing how it is situated in the causal structure of
the world. Relationships of causal relevance (that is, manipulability) partly
constitute that causal structure. One explains neurotransmitter release in
part by describing the variables that can be used to make a difference
to neurotransmitter release. Such explanations are useful precisely because
they identify loci in a mechanism that can be commandeered for the
purposes of control. Some philosophers deny that there are explanations in
biology because biology lacks strict laws (for example, Rosenberg 1985),
but the ability of the manipulationist account to satisfy (E 1)–(E 5) allows
one to see that strict laws are not required for explanation.
The manipulationist view of causal relevance also contrasts with Salmon
(1984, 1998) and Dowe’s (1992, 2000) transmission view and from any view


=== PAGE 222 ===

nonfundamental explanation 201
that construes causal relevance as a kind of physical connection: a cement,
glue, spring, or string. According to such views, causal relevance is most
perspicuously exempliﬁed on a pool table, where solid objects move about
when and only when they receive momentum from some other moving
object. While many relationships of causal relevance are also relationships
of connection in this sense, the focus on the connection misses the core idea
of causal relevance: the idea that causes make a difference to their effects.
Not all connections make a difference. The cue is connected to the cue ball
by both an exchange of momentum and an exchange of matter (the blue
chalk mark), but only the momentum sets the cue ball moving. Not all
cases of difference-making involve connections. Omissions and preventions
make differences through disconnections. Accounts of causation in terms
of contact, or otherwise in terms of the exercise of ‘‘activities’’ and ‘‘causal
powers,’’ have yet to explain the sense in which activities, causal powers,
and contact make a difference to their effects. Here, the manipulationist
view clearly provides some insight.
Cases of omission and prevention help to underscore a difference
between talk of causal relevance and talk of causal powers (as they seem to
be understood in the literature surrounding the causal exclusion argument).
Arguably absences are not things. They do not have properties. They
do not exercise causal powers. Nonetheless, absences can make a differ-
ence. Imagine a simple network in which an excitatory and an inhibitory
neuron both synapse onto a third neuron. Imagine further that both pre-
synaptic cells are tonically active such that their competing efforts keep
the membrane voltage of the post-synaptic cell below the threshold for
generating an action potential. If one were to intervene in this system to pre-
vent the inhibitory neuron from ﬁring, the post-synaptic cell would ﬁre. It is
stretching a point to say that the inactivity of the inhibitory neuron has the
power to cause the post-synaptic cell to ﬁre. Nonetheless the fact that
the inhibitory neuron did not ﬁre is no doubt causally relevant to the fact
that the post-synaptic cell does ﬁre. One can make the post-synaptic cell ﬁre
by inhibiting the inhibitory interneuron or by blocking the post-synaptic
effects of its activity. In this sense, the absence of activity or of an effective
synaptic junction makes a difference to the post-synaptic cell’s state.
I am interested in causal relevance—the idea that some properties make
a difference to others—irrespective of whether the properties make their
difference through the exercise of causal powers or causal efﬁcacy, whatever


=== PAGE 223 ===

202 nonfundamental explanation
these other causal notions amount to. The manipulationist approach as
developed thus far provides an adequate account of what it is for one
variable to be causally relevant to—that is, to make a difference to—the
value of some other variable.
3. Contrasts and Switch-points
According to the manipulationist account, a variable X is relevant to a
variable Y only if there is some ideal intervention on X that changes the
value of Y only via the change in X. To say this is not, however, to
require that all changes to X change the value of Y. For example, while the
electrical state of a neuron is relevant to whether or not a neuron produces
action potentials, not all changes in the membrane voltage of the neuron
produce action potentials. One could, for example, hyperpolarize the cell.
One could also intervene to raise the neuron’s membrane voltage while
keeping it well below the threshold for an action potential. The difference
between the interventions that change the value of the effect variable and
those that do not are explicit in the contrastive statement of the causal
relation. In conditions W, interventions that change the value of X from
x
1 to x2 cause Y to change from y1 to f(x2).
This contrastive statement enforces a more exacting speciﬁcation of
those properties that are relevant to the occurrence of (or to the probability
of the occurrence of) the effect. A number of philosophers argue for the
importance of contrast to causal and explanatory relevance (see Achinstein
1975; Dretske 1977; Woodward 1984; Hitchcock 1996; and van Fraassen
1980). The primary reason is that to assess whether a causal claim is true
or false, it is often necessary to make explicit the implied contrasts in both
the description of the cause and in the description of the effect. To use
Dretske’s example, consider whether Socrates’ sipping the pint of hemlock
caused his death. As stated, the question is ambiguous. This question might
be asking whether Socrates’ sipping the hemlock, as opposed to his guzzling
or otherwise ingesting it, caused his death. In that case, Socrates’ decision
to sip rather than guzzle made no difference to the fact that he died. That
decision perhaps made a difference to the rate at which he died (that is, to
his dying at time t rather than at some time t
1 > t), but that is a different
causal claim. Alternatively, the question might be asking whether Socrates’


=== PAGE 224 ===

nonfundamental explanation 203
consuming hemlock, rather than wine or water, caused him to die. In that
case, there is no doubt that Socrates’ hemlock consumption is relevant.
But suppose that Socrates had been given a choice of hemlock, arsenic, or
cyanide. In that case, the choice of hemlock rather than arsenic or cyanide
made no difference to whether he lived or died.
The contrastive formulation also spotlights ambiguities in quantitative
causal claims. Hitchcock (1996) considers the question of whether smoking
a pack of cigarettes per day causes lung cancer. The answer depends upon
the implied contrast. If John smokes two and a half packs per day and
then cuts back to one, there is little doubt that John has reduced his
probability of acquiring lung cancer. One should say that John has taken
steps, however feeble, to prevent his future lung cancer. On the other
hand, if John increases his cigarette consumption from no packs per day
to one, he has increased his probability of acquiring lung cancer, and one
should say that John has put himself at risk for lung cancer. The occurrent
circumstance—John’s smoking a pack per day—is the same in each case,
but different contrasts from that occurrent circumstance entail different
truth-values for the causal claim.
The experiments used to test causal claims are contrastive. Such exper-
iments involve comparing the value of a variable under experimental
conditions with the value of that variable under control conditions. Exper-
iments are well-designed to the extent that the experimental group and the
control group differ only with respect to the value of the putative causal
variable. One concludes from such experiments that the difference (if any)
in the effect variable between the two groups is due to the difference in
the putative causal variable. Different experiments would have to be done
to test the contrasting causal claims in the two preceding paragraphs. In the
smoking case, one experiment would be required to compare the incidence
of cancer among one-pack smokers with the incidence among nonsmokers,
and another would be required to compare the incidence of cancer among
one-pack smokers with the incidence among two-pack smokers. In the
case of Socrates, one experiment would be required to compare hemlock
sippers to hemlock guzzlers, and another to compare hemlock drinkers to
drinkers of water and wine.
Some object that this contrastive formulation of the causal relevance
relation introduces pragmatic considerations that are not properly thought
of as objective features of the causal structure of the world. The causal


=== PAGE 225 ===

204 nonfundamental explanation
structure of the world, one might say, just is as it is; it is not a fact
about the world that it is one way rather than another. But this is a
misleading way of putting things. First, any time that one searches for
a cause or attempts to formulate an explanation, one must specify the
effect or the explanandum that one is trying to explain. Having done so,
one then looks for the objective relations of causal relevance that explain
the effect. The contrastive description of the explanandum effect is helpful
merely to specify as precisely as possible what one is trying to explain—to
identify precisely that feature of the world for which a cause is sought.
Once the explanandum phenomenon has been speciﬁed (something that must
be done in any search for an explanation or any search for a cause),
it is then an objective matter whether or not it is possible to make a
difference to that effect by manipulating certain antecedent variables and
which manipulations of that variable in fact make a difference. My account
is thus no more pragmatic than any view of causation or explanation
would have to be. Second, changes embody contrasts. It is a perfectly
objective fact about the world that things change and that some changes
are correlated with others. Further, it is a perfectly objective fact, one that
can be assessed experimentally, if such changes continue to be so related
when one intervenes on one of the correlates and when one controls for
other possible causes (in accordance with (I1)–(I 4)). Pragmatic factors enter
into this view of causal relevance only in the sense that relevance is always
applicable to something that we want to explain. The rest can be settled
experimentally.
In picking out the causally relevant changes, one is searching for a
cause-contrast that is appropriate for a given effect-contrast.² This notion of
appropriateness can be explicated within the manipulationist framework of
causation. Consider three examples that show how the practice of designing
controlled experiments helps to identify the appropriate cause-contrast for
an effect-contrast.
I discuss the ﬁrst example brieﬂy in Chapter 2. An action potential
reaches the nerve terminal. There is a sudden rise in Na
+ concentration in
the terminal. This is followed by the opening of Ca2+ channels, the inﬂux
of Ca2+, and then the sequence of activities that ends with the release of
² The following account is similar to Yablo’s ( 1992) account of the ‘‘proportionality’’ of a cause
to its effect, but I use a notion of causation that is different from his, and I make no appeal to the
‘‘naturalness’’ of a property.


=== PAGE 226 ===

nonfundamental explanation 205
neurotransmitters. If one uses tetrodotoxin (TTX) to block Na+ channels,
the cell will not release neurotransmitters. This ﬁnding is consistent with
several possible causal relevance relations. Only experiments can sort them
out. It could be, for example, that there is something speciﬁc about Na +.
Perhaps it activates or modulates some intracellular signaling cascade. It
could be that the conformation changes in the Na + channels themselves
increase Ca 2+ conductance, irrespective of whether they allow Na + to
ﬂow into the cell. Finally, it could be that the inﬂux of Na + raises
the membrane voltage, thus opening voltage-sensitive Ca 2+ channels.
To decide among these possibilities, one must do some experiments.
One could, for example, raise the intracellular concentration of Na +
without changing the membrane voltage (perhaps using a voltage clamp)
or opening Na + channels (perhaps by injecting Na +). And one could
change the membrane voltage without either opening channels (perhaps
using TTX) or changing the Na+ concentration. The goal is to set up
an experimental contrast between a case in which the putative cause is
wiggled (the experimental group) and an otherwise identical case in which
it is not (the control group). Such experiments (see Katz and Miledi 1967)
show that neither the opening of Na+ channels nor the rise in intracellular
Na+ concentration per se are relevant to the release of neurotransmitters.
It is the rise in membrane voltage (rather than the failure of the membrane
voltage to rise) that is causally relevant to opening the Ca 2+ channels and
to the subsequent release of neurotransmitters. In this case, the change
in membrane voltage screens off the other causes. The changes in Na+
concentration make no difference when voltage is held constant, as is
demonstrated by the appropriate experimental test.
The second example is analogous, but it is not a case of one variable
screening off another. Rather the example involves deciding which par-
titions among the values of a single variable frame the relevant contrast
for a given explanandum effect. The logic of the experimental situation,
however, is the same. Suppose that the temperature of a room at sea
level drops to −18.6
◦C and that a bucket of water in the center of the
room freezes. One can then ask, ‘‘What caused the bucket of water to
freeze?’’ Two possible answers are: ( 1) the temperature’s being −18.6◦C;
and (2) the temperature’s being below 0 ◦C. How is one to decide which
of these properties is the causally relevant property to the water’s being
frozen?


=== PAGE 227 ===

206 nonfundamental explanation
The way to decide between these competing hypotheses is to do some
experiments. The obvious experiment would be to intervene to change
the ambient temperature and to determine which changes in temperature
change the state of the water. For example, if the water freezes when the
temperature is set at −18.6◦C but thaws if the temperature is −18.8◦Co r
−18.4◦C, then one would have evidence that the room’s being −18.6◦C
is causally relevant to the freezing of the water. Of course, this is not what
one would ﬁnd. One could change the temperature from −18.6◦Ct oa n y
of a number of values (for example, −13◦C, −4◦C, −22◦C, −29◦C, and
so on) without thawing the water. The only interventions that change the
state of the water in the bucket raise the temperature of the room above
0◦C. Clean experiments of this sort identify the relevant contrasts. An
experiment that yields no difference in the effect between the experimental
group and the control offers only a negative result: the difference is not
causally relevant to the effect. This is the kind of result one would get if
one were to intervene to change the ambient temperature from −18.6
◦C
to −19.2◦C. Such an experiment would fail to identify a causally (and so
explanatorily) relevant difference.
Suppose, on the other hand, that one seeks the cause for the speciﬁc
time interval, t, over which the water froze. One can ask: what caused
the bucket of water to freeze in precisely t minutes (rather than faster
or slower)? Again, one can do experiments by intervening to change the
temperature from −18.6◦C to neighboring values and measuring the time
that it takes for the bucket to freeze. Changing the temperature from
−18.6◦Ct o −16.4◦Co r −23.2◦C does make a difference to the rate at
which the water freezes. Being below 0 ◦C, however, is relevant only to
the fact that the water freezes, not to its rate of freezing. The values of the
variable are too coarse to identify the relevant differences. More precisely,
the temperature’s being −18.6
◦C, rather than any other value, made the
difference between the water’s freezing in precisely t minutes rather than
faster or slower. In such an experiment, there would be a difference
between the experimental group and the control group, and assuming that
all other factors are the same (for example, same altitude and air pressure)
and that the experiment is properly conducted, one identiﬁes the precise
temperature relevant to the differences in rates of freezing
The third example is due to Stephen Yablo ( 1992). A pigeon pecks a
slip of scarlet paper. Why? Here are three competing causal hypotheses:


=== PAGE 228 ===

nonfundamental explanation 207
(1) the paper is scarlet; (2) the paper is red; (3) the paper is colored. Again,
there is no way to decide among these causal hypotheses without doing
experiments. To decide among these hypotheses, one should experiment
by varying the color of the paper to determine whether or not the pigeon
pecks. To distinguish ( 1)f r o m (2), one should observe how the pigeon
responds to a variety of colors in the red spectrum. One could expose
the pigeon to brick, crimson, fuchsia, magenta, rose, pink, and so on. If the
pigeon uniquely pecks the scarlet pieces of paper and none of the others,
then one has evidence that the paper’s being scarlet (rather than some other
shade) is the causally relevant feature for pecking. However, if the pigeon
pecks at all shades of red equally, one would have reason to favor (2).
As long as one does experiments in which the color is varied only
within the red spectrum, however, one would not acquire any evidence for
deciding between hypotheses (2)a n d(3). For that, one would have to test
the pigeon on a full range of colors. If the pigeon pecks at all colors, failing
to peck only white and clear pieces of paper, for example, one would
conclude that the pigeon is selectively responding only to colored pieces
of paper. With different experimental outcomes, one is led to suppose that
different contrasts correctly identify the causally relevant variable. Suppose,
however, that one were interested in some more ﬁne-grained variable, such
as patterns of activity in the dorsal-anterior region of the pigeon’s nucleus
rotundus (the area of the pigeon brain thought to be crucially involved
in color discrimination). It might turn out that the pigeon’s behavioral
patterns vary with changes from red to another color, while the patterns of
activation across cells in the pigeon’s nucleus rotundus vary with speciﬁc
shades of red.
The lesson of this example is replicated time and again in the extensive
literature on pigeon object recognition (for reviews, see Huber 2001;
Kirkpatrick 2001). In that literature, the question arises whether pigeons
recognize objects via ‘‘particulate perception,’’ that is, by recognizing
local features of the stimulus object in isolation (see Cerella 1986), or
whether pigeons recognize objects by detecting more holistic properties
of the object. If pigeons are particulate perceivers, they are insensitive to
global features of objects and respond regardless of how those features
are arranged. If, on the other hand, pigeons are holistic perceivers, then
they should respond not merely to local features but to the overall spatial
arrangements among them. The pigeon should be able to distinguish a


=== PAGE 229 ===

208 nonfundamental explanation
cup from a pail, for example, despite the fact that each is composed of
a cylinder and an arc. Furthermore, if pigeons are particulate perceivers,
their performance should degrade if the object is rotated, changing the
apparent shapes of the object’s component parts. If, however, pigeons
were responsive to holistic properties, then one would expect their object-
recognition abilities to remain more or less constant as the object is rotated.
Kirkpatrick (2001) offers experimental evidence supporting the predictions
of the holistic approach. What matters for present purposes, however, is
not whether pigeons are particulate perceivers or holistic perceivers, but
rather the simple fact that this is a legitimate experimental question of the
sort that arises regularly in perceptual research and that should be settled
by doing the right controlled experiments. Pigeons can discriminate cars,
cartoon characters, faces, geographic scenes, leaves, letters, trees, paintings
by Monet and Picasso, and different excerpts of classical music. They can
learn to respond differentially depending on whether two items in a pair are
the same, different, or similar. In each case, it is an experimental question
which features make a difference to the pigeon’s response.
These examples each illustrate that different effect contrasts (that is, the
contrast between Y’s having the values y
1 and y 2) lead one to identify
different relevant causal contrasts (that is, the contrast between X’s having
the values x 1 and x2). Each of these examples also illustrates the kinds of
experiment that neuroscientists routinely do to make judgments of causal
relevance. In the case of temperature, one might seek an explanation for
the fact that:
(e1) the water froze rather than remaining liquid or turning to steam,
or for the fact that:
(e1′) the water froze at some particular rate t rather than at some other
rate.
These effect contrasts require different cause-contrasts. The appropriate
cause contrast for (e1)i s :
(c1) the ambient temperature was below 0◦C rather than above 0◦C,
rather than the fact that:
(c1′) the ambient temperature was −18.6◦C rather than some other
value.


=== PAGE 230 ===

nonfundamental explanation 209
In contrast, (c1′) is the appropriate contrast for (e 1′). Likewise, in the case
of the pigeon, one might seek an explanation for the fact that:
(e2) the pigeon pecked, rather than ignored, the piece of paper,
or for the fact that:
(e2′) the pigeon’s nucleus rotundus went into state S rather than some
other state.
The appropriate cause contrast for (e2′)i st h a t :
(c2) the paper was red rather than, for example, some other primary
color,
while the appropriate cause for (e2) is that:
(c2′) the paper was some speciﬁc shade of red rather than some other
shade of red.
In each of these cases, one correctly identiﬁes the causally relevant value
of the applicable variable to the extent that one formulates a cause-contrast
that is appropriate to the given effect-contrast.
This notion of appropriateness can be explicated within the manipu-
lationist framework. For purposes of illustration, imagine that one starts
with a variable (for example, temperature) and then searches for partitions
among the ﬁnest grained values of that variable that make a difference
to the value of the effect variable. ³ To decide on the appropriate cause-
contrast, one searches for a switch-point in the possible values of the cause
variable that corresponds to the contrast between the different values of
the effect variable. ⁴ In the simplest cases, there is only one switch-point.
It is the rise of membrane voltage beyond a certain threshold (rather than
to any subthreshold value) that causes the neuron to generate an action
potential. In the case of frozen water, there is a single switch-point in
the temperature variable at 0 ◦C. No intervention that changes the tem-
perature from a value below this switch-point to another value below
this switch-point makes a difference to whether or not the water remains
³ I use a deterministic case for purposes of illustrati on. One can extend this to probabilistic cases,
a sId oi nC h a p t e r3, by using the effect-contrast to compare dif ferent probability distributions over
possible values rather than to compare particular values.
⁴ Compare the discussion of testing interventions in Woodward and Hitchcock (2003a).


=== PAGE 231 ===

210 nonfundamental explanation
frozen. So long as the temperature is below 0◦C, the water remains frozen.
Interventions that cross the switch-point, on the other hand, do make a
difference to the value of the effect variable. Raising the temperature from
below 0◦C to above 0 ◦C changes the water from frozen to liquid. The
appropriate cause-contrast is the one that identiﬁes the switch-points for
the effect-contrast. In searching for the appropriate contrast, one begins
with ﬁne-grained values of a variable (temperature), one identiﬁes the
switch-point(s) in the values of those variables, and then (if necessary) one
replaces the ﬁne-grained values with coarse-grained values appropriate to
the effect contrast.⁵
In the case of (e 2), there are two switch-points—one at each end of
the red spectrum. All values of the spectrum variable that lie between the
switch-points are cases in which the pigeon pecks, and all those values of
the spectrum that lie outside the switch-points correspond to the cases in
which the pigeon does not peck. Interventions to change the cause-variable
from one value between the switch-points to another value between the
switch-points make no difference in the value of the effect variable. Those
that cross switch-points, on the other hand, do make a difference in the
effect variable. For (e 2
′), however, the switch-points are different. The
pigeon’s nucleus rotundus is responsive to a particular shade of red rather
than to red in general. Intervening to change the shade from scarlet to
pink thus makes a difference in the pattern of activation across that brain
region. In this case again, one can begin by describing ﬁne-grained values
of a variable (for example, spectral reﬂectances), identify switch-points
in the values of those variables, and then replace the ﬁne-grained values
with coarse-grained values corresponding to the effect-contrast. Again the
appropriate cause-contrast is the one that identiﬁes the switch-point for the
effect-contrast.
I have perhaps said enough to clarify the manipulationist account of
causal relevance. I now return to Kim’s causal exclusion argument with
these considerations in hand. There are two independent reasons why Kim’s
argument should not prevent one from endorsing a multilevel mechanistic
view of explanation in neuroscience. The ﬁrst is that Kim’s argument
attacks levels of realization, not levels of mechanisms. The second is that
⁵ Causal inference need not proceed in this temporal sequence. One might begin with a coarse
partition of the values for a variable and then make the partition more and more ﬁne-grained in light
of experimental ﬁndings.


=== PAGE 232 ===

nonfundamental explanation 211
Kim’s argument is best understood as an attack on the idea of causal powers
at higher levels of realization rather than on the idea that phenomena at
higher levels of realization are causally relevant.
4. Causal Powers at Higher Levels of Mechanisms
In the causal exclusion argument, P usurps M’s power in producing P ∗.
Because P is sufﬁcient for P ∗, there is else nothing left for M to contribute
to P∗’s occurrence. Either M does nothing, in which case it is an ontological
extravagance, or its contribution is entirely redundant with that of P, a
possibility that many philosophers ﬁnd unsatisfying. ⁶So, it would seem, M
has no causal powers of its own.⁷
Kim points out that his causal exclusion argument does not apply to
what he calls micro/macro levels: ‘‘the [causal exclusion] argument, which
exploits the supervenience relation, does not have the effect of emptying
macro levels of causal powers and rendering familiar macro-objects and their
properties causally impotent.’’ ( 1998: 86) This is because, ‘‘the exclusion-
based worries about mental causation do not generalize across micro-macro
levels’’ ( 1998: 84) Micro-macro levels, for Kim, are levels that stand in
part–whole relations: ‘‘entities belonging to a given level, except those at
the very bottom, have an exhaustive decomposition, without remainder,
into entities belonging to the lower levels.’’ ⁸ The exclusion argument, in
contrast, applies to levels related by the supervenience relation. Sometimes
he says that properties at one level are ‘‘realized’’ by properties at lower
levels. Sometimes he says that they are different orders of properties. We
⁶ Another possibility is that M just is P. If so , the causal exclusion argument no longer applies.
M’s causal powers just are the causal powers of P. See Kim ( 1998)a n dP o l g e r(2004). In that case,
higher-level properties are shown to be causally powerful because they are identical to causally powerful
physical properties, and there is therefore very strong justiﬁcation for pursuing multilevel explanations
in neuroscience and beyond.
⁷ I am adopting here the notion of a ‘‘causal power’’ because it is part of Kim’s argument. Causal
powers are sometimes described as if they need to be a dded into the world in addi tion to the entities
if change is to be possible (as Machamer et al. 2000 describe activities). They are understood as forces
that push and pull, attract and repel, bond and break bonds, restore equilibrium, and so on. Sometimes
they are described merely as sufﬁcient causes (as Kim seems to think of them). I assume merely that
different causal powers allow the properties or objects that have them to be effected and affected by
different features of the causal environment and to affect and effect different features of the world. I
assume that if two causal powers differ in these respects, they are not the same causal powers.
⁸ Similarly, when Heil (2003) objects to ‘‘levels of reality’’ or ‘‘levels ofbeing,’’ he is not objecting
to levels of mechanisms. He is objecting to levels of realization.


=== PAGE 233 ===

212 nonfundamental explanation
can see his point in terms of the contrast between levels of mechanisms and
what I call levels of realization.
Levels of mechanisms are a species of Kim’s micro-macro levels. They
are related by a kind of part–whole relation. Higher levels are decomposed
into components at lower levels. Take some mechanism S and its behavior
ψ. At a lower level are S’s component entities (X 1, X2, ... , Xm) and their
activities (φ1,φ2, ... ,φn). Thus, one says that X1 and φ1 are at a lower level
of mechanisms than S’s ψ-ing. The relata in levels of mechanisms are a
behaving mechanism and its components. The individual components are
at a lower level than the behavior of the mechanism as a whole.
Levels of realization⁹are not related by the part–whole relation. Instead,
they are levels of properties related by the realization relation. Kim’s idea of
realization (or, in his words, higher-order causes) can be summarized in four
points: (i) Realization is a relationship between two properties, a realized
property, ψ, and a realizing property, φ# (pronounced phi-pound). In the
special case of mechanisms, ψ is the property of exhibiting the behavior of
a mechanism as a whole, andφ# is the property (or family of properties) of
having the various components (the Xs), the various activities (theφs), and
the various organizational features in the mechanism.φ#i st h u st h ep r o p e r t y
(or family of properties) of being a given components-plus-organization.
(ii) Both ψ and φ# are properties of the same object, S. S has the property
ψ, and S has the property φ#, that is, of being the organized collection of
Xs φ-ing. (On this point, Gillett ( 2002) distinguishes between ‘‘ﬂat’’ and
‘‘dimensioned’’ views of realization. The ﬂat view is what Kim has in mind.
On the dimensioned view, the properties of wholes (such as S’s ψ-ing) are
realized by the properties of their parts. The dimensioned view corresponds
to my levels of mechanisms. Here, however, I am concerned with the ﬂat
view, and it is crucial to my argument that these two distinct relations are
not confused with one another by sharing the common name ‘‘realization.’’
This is why I distinguish levels of mechanisms from levels of realization.)
⁹ I do not endorse this as a view of realization. (F or a detailed discussion of my own views, see
Wilson and Craver forthcoming). Instead, I am using it to characterize Kim’s idea of ‘‘orders’’ (see
Kim 1998: 80– 7). The idea of ‘‘realization’’ has been part of thephilosophical lexicon at least since the
1960s (Putnam 1960). It has only recently been subjected to extensi ve philosophical scrutiny (Gillett
2002; LePore and Loewer 1989;K i m1998;P o l a n d1994;P o l g e r2004; Shoemaker 2001;W i l s o n2001;
Wilson and Craver forthcoming). I doubt that any single account of realization can accommodate the
diverse ontic categories into which realizers and realized items fall, such as properties, entities, events,
and processes (see Poland 1994;C r a v e r2004). Again, I do not mean to presuppose the existence of
realized or determinable properties. Call them realized ‘‘categories’’ if that is preferred.


=== PAGE 234 ===

nonfundamental explanation 213
(iii) S has ψ in virtue of having φ#. This ‘‘in virtue of’’ relation can be
understood in many ways. Here, I describe it as a supervenience relation:
necessarily,¹⁰there can be no difference inψ properties without a difference
in φ# properties. ¹¹ Finally, (iv) it is physically possible for S to have ψ
without having φ#. That is, S has ψ in virtue of having φ#, but S does not
have φ# in virtue of having ψ. This requirement distinguishes realization
from type identity, which is symmetrical. Some use the term ‘‘realization’’
to include both type identity and weaker forms of realization (for example,
Polger 2004). However, the notion of realization was originally introduced
to articulate a weaker relation than identity. Different instances of ψ-ing
can be realized by different properties (φ#
1,φ#2 ...) on different occasions.
That is, ψ is multiply realizable.
Levels of realization are not levels of mechanisms (as I describe them
in Chapter 5). Levels of mechanisms stand in part–whole relations. The
neuron (S’s) ability to generate action potentials ( ψ)i sr e a l i z e db yt h ef a c t
that the neuron (S) has the property (φ#) of being an organized collection of
Na+ channels, K+ channels, a membrane, and so on. The ability to generate
action potentials is at a higher level of mechanisms than the Na+ channels,
K+ channels, and the membrane because the Na+ channels, K+ channels,
and membrane are components of the mechanism for generating action
potentials. However, the ability to generate action potentials is not at a
higher level of mechanisms than the property of being a particular organized
collection of acting Na
+ channels, K+ channels, and a membrane. Rather,
the parts-plus-organization realize the generation of action potentials.
Having the ability to generate action potentials and having an organized
collection of acting cellular components are properties of the same thing
(the neuron or, more speciﬁcally, the mechanism), and the neuron generates
action potentials by virtue of being an appropriately organized collection of
¹⁰ This is consistent with several metaphysical exp lanations for why the realization relation holds
between any two properties, assuming that such explanation is necessary. It might be that the two
properties are identical. It might be that the individual properties in the realizer make up the realized
property or otherwise constitute (in some thick metaphysical sense) that property. It might be that
the causal powers of the realized property are a subset of the casual powers of the realizing property.
Different understandings of this requirement might be appropriate in different cases. My argument in
Section 5 is not consistent with an interpretation of (iii) in terms of type identity because my argument
relies on the thesis of multiple realizability. I take no stand on what, if anything, makes realization
relations true. For present purposes, I care only that some of them are, in fact, true.
¹¹ This requirement, coupled with item (ii) raises problems for thinking about cases of realization in
which the mechanism’s environment play s a crucial role in the realization (Wilson 2001), but this is
not an issue that needs to be resolved for the present dispute.


=== PAGE 235 ===

214 nonfundamental explanation
parts (and not vice versa). Having the ability to generate action potentials is
thus realized by an organized collection channels and membrane structures
(φ#), and not by the parts (X 1, X2, ... , Xm) and activities (φ1,φ2, ... ,φn)
taken singularly.
The distinction between levels of mechanisms and levels of realization is
crucial because there is no difﬁculty seeing how mechanisms can do things
that their components taken individually cannot. Kim says that this point is
‘‘obvious but important’’:
This table has a mass of ten kilograms, and this property, that of having a mass of ten
kilograms, represents a well-deﬁned set of causal powers. But no micro-constituent
of this table, none of its proper parts, has this property or the causal powers it
represents. H
2O molecules have causal powers that no oxygen and hydrogen
atoms have. A neural assembly consisting of many thousands of neurons will have
properties whose causal powers go beyond the causal powers of the properties of
its constituent neurons, or subassemblies, and human beings have causal powers
that none of our individual organs have. Clearly then macroproperties can, and
in general do, have their own causal powers, powers that go beyond the causal
powers of their micro-constituents. (1998: 85)
Through aggregation or organization, wholes have causal powers that
their parts individually do not have; they can do things that their parts
individually cannot do.
Suppose, for simplicity, that the behavior of a mechanism can be char-
acterized in terms of an input–output relation. Focusing ﬁrst on the input
side to the mechanism, the organization of components in a mechanism
allows the mechanism to be affected by aspects of its environment that
cannot so impact on the parts individually. The primate visual system,
for example, is differentially responsive to motions, shapes, and objects.
Take as the input the presentation of a visual stimulus, such as a vertical
bar moving left to right, and take as the output a distributed activation
pattern in visual cortex that encodes those features of the stimulus. None
of the cells in the visual system, taken individually, can detect the shape,
orientation, or motion of the bar. That task requires the organized effort
of myriad neurons across several functionally distinct brain regions. When
the neurons are organized in the right way, they can generate patterns of
activity that correlate tightly with those features of a visual stimulus. Even
if there are ‘‘grandmother cells’’ (that is, single cells that respond if and only
if your grandmother is present), these cells gain their status as such only


=== PAGE 236 ===

nonfundamental explanation 215
because they are organized within a mechanism that allows them to play
this functional role. No neuron, removed from its context in the body,
ﬁres when and only when grandmothers are present. Individual neurons
do not have the organization required to register these complex features
of the stimulus. When neurons ﬁrst came to be organized in this way,
new kinds of causal relationships came into being that allowed organisms
a profound ﬂexibility in dealing with their environments. The organism
could make use of this information in its behavior, and so new manipulable
relationships arose between abstract features of a light stimulus (the input)
and the activities of organisms in their environments (the output). New
relations of causal relevance, such as that between features of ambient light
and an organism’s behavior, came into being.
Does this amount to a causal power for the visual system that ‘‘goes
beyond’’ the causal powers of its individual components? However one
understands causal powers, it should turn out that two causal powers differ
if they have different precipitating conditions (inputs) and manifestations
(outputs). If so, it seems clear that the set of input–output relations that
holds for the visual system is different from the set of input–output relations
that holds for any of its components. In that sense, then, this is a novel
causal power. And when such input–output relationships are useful for
biological organisms, they tend to be preserved in subsequent generations
and to become conserved across large populations of organisms.
One might object that causal powers are always speciﬁed in combination
with the various precipitating conditions required for their manifestation.
To specify the power to detect moving bars, one will have to make
reference to an environment in which one or more bars is moving. Those
are the conditions in which the ability to detect bars is manifested. If
one includes enough of the environment in one’s speciﬁcation of the
precipitating conditions for the exercise of a power, however, one can
come to see individual neurons as having the power to detect bars and
grandmothers. For if they were surrounded by millions of other neurons
organized just so, and if they were presented with a moving bar stimulus,
then they would detect the motion of the bar. Spark plugs have the power
to mow grass that is manifest when they are organized together with other
components in the lawn-mower. Note, however, that in each case the
generalizations that describe the input–output relations for the whole are
different from those that describe the input–output relations for the parts.


=== PAGE 237 ===

216 nonfundamental explanation
The precipitating conditions for the part are much more extensive than
are the precipitating conditions for the whole, given that the precipitating
conditions for the exercise of the part’s powers include all of the details
about the organization of the surrounding components and organizational
features in the mechanism.
It is now clear why the causal exclusion argument does not apply to
levels of mechanisms. If one understands P in Kim’s argument merely as an
individual component in the mechanism for M, then it is false to say that
M’s causal contribution is exhausted by the causal contribution of P. P and
M do not compete as complete (that is, sufﬁcient) causes and explanations.
P is just a part of M. In the notation of earlier chapters, the behavior ( ψ)
of the mechanism as a whole (S) does not compete with the behavior ( φ)
of its individual components (X) as a sufﬁcient cause of any downstream
effect. φ is a component activity in the mechanism forψ-ing, and the causal
relevance relations in which φ ﬁgures are not the same as those in which ψ
ﬁgures. The behavior of the component is not sufﬁcient for the occurrence
of the effect, as is assumed in Kim’s argument; the component must also
be organized together with the other components. In Kim’s argument, it is
ψ and φ# (that is the organized collection of parts-plus-organization) that
compete as causes. Consequently, the causal exclusion argument does not
prevent one from accepting that mechanisms can do things that individual
parts cannot, that mechanisms explain things that individual parts cannot,
and so that higher levels of mechanisms are legitimately included in the
explanations of contemporary neuroscience.
Lest there be some confusion, I do not advocate a spooky form of
emergence. It is important to keep several different senses of the term
‘‘emergence’’ distinct. Some philosophers and scientists use the term ‘‘emer-
gence’’ to describe properties of wholes that are not simple sums of the
properties of components. Mechanisms are nonaggregates, and so they are
emergent in this weak sense. Mechanisms require the organization of com-
ponents in cooperative and inhibitory interactions that allow mechanisms
to do things that the parts themselves cannot do. Other philosophers and
scientists use the term ‘‘emergence’’ to mean that it is not possible to
predict the behavior of a mechanism as a whole from what is known about
the organization of its components. This is sometimes called ‘‘epistemic
emergence.’’ Some mechanisms have so many parts and such reticulate
organization that our limited cognitive and computational powers prevent


=== PAGE 238 ===

nonfundamental explanation 217
us from making such predictions. Some mechanisms are so sensitive to
undetectable variations in input or background conditions that their behav-
ior is unpredictable in practice. Behaviors of mechanisms are sometimes
emergent in this epistemic sense. However, one who insists that there is
no explanation for a nonrelational property of the whole in terms of the
properties of its component parts-plus-organization advocates a spooky
form of emergence. Indeed, levels of mechanisms are levels of ontic mech-
anistic explanation. Advocates of the spooky emergence of higher-level
properties must have in mind a different sense of ‘‘level’’ altogether. Advo-
cates of spooky emergence cannot therefore appeal to levels of mechanisms
to make their view seem familiar and unmysterious. When one says that
atoms compose molecules, which are organized into cells, which are linked
into networks from which mental properties spookily emerge, the ﬁrst
three steps are upward steps in a hierarchy of levels of mechanisms, but the
last is not. The ability of organization to elicit novel causal powers (that is,
nonaggregative behaviors and properties) is unmysterious both in scientiﬁc
common sense and common sense proper (Craver 2001; Van Gulick 1993;
Wimsatt 1985, 1997). Appeal to strong or spooky emergence, on the other
hand, justiﬁably arouses suspicion.
To conclude, if one agrees that levels of mechanisms are the central
sense of level in the multilevel explanations in neuroscience, and one agrees
with Kim that his metaphysical worries about nonfundamental causation
are irrelevant to levels of mechanisms, then one should conclude that
Kim’s metaphysical worries are not relevant to the sense of levels central to
many explanations in neuroscience. The metaphysical arguments provide
no ground for believing that things at higher levels of mechanisms lack
novel causal powers. Neither do they provide ground for the weaker
claims that they are explanatorily superﬂuous or useless for the purposes
of intervention and control. The multilevel view of explanation presented
in this book is neither a target of, nor is it threatened by, Kim’s causal
exclusion argument.
5. Causal Relevance at Higher Levels of Realization
It would be hasty, however, to conclude that neuroscientists and neu-
rophilosophers can ignore the upshot of Kim’s argument. Kim’s target is


=== PAGE 239 ===

218 nonfundamental explanation
levels of realization, and levels of realization have played an important,
if controversial, role in the history of neuroscience. Although my view
of explanation is committed only to the existence of higher levels of
mechanisms, as discussed above, the manipulationist view of causal rel-
evance can be used to argue that realized phenomena are sometimes
causally and therefore explanatorily relevant. This conclusion is indepen-
dent of the implications of the causal exclusion argument, whatever they
should be.
Levels of realization have been discussed widely in relation to computa-
tional explanations in cognitive neuroscience. David Marr’s ( 1982) ‘‘levels
of analysis’’—the computational level (the level of what is computed and
why), the algorithmic level (the level of input–output transformations), and
the level of hardware implementation (the level of physical parts and their
organization)—are perhaps the best-known example of levels of realiza-
tion. Computational processes, such as addition, are realized by algorithmic
transformations, and these, in turn, are realized by an organized collection
of hardware components. These are three different properties of one and
the same system. The system as a whole is at once an adder, a manipulator
of symbols, and an organized set of electrical circuits. The algorithmic
manipulator of symbols is not a component of the computing mechanism,
and the hardware implementation is not a component of the algorithmic
manipulator. Rather, these are all properties of the same thing. The system
is an adder by virtue of its being a manipulator of symbols, and it is a
manipulator of symbols by virtue of its being, for example, an organized
set of electrical circuits. Furthermore, as Marr argues, the computational
and algorithmic levels are multiply realizable. The same computation can
be carried out with different algorithms, and the same algorithms can be
carried out by many different hardware implementations. Similar views can
be found in Lycan (1987), Putnam (1960), and Lepore and Loewer (1989).
The simple examples that open this chapter exemplify the realization rela-
tion as well. One and the same thing (the ambient temperature) has the
property of being below 0
◦C and the property of being −18.6◦C. The
temperature is below 0 ◦C in virtue of the fact that it is −18.6◦C. Being
−18.6◦C realizes being below 0◦C. Likewise, one and the same thing (the
piece of paper) has the property of being red and the property of being
scarlet. The piece of paper is red in virtue of being scarlet. Being scarlet
realizes being red.


=== PAGE 240 ===

nonfundamental explanation 219
One can confuse levels of mechanisms with levels of realization in
the special case in which the realized property is some behavior ( ψ)o f
a mechanism as a whole (S), and the realizing property is S’s being a
particular parts-plus-organization ( φ#). Kim calls properties such as φ#
‘‘micro-based’’ or ‘‘micro structural’’ properties (1998: 82). It is true that
the relationship between ψ and φ# is in some ways different from the
relationship between variables (determinables) and their values (determi-
nates) discussed in the last paragraph. φ# is a composite property of (or,
if it be preferred, a family of properties involving) S’s having its particular
parts-plus-organization. Being scarlet is not a case of being an organized set
of components by virtue of which something is red, and being −18.6◦Ci s
not a case of being a set of components organized such that the temperature
is less than 0 ◦C. However, the fact that φ# is micro-based and complex
is not germane. In each case, the realized and realizing properties are
properties of the same object—S, the ambient temperature, and the slip
of paper. In each case, the object has the realized property by virtue of
having the realizing property. The room is below 0
◦C by virtue of being
−18.6◦C, and S isψ by virtue of its beingφ#. In each case, the relationship
is asymmetrical. Just as the paper is not scarlet by virtue of being red, S
is not φ# by virtue of ψ-ing. The paper might be red by virtue of being
brick rather than scarlet, and S might be ψ by virtue of being φ#′ rather
than φ#. S’s being φ# is a realizer of S’s being ψ. In each case, the realizer
is a particular way of having the realized property.
To consider a concrete example of realization by a micro-based property,
suppose that a neuron (S) depolarizes ( ψ) to a given membrane potential.
S also has a particular arrangement of ions around its membrane ( φ#). It
is in virtue of the fact that the ions are distributed and arranged that the
neuron is depolarized. If one were to ﬁx the spatial arrangement of the ions
around the membrane and the other factors relevant to membrane potential
(φ#), one would thereby ﬁx the membrane potential ( ψ). However, there
are many different conﬁgurations of ions that would realize precisely
the same depolarization. Think, for example, of switching the positions
of like-charged ions on opposite sides of the membrane. The particular
arrangement of ions is just one way of depolarizing the cell. In this respect,
it is closely analogous to examples of computational explanation.
Kim’s argument attacks this sense of levels. His claim is that realized
properties have no causal powers over and above those of the realizing


=== PAGE 241 ===

220 nonfundamental explanation
properties. What, one might ask, could the property of being below 0 ◦C
allow an object to do that the property of being−18.6◦C would not allow
it to do? What causal powers could the property of being red give an
object that the property of being scarlet could not? And what causal work
could depolarization of the cell body do over and above what is already
being done by the particular arrangement of ions in the cell body? If
the answer to these questions is ‘‘nothing,’’ then talk of causal powers at
higher levels of realization will appear suspect. To borrow Heil’s colorful
intuition-pump, imagine that a god sets out to make the world. The god
begins by creating the fundamental particles and endowing them with
all of their causal powers. Then the god organizes them spatially and
temporally into complex objects and interactions (such as buckets of water
and neurons). Must the god add in a new set of causal powers for buckets
of water, and neurons? Or are the causal powers of these things already
in the organizing relations among the fundamental components? This is
where Kim’s metaphysical arguments potentially raise a serious challenge.
However, it is crucial to keep this metaphysical question of whether there
are real properties with causal powers at higher levels of realization, whatev-
er is required for them to be ‘‘real’’ in this sense, separate from theexperimen-
tal question of whether realized properties ﬁgure in unique causal relevance
relations. In asking whether realized properties ﬁgure in causal relevance
relations, I am asking whether there are generalizations of the form, ‘‘In
conditions W, intervening to change the value of X from x
1 to x2 changes
the value of Y to f(x 2)’’ that quantify over variables describing realized
properties. I am also asking whether one can identify switch-points among
realized values of variables that are appropriate to a given effect-contrast.
In asking whether these causal relevance relations are unique, I am asking
whether there are explanatory generalizations (i.e., those that satisfy the
criteria of manipulability laid out above) that are true of realized properties
and are not true of their realizers. If these questions are answered afﬁrma-
tively, then one has an argument that realized properties make a difference
in a sense robust enough to satisfy constraints ((E 1)–(E 5)) on acceptable
explanation. One can hold this much even if one endorses the metaphysical
view that there are no unique causal powers among realized properties.
I have already made the experimental case for the causal relevance of
three realized properties: the property of being below 0
◦, the property of
being red, and the property of depolarization. This discussion does not


=== PAGE 242 ===

nonfundamental explanation 221
require simpliﬁed philosophical examples. Rather, the questions discussed
here are just like the questions addressed all the time in neuroscience
laboratories. When Miledi showed that action potentials trigger the release
of neurotransmitters through depolarization rather than through the inﬂux
of Na+ in particular, a crucial ﬁnding in the discovery of the mechanisms
of neurotransmitter release, he showed that a realizing property, the
rising Na + concentration perse, is not relevant to transmitter release.
It is relevant only in virtue of the fact that rising intracellular Na +
concentrations realize depolarization under typical cellular conditions.
His experiment follows precisely the logic that I have described here.
Irrespective of metaphysical worries about causal powers, it seems clear that
Miledi elegantly identiﬁed and settled a causal question that is crucial for
understanding how this system works. It is also crucial for understanding
how to manipulate the system. Interventions that alter Na
+ concentration
without changing the membrane voltage will be ineffective in triggering the
release of neurotransmitters (or changing the probability of such release).
Interventions that increase membrane voltage without changing Na +
concentrations will trigger the release of neurotransmitters (or change the
probability of such release). In this sense, depolarization makes a difference
to the release of neurotransmitters.
Consider another example from recent experimental and theoretical
work in neuroscience. Astrid Prinz and colleagues (2004) argue that realized
features of even relatively simple and evolutionarily ancient neural systems
are surprisingly independent of the details of the underlying micro-based
properties that realize them in any given case. To put it another way,
there are true stable generalizations about the behavior of these systems
that are not true of the parts-plus-organization that realize them on any
given occasion. The system in question is the stomatogastric ganglion in
the lobster. This simple structure has roughly thirty neurons, but it is
capable of generating several distinctive kinds of rhythmic electrical activity
that regulate many aspects of the lobster’s digestive processes, including
what is known as the pyloric rhythm. By building computer simulation
models of the stomatograstric ganglion, Prinz shows that the characteristic
bursting pattern of the pyloric rhythm can be produced by wildly different
microstructural properties. Prinz constructed over 20,000,000 models of
this simple system, varying the conductance properties of individual cells
and the strengths of the synapses between them. They found that roughly


=== PAGE 243 ===

222 nonfundamental explanation
20 percent of these models produce patterns of activation that have the same
overall temporal patterns as those observed in lobster ganglia. Among these
20 percent, 11 percent (roughly 452,500) of the networks, with widely
ranging cellular and synaptic properties, produced burst-patterns within
experimentally observed ranges determined by ﬁfteen established criteria
for assessing this pattern. What the stomatogastric ganglion does—its ability
to regulate the pyloric rhythm—is in large part independent of the particular
cellular and synaptic connections that realize it. One could intervene to
change the organization in 452,499 separate ways without changing the
relevant features regulating the pyloric rhythm. Prinz concludes that similar
results are likely to be found in other systems throughout the central
nervous system and beyond:
Although the pyloric rhythm of the crustacean stomatogastric nervous system was
the speciﬁc example used here, we draw a general conclusion: that even tightly
regulated network behavior can result from widely disparate sets of parameters in
the processes that give rise to this behavior. This conclusion is relevant not only
to the nervous system, but also to biochemical and signaling networks, as parallel
and interacting pathways also occur in these networks. It may be possible for any
given network parameter to be highly variable in different cells or in different
individuals, as long as an appropriate set of compensating changes has occurred.
(2004: 1349)
These stable patterns are causally integrated within the lobster’s digestive
system such that changes in the rhythm (irrespective of the particular
organization of components) produce changes in behavior of the digestive
system. There must be stable developmental mechanisms in lobsters that
construct—not a particular set of connections and strengths among par-
ticular neurons in the ganglion—but rather any organization of neurons
that adequately produces the functional pyloric rhythm. There are likely
homeostatic mechanisms in place to maintain that rhythm in spite of per-
turbations that, if uncorrected, would disrupt the rhythm. If one were an
adaptationist, one might argue that nature has not selected for a particular
organization of cells, but rather for a behavioral proﬁle that can be cobbled
together in many ways in the process of development. If Prinz is right,
neuroscientists would misunderstand the behavior of the lobster digestive
system if they were to suppose that it is regulated in the stomatogastric
ganglion by a particular conﬁguration in a network of cells. If one were
to focus on a particular organizational structure, one would miss a pattern


=== PAGE 244 ===

nonfundamental explanation 223
in the causal structure of the digestive system that is independent of those
patterns among the network realizers, just as to focus on the inﬂux of Na +
into the axon terminal is to miss a pattern in the causal structure of the
neuron (involving changes in membrane voltage) that is independent of
the particular ion ﬂux by which the membrane voltage changes.
The key point here, however, is that there are generalizations expressing
contrastive relations of causal relevance that are true of realized properties
and that are not true of their realizers. Building an adequate explanation
requires identifying the appropriate causally relevant property for a given
effect. If the pigeon pecks because the paper is red, then changing the
paper from scarlet to pink makes no difference to the pigeon’s behavior,
although it does change the activation vector in its nucleus rotundus. This
intervention merely provides a new realizer for the value of the color
variable that is causally relevant to the pecking. Because water freezes when
the temperature drops below 0
◦C, changing the temperature from −18.6◦
to −19.2◦ makes no difference to whether the water freezes, although
such an intervention will change the rate at which the water freezes.
Given this intervention, the water will still freeze, but the freezing will
have a different realizer. Finally, as long as one depolarizes the cell body,
intervening to change the particular locations of the Na + and K+ ions
makes no difference to whether the neuron generates an action potential so
long as the membrane voltage is not changed. The neuron will still generate
an action potential, but the action potential will be realized by a different
conﬁguration of ions. In each of these cases, the generalization expressed in
terms of realized properties identiﬁes a switch-point that is not represented
in the generalizations describing the behavior of the particular realizers.
Note further that this conclusion is independent of the question of whether
the realized causal relevance relations are derivable from generalizations
describing fundamental causal powers. Whether or not one can carry out
such a derivation, it is still the realized contrast that is relevant. It is the
paper’s being red (rather than not red) that caused the pigeon to peck, not
its being scarlet rather than non-scarlet. Derivable or not, the appropriate
switch-point is framed among realized properties.
Eric Marcus (forthcoming) puts this point in terms of Kim’s causal
exclusion argument, sketched in Section 1. Suppose that if M were to
occur (rather than not-M), then M
∗ would occur (rather than not-M ∗),
and that if M failed to occur, then M∗ would fail to occur. Suppose further


=== PAGE 245 ===

224 nonfundamental explanation
that if P were to occur (rather than not-P), then P ∗ would occur (rather
than not-P∗). And suppose that P realizes M, and that P ∗ realizes M∗.
Note that in this situation, if M had occurred, and P had not, then M ∗
would still have occurred. The reason is that, in this last case, some other
M-realizer (say P
′) would have occurred, and it would have caused some
other M∗-realizer to occur. More concretely, if the room had been below
0◦C, but had not been −18.6◦C, then the water would still have frozen
because in that case the room would have had some other value below
0◦C, and that value would have caused the water to freeze (albeit at a
different rate). The true generalization describing the relationship among
realized properties identiﬁes a pattern of causal relevance that is much more
encompassing than are the patterns of causal relevance identiﬁed among
the realizers.
I emphasize again that these are points about causal relevance and causal
explanation, not about causal powers. It is open to the metaphysician
to grant these points and to insist nonetheless that the causally efﬁcacious
relations (those involving causal powers) are found only among the ultimate
realizers. There is a generalization describing the behavior of the pigeon
in relation to red things, but in every instance it is a particular shade of
red that exerts powers in affecting the pigeon’s visual system in a particular
way. There is a true generalization that water freezes at temperatures
below 0
◦C, but each instance of freezing is in fact brought about by
some determinate ambient temperature. The true generalizations among
realized values of variables must have truth-makers, one might think,
and the obvious candidates for those truth-makers are the relations of
causal efﬁcacy or power that hold among the individual realizers (see
Heil 2003). For such a metaphysician, causation is fundamentally about
efﬁcacy, activity, and production. Relations of causal relevance are second-
class causal relations, derivative for their existence upon more fundamental
expressions of causal power. Higher-level predicates do not refer to genuine
higher-level properties but refer instead to individuals grouped by family
resemblance.
The view that causal relevance relations are ultimately grounded in the
exercise of causal powers is no doubt attractive. I have endorsed a similar
view in other contexts (Machamer et al. 2000). Three challenges face such
a view. The ﬁrst is to supply an illuminating account of causal powers. To
be illuminating, the metaphysical posit has to explain why causal relevance


=== PAGE 246 ===

nonfundamental explanation 225
relations hold and why they satisfy constraints such as (E 1)–(E 5). It will
not do to simply introduce a ﬁller term, such as ‘‘power’’ or ‘‘activity,’’
as a primitive causal relation and to assume that thereby a metaphysical
explanation has been achieved. (E1)–(E 5), in other words, characterize the
phenomenon to be explained by appeal to causal powers. The challenge is
to provide an account of what activities, causal powers, and causal efﬁcacy
are, that explains (not merely presupposes) why generalizations in our world
satisfy (E1)–(E 5). In Chapter 3, I consider two attempts at such an account:
the transmission account, according to which causal processes are physically
connected through the transfer of conserved quantities, and the mechanical
view, according to which cause and effect are connected by a mechanism.
Neither of these views satisﬁes (E 1)–(E 5). Perhaps there is some other
satisfactory view of the fundamental causal relation, but this notion has
been recalcitrant to philosophical analysis at least since Hume. The second
challenge is to provide a compelling account of causation by omission and
prevention. Causes sometimes make a difference through the dormancy of
causal powers, gaps in transmission, breaks in mechanisms, and inactivity
among their components. The metaphysician must then supply a separate
explanation for why stable generalizations about causal relevance hold in
such cases. Finally, the metaphysician should provide an account of causal
powers that makes sense of the experimental and observational practices
that scientists use to discover causal relations. It would, for example, be an
epistemic limitation if one’s account of causation made causal relationships
unknowable on the basis of all possible evidence. These challenges are
pressing given that the manipulationist view automatically accommodates
(E1)–(E 5) and provides a univocal account of both positive and negative
causes while making straightforward sense of the experimental practices
used by scientists in their search for causes.
Given such considerations, one might be tempted to jettison talk of
causal powers as unnecessary metaphysics and to hold that to cause just is
to be causally relevant in the sense speciﬁed in this book. On such a view,
causation is fundamentally about making a difference, regardless of whether
that difference is made through the exercise of activities or powers. There
need not be a cement, glue, spring, string, or power that connects causes
to their effects. What matters is that changes in the cause are accompanied
by changes in the effect that occur only via the change to the cause and
not via some other route. Sometimes causes act through the exercise of


=== PAGE 247 ===

226 nonfundamental explanation
causal powers, and sometimes they act via absences and gaps. Any putative
property that can be detected by multiple independent techniques, that is
described in our best scientiﬁc theories and explanations, and that ﬁgures
in patterns of causal relevance is, if not real in the full-blown metaphysical
sense, at least as real as anything else known to science. For many, that is
real enough (cf. Dennett 1991).
This alternative view faces two signiﬁcant challenges. First, the manip-
ulationist view of causal relevance explicitly presupposes, and so is not a
reductive analysis of, the notion of causation. The idea of an intervention
and the constraints (I 1)–(I 4) are explicitly causal. One might therefore
think that the manipulationist criterion itself requires grounding in a more
fundamental causal notion, and perhaps the idea of a ‘‘causal power’’ can
play that role. This possibility will have to be assessed as more detailed
accounts of causal powers and activities are forthcoming. Second, one
might think that all general truths about the world have truth-makers, that
is, facts in virtue of which the general truths hold. The manipulationist
view might provide a revealing account of the generalizations that express
causal relevance relations, but it does not provide an account of the ultimate
causal facts in virtue of which these generalizations hold. The manipula-
tionist view, to put the same point differently, lacks a semantics for the
central claim that if X is changed from x
1 to x2 then Y changes from y1 to
y2. Solutions to this problem will likewise have to be evaluated as they are
forthcoming.
These are merely two metaphysical views among many, and it is possible
that the virtues of each could be combined into a more powerful view
of the causal structure of the world than either can supply independently.
My point is that one’s convictions about realized properties, be they
metaphysically fundamentalist or antifundamentalist, should not prevent
one from endorsing the idea that realized properties are sometimes causally,
and so explanatorily, relevant. These two metaphysical views each agree
that there are nonfundamental relations of causal relevance. They disagree
only about the ultimate structure of reality in virtue of which those
relations hold. Questions about the metaphysics of properties and causation
are therefore not relevant to what experimental scientists ought to do
or to what explanations they ought to seek. Nor are they relevant to
which explanations a neurophilosopher ought to endorse. Indeed, most
metaphysical fundamentalists take it as a burden of their view to explain


=== PAGE 248 ===

nonfundamental explanation 227
why robust and explanatory generalizations hold among realized (even
multiply realized) properties if all the causal powers are located at the
fundamental level. It would thus be incorrect to conclude, as some do, that
causal exclusion arguments justify focusing research at the most fundamental
levels of neuroscience (see Bickle 2003). If neuroscientists were to ignore
generalizations among realized properties on the basis of these metaphysical
challenges, they would be misled by philosophers into ignoring crucial
switch-points in the causal structure of the world.
6. Conclusion
In this chapter, I show that well-known arguments against higher-level
causes should not prevent one from adopting a multilevel mechanistic view
of explanation. I argue that mechanisms, by virtue of their organization, are
able to do things that their parts cannot do individually. They can respond
to inputs that the parts alone cannot detect. They can produce behaviors
that their parts alone cannot produce. There are generalizations about causal
relevance that are true of mechanisms and false of their parts. Kim does not
intend to deny any of this. He says it is obvious, and indeed it is.
Concerning levels of realization, I claim that there are truths about
causal relevance captured in generalizations describing realized values of
variables and that these generalizations cannot be expressed in generaliza-
tions describing relations among realizers. My argument for the relevance of
realized properties (and my account of how to tell which level of realization
is relevant in a given case) rely on the common practice of using controlled
experiments to test claims about causal and explanatory relevance. Mine
is an experimentalist’s defense of the causal relevance of realized proper-
ties. The metaphysician wants to look deeper to the ultimate ontological
structures that explain these facts. Whatever they ﬁnd, however, it will not
tarnish the fact that nonfundamental features are causally relevant, explana-
torily relevant, and useful for the purposes of manipulation and control. We
can make signiﬁcant progress in the philosophy of neuroscience without
settling these perennial metaphysical disputes.


=== PAGE 249 ===

7
The Mosaic Unity
of Neuroscience
Summary
In this chapter, I show how multilevel mechanistic explanations scaffold the
unity of neuroscience. Philosophers of neuroscience traditionally envision
the unity of neuroscience as being achieved through the stepwise reduc-
tion of higher-level theories to successively lower level, and ultimately
fundamental, theories. I argue, in contrast, that the unity of neuroscience
is achieved as different ﬁelds integrate their research by adding constraints
on multilevel mechanistic explanations. The goal of ﬁnding multilevel
explanations provides an abstract sketch or scaffold for integrating ﬁelds.
The ﬁndings in different ﬁelds of neuroscience are used, like the tiles of
a mosaic, to elaborate this abstract mechanism and to shape the space of
possible mechanisms. The mosaic unity of neuroscience is achieved both
through interﬁeld integration at a given level and through integration
across levels in a hierarchy of mechanisms. I develop this model using a
putative exemplar of reduction in contemporary neuroscience: the relation-
ship between the psychological phenomena of learning and memory and
the electrophysiological phenomenon, Long-Term Potentiation (LTP). I
thereby demonstrate that the mosaic view is superior to reduction as a
model of the unity of neuroscience.
1.I n t r o d u c t i o n
Neuroscience is a multiﬁeld research program. ¹ Its departments, journals,
societies, and textbooks include perspectives from anatomy, biochemistry,
¹ In the spirit of Darden and Maull ( 1977), I understand ﬁelds as groups of researchers related by
common problems, techniques, and vocabularies. The boundaries between ﬁelds are fuzzy and change
with time, but there is no pressing need to tidy them up for present purposes.


=== PAGE 250 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 229
computer science, radiology, developmental, evolutionary, and molecular
biology, electrophysiology, experimental psychology, ethology, pharma-
cology, and psychiatry, to name just a few. The Society for Neuroscience
(SfN) was founded in 1969 to ‘‘advance the understanding of the brain and
the nervous system by bringing together scientists of diverse backgrounds,
by facilitating the integration of research directed at all levels of biological
organization, and by encouraging translational research and the application
of new scientiﬁc knowledge to develop improved disease treatments and
cures.’’² This goal of integrating and unifying neuroscience, however, is
underspeciﬁed until one can say how scientists are brought together, what
it means to integrate research, and in what sense work in one ﬁeld can be
‘‘translated’’ for use in others.
Most philosophers who discuss the unity of neuroscience (for example,
Bickle 1998, 2003; P. S. Churchland1986; Schaffner 1993a, 1993b) describe
it using models of intertheoretic reduction. According to the ‘‘classical’’
model of reduction (Nagel 1949, 1961), from which each of these authors’
models descends, reduction is a species of covering law (CL) explanation:
one theory is reduced to another when it is possible to deﬁne the
theoretical terms of the ﬁrst with those of the second and to derive the ﬁrst
theory from the second. None of the above philosophers of neuroscience
endorses the classical view of reduction in all its rigor, but each endorses
a close descendant. For example, Schaffner’s model of reduction (which
Churchland adopts) requires that a corrected version of the reduced theory
be derivable from a restricted version of the reducing theory with the aid of
transtheoretic identities.³ These elaborations maintain the basic derivational
framework of reduction, but allow the ﬁt between reduced and reducing
theory to be less than exact. Bickle’s model of reduction ( 1998) requires
that one be able to construct an ‘‘equipotent image’’ of the reduced
theory within the structure of the reducing theory as well as ‘‘ontological
reductive links’’ between the two. The idea of an equipotent image is
a technical notion that plays the role of the derivation requirement in
the strongest formulation of the classical model, but that allows degrees
of homomorphism between the two theories. Ontological reductive links
play the role of identity statements in the classical model. In each of these
² Society for Neuroscience web page( 2003):<http://web.sfn.org/content/AboutSfN1/Mission/
mission.htm>.
³ This view of reduction has also been elaborated and defended by Hooker (1981).


=== PAGE 251 ===

230 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
models, reduction is conceived as a relationship between theories. Theories
descriptive of a given level are reduced to theories descriptive of the next
lowest level. Because different theories of neuroscience are associated with
different ﬁelds, such reductions effect the unity of neuroscience. In still
weaker models of reduction, reduction merely requires that all higher-level
phenomena be explained in terms of fundamental mechanisms or laws
(for example, Sarkar 1992;S m i t h1992; Weber 2005). All that remains of
reduction in these cases is a commitment to the primacy of downward and
fundamental explanation.
There are many reasons why philosophers of neuroscience ﬁnd reduction
attractive for thinking about the unity of science. First, reduction can
be deﬁned precisely with formal logic (for example, Schaffner 1993a,
1993b) and set theory (for example, Bickle 2003). So the thesis that
different ﬁelds of neuroscience are integrated through reduction can be
formulated precisely and evaluated. This advantage is sacriﬁced by advocates
of weaker reduction models who appeal to, for example, ‘‘explanation by
mechanism’’ (Weber 2005) or ‘‘explanatory interfacing’’ (Smith 1992)
without explicating precisely what counts as an explanation or what
distinguishes good explanations from bad. ⁴ Second, because there is a
long tradition of using reduction models in the philosophy of physics,
chemistry, and biology, one might expect (or hope) that reduction models
can be extended to the neurosciences. Finally, at least since Oppenheim
and Putnam’s manifesto ( 1958), reduction has been nearly synonymous
with the explanatory unity of science: the unity of science is achieved by
reducing the theories of all ﬁelds to the theories of the ﬁeld that describes
fundamental ontology. Thus, whoever questions the reductive unity of
science might appear to be questioning the unity of science simpliciter (see
Fodor 1974;D u p r e1993).
In the preceding chapters, I raise a number of problems for the above
views of explanatory reduction. First, I object to the image of explanation
that lies at their heart, arguing that the CL account cannot distinguish
mere models from explanations, how-possibly from how-actually explana-
tions, and mechanism sketches from complete descriptions of mechanisms.
Precisely the same objections apply to Bickle’s image-based view because
⁴ Weber (2005), for example, explicitly declines to specify a view of explanation, appealing to the
CL model, Kitcher’s U-model, and Salmon’s causal-mechanical account. I discuss the shortcomings of
each of these possibilities in Chapters 2 and 3.


=== PAGE 252 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 231
equipotent images can be how-possibly images, incomplete images, and
explanatorily irrelevant images. Furthermore, Bickle does not show when
the ontologically reductive links are precise enough to rule out pseudo-
explanations. In Chapter 4, I provide a model of mechanistic explanation
that is superior to reductive models as a regulative ideal for constitutive
explanation in neuroscience. I argue in Chapter 5 that levels of science,
levels of theory, and levels of nature do not coincide with one another in
contemporary neuroscience. Thus, the notion that levels of nature corre-
spond to levels of theory developed within levels of ﬁelds oversimpliﬁes
the structure within which the unity of neuroscience is achieved. Finally,
in Chapter 6, I show that adequate explanations in neuroscience typically
include higher-level causes. The reduction model is focused exclusive-
ly on explanations that appeal to lower-level mechanisms, and so does
not accommodate these aspects of the explanatory unity of neuroscience.
Reduction models thus provide an inadequate account of the explanatory
unity of neuroscience. Reduction survives as a model of the unity of
neuroscience largely because there is no alternative of comparable scope
and clarity.
In this chapter, I use the view of multilevel mechanistic explanation
developed in the preceding chapters to construct a model of the mosaic
unity of neuroscience . The central idea is that neuroscience is uniﬁed not by
the reduction of all phenomena to a fundamental level, but rather
by using results from different ﬁelds to constrain a multilevel mecha-
nistic explanation. The goal of building a mechanistic explanation, rather
than an explanation simpliciter, provides an abstract framework or scaffold
that is elaborated as different ﬁelds add constraints on the explanation.
The search for mechanisms guides researchers to look for speciﬁc kinds
of evidence (in the form of different constraints) and provides the scaffold
by which these constraints are integrated piecemeal as research progresses.
The different ﬁelds that contribute to the mosaic unity of neuroscience
are autonomous in that they have different central problems, use different
techniques, have different theoretical vocabularies, and make different back-
ground assumptions; they are uniﬁed because each provides constraints on a
mechanistic explanation. Individual ﬁelds do not surrender their autonomy
through this form of uniﬁcation; in fact, their ability to contribute novel
constraints on a mechanism requires that they maintain their autonomy (cf.
Wylie 2002). Because different ﬁelds approach problems from different


=== PAGE 253 ===

232 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
perspectives, using different assumptions and techniques, the evidence they
provide makes mechanistic explanations robust.
To develop the mosaic model, I consider an historical example of progress
toward the unity of neuroscience: the LM research program (discussed
in Chapters 3 and 5). Several philosophers of neuroscience (including
Bickle 1998, 2003; Schaffner 1967, 1993a; and Churchland and Sejnowski
1992) describe the LM research program as an exemplar of reduction.
In Section 2, I argue that rather than being exemplary of reduction,
the historical development of the LM research program more accurately
exhibits the mosaic unity of neuroscience. In considering the case, I
note three descriptive limitations of reduction models: ﬁrst, they cannot
accommodate the upward-looking aspects of the unity of neuroscience;
second, they ignore intralevel forms of interﬁeld integration; and third,
they gloss over the fact that progress in the LM research program has been
achieved by abandoning reduction as an explanatory goal. This history
shows how scientists integrate ﬁelds by adding constraints on mechanisms
(see also Bechtel 1984). In the next portion of the chapter, I construct a
model of the mosaic unity of neuroscience. Speciﬁcally, in Section 3,I
show how the goal of building mechanistic explanations provides a scaffold
for integrating results from different ﬁelds at a given level .⁵ In Section 4,I
show how the pursuit of mechanisms provides a scaffold for integrating
results from different ﬁelds across levels. The historical considerations of
Section 2 show that the mosaic model of interﬁeld integration is more
historically accurate than reduction. The constructive project of Sections 3
and 4 encompasses forms of interﬁeld integration that the reduction model
neglects, and it provides a more detailed view than does the reduction
model of the kinds of constraints needed to build bridges from molecules
to behavior.
I conclude by showing how the mosaic unity of neuroscience, in which
autonomous ﬁelds provide independent constraints on a common multilevel
mechanism, serves the epistemic function of making mechanistic explana-
tions robust, that is, of constructing explanations that are able to withstand
scrutiny from multiple independent lines of evidence and multiple inde-
pendent disciplinary perspectives (compare Hacking 1983;S a l m o n1984;
⁵ Throughout this chapter, when I say that integration occurs at a level, I mean that the integration
does not cross levels. My view of levels (Chapter 5) purposely leaves the idea of sameness of level
undeﬁned.


=== PAGE 254 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 233
Wimsatt 1981; Wylie 2002). The mosaic unity of neuroscience is a valuable
goal, not because it distinguishes science from nonscience, nor because
it shows everything to be tethered to fundamental things, but because
such unity is a sign of epistemic success. In sum, I argue that the mosaic
model of the unity of neuroscience, based on the search for mechanistic
explanations, is better suited than reduction to the descriptive, explanatory,
and epistemic projects for which these classic models were designed.
2. Reduction and the History of Neuroscience
There is little agreement among advocates of reduction as a model of the
unity of neuroscience as to whether or not it should be taken to be an
empirical fact that neuroscience exhibits a reductive trend from early work
at higher levels to more mature work at lower levels.
Many advocates of reduction admit that the reduction model poorly
describes the history and practice of science. Schaffner (1993a), for example,
argues that reduction is ‘‘peripheral’’ to scientiﬁc practice and that it should
be regarded merely as a ‘‘regulative ideal,’’ that is, the goal of an ideally
complete explanation. P. S. Churchland, following Francis Crick, admits
that reductions are rare and that they typically occur only after the
interesting ‘‘co-evolutionary’’ work has been done (see 1986: 285). Such
admissions insulate reduction models against evidence from the history
of neuroscience. Reductionists can grant that neuroscientists have yet to
achieve any (or many) complete reductions and claim, nonetheless, that
neuroscientists ought to aim for the goal of reduction. They justify this
normative claim by appeal to success stories in the history of other branches
of science, such as the reduction of the laws of thermodynamics to the laws
of statistical mechanics (Bickle 1998;a n dN a g e l1961), or the reduction of
the laws of optics to the laws of electromagnetism (P. S. Churchland1986).
On the other hand, it is reasonable to be suspicious of theories about
neuroscience that are peripheral to what neuroscientists actually do. Why,
after all, should neuroscience have the explanatory goals of physics? One
difference between neuroscience and physics is that there are no laws of
neuroscience comparable in scope and stability to the laws of optics and sta-
tistical mechanics. Generalizations in neuroscience are fragile, variable, and
historically contingent to a far greater extent than are the gas laws or the laws


=== PAGE 255 ===

234 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
of optics. A second difference is that objects in the domain of neuroscience
are multiply realizable; that is, different materials, parts, or mechanisms can
(and do) give rise to the same nonfundamental regularities. Even though
these two differences between neuroscience and more fundamental sciences
do not provide challenges to reduction in principle, they nevertheless show
why the goal of achieving a classical reduction is not a priority in neu-
roscience. To derive higher-level regularities from lower-level regularities
would require such a vast number of restrictions on background and internal
conditions (even compared to the vast number required for such reductions
in physics and chemistry) that actual reductions would invariably appear
contrived. Furthermore, because higher-level generalizations are multiply
realizable, such reductions (if possible) would likely be of only narrow
signiﬁcance and hold, for example, only for normal members of a subset of
a species during a particular time of development. Explanatory successes in
physics and chemistry are irrelevant if the domain of neuroscience (among
other special sciences) requires a different kind of explanation. The periph-
erality of reduction, in other words, is a warning sign that it is premised on
an explanatory ideal that is inappropriate for the neurosciences.
Some advocates of reduction champion reduction as an accurate descrip-
tion of scientiﬁc practice. Oppenheim and Putnam ( 1958) argue that the
sciences of their day exhibit a trend toward reducing social facts to facts
about psychology, then reducing facts about psychology to facts about
cells, and so on down to elementary particles. They argue for a ‘‘working
hypothesis’’ that the unity of science will ultimately be achieved through the
stepwise reduction of higher-level sciences to lower-level sciences. Bickle
(1998, 2003) similarly argues that contemporary neuroscience exhibits a
reductive trend ( 2003: 280). He cites recent conference programs and
journals to show that the bulk of the most exciting contemporary neuro-
science is dedicated to manipulating and understanding the behaviors of
cells and molecules. Furthermore, he argues that it is now possible to con-
struct explanations for many high-level phenomena in terms of molecular
mechanisms. He concludes that the best explanations in neuroscience are
currently at the molecular level, and that higher-level neuroscience is at
best heuristically important for directing attention to the right molecular
mechanisms.⁶
⁶ Bickle sometimes stresses that his reductioni sm is merely internal—a report of the explanatory
ideals and practices of cellular and molecular neuroscience. Thus restricted, Bickle’s advocacy of ruthless


=== PAGE 256 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 235
I do not dispute that molecular biologists are making very exciting
contributions to contemporary neuroscience. Nor do I dispute that the
proportion of neuroscience dedicated to molecular pursuits has expanded
dramatically in recent years. Even if one grants that there is an historical
trend toward the molecular, there is a further question of what hypothesis
best explains that trend. Bickle’s hypothesis is that only molecular explana-
tions are truly explanatory, and that neuroscientists are ‘‘going molecular’’
because that is where the true explanations are. However, an alternative
hypotheses is at least equally plausible. Researchers have recently developed
a host of new techniques for sequencing, copying, and manipulating genes,
and for designing pharmaceuticals that control molecular mechanisms.
These techniques allow molecular biologists to answer myriad questions
about the molecular constituents of nerve cells that could not have been
posed even a few years ago. As a result, the ﬁeld of molecular biology has
expanded greatly. In Lakatos’s terms, there is now a progressive research
program in molecular biology that currently generates more questions than
can be answered. There have not been such exciting developments in
technology in other areas of neuroscience (except perhaps neuroimaging),
and so these other areas have not grown at a comparable rate. Add to this
the fact that funding for genetic and other molecular research has increased
dramatically, and that university research priorities are designed around
funding opportunities, and one has a plausible explanation for recent trends
toward molecular neuroscience. If comparable techniques for experiment-
ing on social phenomena are developed, that ﬁeld of research will boom
as well.
The fact that neuroscientists are increasingly pursuing molecular research
does not establish that the best neuroscientiﬁc explanations are at the
molecular level. Nonetheless, knowledge of the history of a ﬁeld can help
philosophers keep their theories about the unity of science true to what
scientists actually do. If one hopes to understand the norms implicit in
the practice of science—here Bickle is exactly right—one must begin by
looking at real science. My claim is that the norms implicit in the history
reductionism is much less controversial than it appears, amounting only to the claim that some scientists
think that explanations ought to be given in terms of cells and molecules. This is a far cry from the
claim that all neuroscientists endorse ruthless reductioni sm, and further still from the claim that all
neuroscientists ought to.


=== PAGE 257 ===

236 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
of the LM research program are closer to those expressed in my mosaic
model than those expressed by reduction models.
With these objectives in mind, I now examine an episode in the recent
history of neuroscience—one that has become the standard exemplar of
reduction in the philosophy of neuroscience: the discovery of LTP and its
association across multiple levels with learning and memory (discussed in
Chapters 3 and 5). In the standard scientiﬁc history of LTP, the discovery
of LTP is described as the product of an intentional downward-looking
search for a memory mechanism in the hippocampus. Thus understood,
this discovery supports the view that there was a reductive trend from
higher to lower levels. Eric Kandel (who won the Nobel Prize for his
foundational work on the neuroscience of memory) and Larry Squire (an
eminent memory researcher and historian of neuroscience) provide such a
reductionist account of LTP’s history.
In 1973 Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo working in Per Andersen’s laboratory in Oslo,
Norway, made a remarkable discovery. Aware of Brenda Milner’s insight about
the role of the hippocampus and the medial temporal lobe in memory storage, they
attempted to see whether the synapses between neurons in the hippocampus had
the capability of storing information. To examine this possibility, they purposely
carried out a quite artiﬁcial experiment. T hey stimulated a speciﬁc nerve pathway
in the hippocampus of the rat and asked: Can neural activity affect synaptic strength
in the hippocampus? They found that a brief high-frequency period of electrical
activity (called a tetanus) applied artiﬁcially to a hippocampal pathway produced
an increase in synaptic strength that lasted for hours in an anaesthetized animal and
would, if repeated, last for days and even weeks in an alert freely moving animal.
This type of facilitation is now called long-term facilitation, or more commonly,
long-term potentiation (2000: 210– 11).
In this passage, some of the central ﬁgures in the history are introduced.
These include Per Andersen (in whose Oslo laboratory much of the story is
set), Terje Lømo (Andersen’s ﬁrst graduate student), Tim Bliss (Andersen’s
post-doctoral fellow), and Brenda Milner (who performed psychological
evaluations on patients with lesioned hippocampi). Yet this passage is a
scientiﬁc argument for the importance of LTP rhetorically packaged as
history—it is more compelling than it is historically accurate.
In a detailed examination of this history (Craver 2003), I show how
misleading this history, and the reductive image that it supports, is. First,
contrary to Oppenheim and Putnam’s (and Bickle’s) empirical thesis, the


=== PAGE 258 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 237
development of the LM research program extends upward and downward
depending upon the problem to be solved, not just downward as the
reduction model requires. This oscillation among levels is also evident in
contemporary LM research. Second, the instances of interﬁeld integration
composing the history of the LM research program are, in many cases,
intralevel and intratheoretic, and so are not even candidates for analysis in
terms of reduction. Finally, although reduction was once an explanatory
goal of the LM research program, that goal was replaced by the goal of
building multilevel mechanisms. In short, reduction is not only peripheral
to the recent history of LTP, but it is also incomplete and misleading as a
model of the unity of neuroscience.
2.1 LTP’s origins: not a top-down search but intralevel integration
Like Squire and Kandel, most neuroscientists date the discovery of LTP
to a series of 1973 papers by Tim Bliss, Terje Lømo, and Tony Gardner-
Medwin. Although these papers constitute a watershed in the LTP research
program, the story of LTP begins much earlier than 1973 and involves an
episode of intralevel (and thus nonreductive) interﬁeld integration.
Electrophysiologists ﬁrst produced and reported synaptic plasticity in
the hippocampus in the 1950s. At the time, researchers worked in vivo
by inserting electrodes through the skulls of anaesthetized rabbits. (It is
now common to work on in vitro hippocampal slice preparations, but these
techniques did not exist until the1970s.) These researchers were under time
pressure to produce as much data as they could before the anesthesia, blood
loss, and repeated stimulation degraded the electrophysiological responses.
As a trick of the trade, researchers knew that when the electrophysiological
signals began to degrade, they could reawaken the cells by jolting them
with a high-frequency stimulus for a few seconds (see Andersen 1991,
2003). While extremely important as a laboratory tool, this trick was
not considered theoretically signiﬁcant at the time. There are scattered
references to the phenomenon in the late 1950s and early 1960s (see, for
example, Green and Adey 1956: 250; Andersen 1960a: 191, 1960b: 216;
Andersen, Bruland, and Kaada 1961; Gloor et al. 1964), but none of them
describes it as more than an experimental curiosity. They mention it as
one electrophysiological effect among many, and they accord it no special
signiﬁcance. It is not surprising, then, that none of these early reports
connect this form of potentiation with learning or memory.


=== PAGE 259 ===

238 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
It is reasonable to assume, as the above quotation suggests, that researchers
were drawn to the hippocampus because of its link with learning and mem-
ory. Wilder Penﬁeld had published preliminary reports on hippocampal
lesions in 1952, and Brenda Milner and William Scoville published their
classic paper on the effects of hippocampal lesions on human memory in
1957. If electrophysiologists were studying the hippocampus because of
its link with learning and memory, these reports would be evidence of a
downward trend in this early phase of the LM research program.
In addition to the fact that none of the early reports of synaptic plasticity
in the hippocampus contain mention of learning and memory, there are
a number of reasons to reject this hypothesis. To begin with, the idea of
localizing memory anywhere in the brain was generally not accepted at the
time. In the 1940s, Karl Lashley’s systematic lesion experiments on pigeons
convinced many neuroscientists that the severity of the resulting learning
and memory deﬁcits depends not on the lesion’s location, but rather on
the volume of brain tissue excised:
This series of experiments has yielded a good bit of information about what and
where the memory trace is not. It has discovered nothing directly of the real nature
of the engram. I sometimes feel, in reviewing the evidence on the localization of
the memory trace, that the necessary conclusion is that learning just is not possible.
It is difﬁcult to conceive of a mechanism that can satisfy the conditions set for it.
Nevertheless, in spite of such evidence against it, learning sometimes does occur
(Lashley 1950; reprinted in Cummins and Cummins 1999: 347).
Furthermore, in the 1950s, neuroscientists commonly associated the hip-
pocampus with functions other than memory. Writers of most neuroscience
texts of the day associate the hippocampus with olfaction; others hypothesize
that it might be involved in behavioral inhibition, emotion, fear, ingestive
behavior, sexual activity, sleep, and respiration. Given such a wide range
of phenomena, it is little wonder that the early reports of hippocampal
synaptic plasticity fail to include mention of learning or memory. In one
of these early papers, the authors explicitly decline to speculate about the
‘‘true role’’ of the hippocampus. They say that ‘‘many more physiological
and behavioral studies will be needed before any systematic correlation with
the anatomical structure can be attempted’’ (Cragg and Hamlyn1957: 483).
If these electrophysiologists were not looking for a neural correlate
of memory, as reductionists claim, then why were they looking in the


=== PAGE 260 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 239
hippocampus? There are two primary reasons. First, the hippocampus is
implicated in epilepsy. In fact, Scoville and Milner removed the hippocam-
pus in at least one of their patients (H.M.) in a desperate attempt to cure his
life-threatening seizures. Most of the electrophysiologists studying the hip-
pocampus (including Andersen) were MDs working at medical schools, and
they were no doubt aware of, if not explicitly interested in, its pathology.
Second, and most importantly in the present context, the hippocampus was
(and is) a valuable experimental model for studying the electrophysiology
of neural circuits. It has a relatively simple organization, with three major
excitatory synapses, and the same pattern is repeated, layer after layer. The
anatomy of the system was well understood at the time. It is primitive and
highly conserved across species. Finally, the rodent hippocampus is large
and readily accessible through the skull, making it attractive forin vivo stud-
ies. Electrophysiologists worked on the hippocampus for the same reasons
that researchers are generally attracted to any simple and well-characterized
experimental model.
In Oslo, where the ﬁrst long-lasting form of hippocampal plasticity
was produced, researchers viewed the hippocampus as an especially useful
experimental model for integrating results from anatomy and electrophysi-
ology. This integration of ﬁelds did not occur across levels, as the reductive
story suggests, but occurred at a single level as different ﬁelds added different
constraints on a neural mechanism. There were several anatomists working
on the hippocampus in Oslo. Chief among them was Alf Brodal, who
argued inﬂuentially that to understand the brain, one must ﬁrst understand
its basic anatomical wiring patterns. Some of the anatomists used Golgi
stains, which stain one in ten neurons and thereby show patterns of connec-
tivity in a brain region. Others used terminal degeneration studies, in which
one kills the cell body and then applies stains that show the withering axons.
In each case, the goal was to identify neuronal locations, structures, and
connections. This anatomical wiring diagram could then be used as a foun-
dation for electrophysiological investigation. Using the anatomical map of
the hippocampus, one could intervene to change the electrophysiological
properties of speciﬁc cells or populations of cells (for example, by delivering
current) and could record the effects of those interventions on other cells
or populations of cells. In this way, electrophysiologists could study the
propagation of neural excitation through the circuitry of the hippocampus.
The ﬁndings of the anatomists and electrophysiologists were not related to


=== PAGE 261 ===

240 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
one another by reduction. They did not bridge levels, create equipotent
images, form bridge laws, or establish ontological reductive links relating
the items of two domains. Instead, they combined different techniques to
investigate different aspects of a mechanism at the same level. Their goal was
to understand how neural wiring diagrams and electrical activities are relat-
ed in a well-deﬁned neural circuit. In the context of this interﬁeld project,
Lømo, and later Bliss, encountered the phenomenon now known as LTP.
To summarize the story thus far, hippocampal synaptic plasticity was
not discovered in a top-down, reductive search for the neural correlate
of memory; rather, it was noticed during an intralevel research project
in which anatomical and electrophysiological perspectives were integrat-
ed. Such intralevel varieties of interﬁeld integration are not candidates
for description with the formalism of reduction models, but they do
constitute signiﬁcant progress toward the goal of a uniﬁed neuroscience.
These ﬁndings from different ﬁelds provide different constraints on the
same mechanism and yield a more complete image of the mechanism’s
organization than the ﬁelds can provide individually. In some cases, dif-
ferent techniques are used to provide independent evidence about a single
phenomenon (as when researchers study neural connections with differ-
ent staining techniques, such as Golgi stains and terminal degeneration).
In other cases, different techniques expose different aspects of a single
mechanism (as when researchers in one ﬁeld study anatomy and those
in another study electrophysiology). If the ﬁelds and techniques were not
largely autonomous, if the results of one could be translated into the results
of the other, then they would not provide independent evidence about a
mechanism (cf. Wylie 2002).
2.2 The mechanistic shift
If LTP was not discovered in the search for a memory mechanism, then how
did LTP come to be associated with learning and memory? This upward-
looking phase of the research program, in which the lower-level phe-
nomenon is related to a higher-level mechanism, continues to the present.
This phase developed only after the discovery of potentiation in the hippo-
campus that lasts longer than ten minutes. Some neuroscientists in the1950s
and 1960s had a downward reductive view of the connection between syn
aptic changes and learning. However, after the 1973 LTP watershed, these
reductive aspirations were replaced by mechanistic explanatory goals.


=== PAGE 262 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 241
Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, for example, had clear reductive
aspirations:
The ‘‘all-or-none’’ law of nervous activity is sufﬁcient to insure that the activity
of any neuron may be represented as a proposition. Physiological relations existing
among nervous activities correspond, of course, to relations among the propo-
sitions; and the utility of the r epresentation depends upon the identity of these
relations to relations among the proposit ions. To each reaction of any neuron
there is a corresponding assertion of a simple proposition. This, in turn, implies
either some other simple proposition or t he disjunction or the conjunction, with
or without negation, of similar propositions according to the conﬁguration of the
synapses upon and the threshold of the neuron in question. (McCulloch and Pitts
1943: 352)
In this explanatory schema, propositions are identiﬁed with all-or-nothing
activity in neurons, and the interrelationships among action potentials
in a network are identiﬁed with complex propositions (for example,
conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations) and with inferences among
propositions (for example, from the activation of two propositions separately
to the activation of their conjunction). Changes in beliefs or inference
patterns, McCulloch and Pitts suggest, might be represented as changes in
connection strengths among neurons. It would be difﬁcult to ﬁnd a clearer
statement of reductive goals anywhere in science.
Oppenheim and Putnam ( 1958) cite McCulloch and Pitts and other
mathematical biophysicists as having shown that phenomena at the level
of the whole organism (psychology) are reducible to phenomena at the
level of cells. Oppenheim and Putnam use this purported achievement as
evidence for their historical thesis:
In terms of such nerve nets it is possible to give hypothetical micro-reductions
for memory, exact thinking, distinguishing similarity or dissimilarity of stimulus patterns,
abstracting of ‘‘essential’’ components of a stimulus pattern, recognition of shape regardless
of form and of chord regardless of pitch (phenomena of great importance to Gestalt
psychology), purposeful behavior as controlled by negative feedback,adaptive behavior,
and mental disorders. (Oppenheim and Putnam 1958: 20; italics in original)
Something like the goal of reducing learning to synaptic changes is implicit
in the early reports of synaptic plasticity from Oslo. The claim was not
that learning in organisms is identical to synaptic changes, but rather that
synaptic changes are a simple and primitive type of learning. Andersen and


=== PAGE 263 ===

242 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
Lømo, who in 1967 were the ﬁrst to associate this form of plasticity with
learning, write that the phenomenon is ‘‘of some interest in connection
with,’’ ‘‘an indication of,’’ and ‘‘an example of’’ a synaptic learning process.
Sir J. C. Eccles, with whom Andersen worked from 1961 to 1963, uses
similar language. Unlike the Oslo community, Eccles was speciﬁcally
interested in neural correlates of learning, and he was looking for evidence
of plasticity in spinal reﬂex circuits. Eccles was able to produce short-
term changes in synaptic strength. He thought of this potentiation in the
spinal cord as a kind of memory. He claimed, for example, that ‘‘disused
synapses are capable of ‘learning’ to operate more effectively’’ (Eccles
1953) in the sense that repeated stimulation (experience) strengthens the
synapse (long-lasting change). Andersen and Lømo explicitly note that the
phenomenon reported in their 1967 paper does not last long enough to
be plausibly identiﬁed with learning in organisms ( 1967: 410). This is why
they describe their phenomenon as merely a simpliﬁed model or example
of memory—not as a potential memory mechanism.
In 1966, Lømo published an abstract in which he described a form
of tetanus-induced plasticity in the hippocampus that lasts for hours. In
1968, when Bliss arrived for his post-doctoral fellowship, he teamed up
with Lømo to characterize LTP. This work culminated in the 1973 LTP
watershed (Bliss and Lømo 1973; Bliss and Gardner-Medwin 1973; Bliss,
Gardner-Medwin, and Lømo 1973). These papers are the ﬁrst to charac-
terize the LTP phenomenon in detail. The authors are also the ﬁrst to
suggest clearly, albeit timidly, that LTP might be associated with learning.
Finally, these researchers subtly reconceptualize the link between LTP and
memory. They describe LTP, not as identical to memory, or as a kind
of memory, but rather as a component in a multilevel memory mechanism.
This implicit shift from reductive to mechanistic explanatory objectives
guided subsequent research by clarifying two basic goals. The ﬁrst goal
is downward-looking: to discover ‘‘the mechanisms which might be
responsible for long-lasting Potentiation’’ (Bliss and Lømo1973: 350). This
topic is the near exclusive focus of the discussion section of this ﬁrst paper.
Bliss and Lømo mention learning only in passing, noting in the ﬁnal
paragraph that the results are interesting partly because the effect lasts so
long and partly because it occurs in a cortical pathway associated with learn-
ing and memory. The second goal is upward-looking: to evaluate the role
of LTP in higher-level memory mechanisms. Bliss and Gardner-Medwin


=== PAGE 264 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 243
(1973) address this topic by attempting to produce LTP in awake and
behaving rabbits:
Since an increase in the effectiveness of synapses may be a process underlying
some forms of memory, it was considered important to establish whether long-
lasting synaptic changes could be produced in animals in an approximately normal
physiological condition. (1973: 358)
Sleeping rabbits do not learn. If LTP is a learning mechanism, it should
be possible to produce it without anesthesia. Again, however, this paper
leaves the association with learning and memory largely for the reader
to infer. The primary arguments in support of the upward-looking goal
are in Bliss, Gardner-Medwin, and Lømo ( 1973). Their introduction is
an extended argument for the relevance of LTP to learning and memory.
Their argument, not coincidentally, appeals to results from multiple ﬁelds.
They appeal to experimental psychologists’ ablation studies (Douglas1967),
biochemists’ assays of the molecular constituents of the hippocampus
(Hyden 1973), physiologists’ EEG recordings during memory tasks (Elazar
and Adey 1967), psychiatrists’ evaluations of patients with brain damage
(Milner 1970), electrophysiologists’ theoretical considerations (Eccles1953;
Hebb 1949), and computer scientists’ models (Marr 1970). Results from
these different ﬁelds constrain the possibilities for situating LTP within a
multilevel mechanism.
As of 1973, LTP was no longer proposed as identical to or as an example
of memory, but rather as a component in a multilevel memory mechanism.
This shift in explanatory perspective clearly deﬁned the goals of the LTP
research program and, at the same time, situated the LTP phenomenon in
a theoretical framework for integrating ﬁelds in the young neurosciences of
memory. Anatomists, biochemists, electrophysiologists, psychologists, and
psychiatrists could contribute to understanding either the mechanism of
LTP or the memory mechanisms that contain it.
2.3 Mechanism as a working hypothesis
This revised history helps to dislodge three reductionist assumptions about
the LM research program. First, the LTP research program is a clear
historical counterexample to those (such as Oppenheim and Putnam 1958;
Bickle 2003) who present reduction as a general empirical hypothesis about
trends in science. In the1970s, one crucial development in the LM research


=== PAGE 265 ===

244 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
program was an upward connection of LTP to learning and memory. This
goal explains why it was so important for Bliss and Lømo to extend the
duration of the potentiation beyond minutes to hours and days. This goal
also explains why it was so important for Bliss and Gardner-Medwin to
show that they could produce the phenomenon in awake and behaving
rabbits. And, ﬁnally, this goal explains why Bliss, Gardner-Medwin, and
Lømo ( 1973) open with an extended argument that LTP is relevant to
memory. LTP became more than an experimental curiosity because it came
to be plausibly associated with learning and memory.
The LM research program continues to involve both upward and
downward connections in a hierarchy of mechanisms. Bickle (2003)i sr i g h t
to note that many researchers use techniques from molecular biology and
electrophysiology to understand the molecular and synaptic mechanisms
implicated in the phenomenon of learning and memory. Some focus on
the molecular mechanisms involved in the induction and maintenance of
LTP, some on the anatomy of changes in dendritic spines, and some on the
structural basis for conformation changes in the NMDA receptor. Others
evaluate the relevance of LTP to higher-level phenomena. Different aspects
of learning and memory are found to be localized in different areas of the
brain (see Buckner and Wheeler 2001). Many continue to test the link
between LTP and different varieties of memory, but others also explore the
role of LTP in addiction (Thomas and Malenka 2003), fear conditioning
(Schafe and LeDoux 2000;S c h a f ee t a l .2000), and pathologies of the
nervous system such as Alzheimer’s disease (see, for example, Rowan et al.
2003). My point is that the history of neuroscientiﬁc research on learning
and memory does not show merely a trend toward downward reduction.
Instead, research is focused up and down in a hierarchy as new problems
are recognized and as new techniques become available. Only if one has
a downward reductive bias in mind can one see the history of the LM
research program, or the contemporary LTP research program, as evidence
for a downward reductive trend toward a fundamental explanatory level.
The mosaic model, in comparison, emphasizes the interdisciplinary richness
of this historical episode.
Second, the focus of reduction models on interlevel relationships distracts
attention from interﬁeld integration at a single level. The research program
at Oslo was built around the idea that anatomical and electrophysiological


=== PAGE 266 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 245
studies could be used in tandem to study the structure and the function of
brain regions such as the hippocampus. Anatomists and electrophysiologists
were not working at different levels of mechanisms. Workers in each ﬁeld
were concerned with neurons and hippocampal wiring diagrams. Similarly,
workers who argue for the relevance of LTP to learning and memory appeal
to results from different ﬁelds to show that the hippocampus is relevant to
memory and that synaptic plasticity is theoretically plausible as a mechanism
of learning. Again, workers in these ﬁelds do not operate at different levels;
rather, they provide different perspectives on the same level. At least since
Oppenheim and Putnam, reductionists have assumed that there is roughly
a one-to-one mapping among ﬁelds of science, scientiﬁc theories, and
levels of organization. The multiﬁeld nature of mid-twentieth-century
neuroscience, as exempliﬁed in the LM research program, shows how
restrictive this assumption is. The different perspectives and techniques of
different ﬁelds allow them to study different aspects of the same mechanism
at a single level. Because reduction models are necessarily designed to
represent relations among theories at different levels (or between a theory
and its successor), they are not suited to represent the kind of interﬁeld
unity achieved at a given level.
The ﬁnal lesson from this revised history is that the workers in the LM
research program implicitly abandoned reduction as an explanatory goal in
favor of the search for multilevel mechanisms. When they take reduction
as a goal or method, researchers are driven to look for one lower-level
vocabulary in terms of which theexplanandum phenomenon can be described,
or with which an equipotent image of the explanandum phenomenon can
be constructed. This is precisely what McCulloch and Pitts tried to do
by relating propositional structures to neural structures. Although the LM
research program of the 1950s does exhibit a broadly reductive style of
explanation, that approach was gradually replaced through the 1970sb ya
more ecumenical and multilevel mechanistic style of explanation. This shift
in explanatory ideals allowed researchers from multiple ﬁelds to contribute
to the development of neuroscientiﬁc explanations. ⁷
⁷ Kenneth Schaffner (forthcoming) describes a recent example from behavioral and psychiatric
genetics. In the early 1990s, researchers hoped to ﬁnd crude linkages between behavioral and
psychiatric traits (for example, aggression and schi zophrenia) and genes. This project largely failed to
produce replicable results (see Hamer 2002). In response, researchers began to appeal to higher-level


=== PAGE 267 ===

246 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
The mid-twentieth century was a formative period in the history of
neuroscience as a discipline—a period during which researchers self-
consciously worked to create a multiﬁeld research program. This period
witnessed F. O. Schmitt’s neuroscience study program, the origins of the
SfN, and the scattered appearance worldwide of departments with names
like ‘‘Neurophysiology’’ and ‘‘Psychobiology.’’ It would be surprising
if one did not ﬁnd evidence during this time of shifting standards and
explanatory objectives. The origins of the LM research program span this
coalescence of the neural sciences into Neuroscience. In this milieu, the
goal of describing multilevel mechanisms dislodged classical reduction as
the ﬁeld’s explanatory ideal.
Oppenheim and Putnam recommend reduction as a working hypothesis
for building the unity of science. To support this thesis, they appeal to
historical evidence of reductive trends in science. But their argument is
ﬂawed because they overlook evidence of upward-looking trends. It is
also ﬂawed because even if there were a downward trend before 1950,
neuroscience after the1950s became increasingly multilevel and increasingly
integrative. I propose a new working hypothesis on the basis of this revised
history: The unity of neuroscience is achieved as different ﬁelds contribute
constraints on multilevel mechanistic explanations. Rather than reductive
unity, contemporary neuroscience exhibits mosaic unity.
3. Intralevel Integration and the Mosaic
Unity of Neuroscience
I now turn from historical considerations to the task of constructing a
positive model of the unity of neuroscience. In this section, I focus on
intralevel cases of interﬁeld integration. The reduction model is not equipped
to handle such cases of interﬁeld integration because the phenomena are not
at different levels, the terms used to describe them are not translated into
one another, and the descriptions are not homomorphic with one another.
The reductive goal of globally relating two ﬁelds through derivation of laws
should be replaced by a mosaic image of multiple ﬁelds making punctate
intermediates (such as activation in brain regions) and environmental factors (such as being raised in
an abusive household). Thus far, results in this multilevel tradition seem to be more promising and
replicable than their predecessors.


=== PAGE 268 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 247
contributions to an abstract sketch of a mechanism. This view of the unity
of neuroscience derives from Darden and Maull’s (1977) idea that the unity
of science is often achieved by constructing interﬁeld theories. What is
missing from Darden and Maull’s account, and what is provided by my
account of mechanistic explanation, is an explanatory structure of interﬁeld
theories that can accommodate contributions from multiple ﬁelds. In what
follows, I provide a detailed account of how progress toward the mosaic
unity of neuroscience proceeds.
3.1. The space of possible mechanisms
Mechanistic theory building typically proceeds through the piecemeal
accumulation of constraints on the space of possible mechanisms for a
phenomenon. Different ﬁelds are integrated when their ﬁndings provide
constraints on the space of possible mechanisms. The abstract goal of
constructing multilevel mechanistic explanations serves as a skeletal frame-
work—a most abstract mechanism schema—on which neuroscientists
construct the mosaic unity of neuroscience.
The space of possible mechanisms , conceived most inclusively, contains all
the mechanisms that could possibly explain a phenomenon. The dimensions
of this space are deﬁned by the entities, properties, and activities that
compose the how-possibly mechanism at all relevant levels, and by the
varieties of organization among its components. Points in this space are
single how-possibly explanations. Distances between these points indicate
the degree of similarity between any two possible mechanisms, and regions
of this space represent classes of similar mechanisms. Scientists never
consider the entire space of possible mechanisms. They typically start
with a restricted space shaped by prior assumptions about what kinds of
components are likely to be included, what kinds of organization are
likely to be relevant, and what sorts of basic constraints are assumed to
be in play (for example, gravitation, the light postulate, and energetic
constraints). They thus typically work within a roughly deﬁned space of
plausible mechanisms, that is, the space of possible mechanisms consistent
with known or assumed constraints. Hille’s diagram of possible gating
mechanisms (Chapter 4,F i g u r e4.2), for example, marks out several distinct
regions in a space of possible mechanisms for Na
+ channel gating.
A constraint is a ﬁnding that either shapes the boundaries of the space of
plausible mechanisms or changes the probability distribution over that space


=== PAGE 269 ===

248 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
(that is, the probability that some point or region of the space accurately
describes the actual mechanism). Some constraints exclude regions of the
space; they show that some set of possible mechanisms is impossible given
what is known about the components and their organization. On the
other hand, the discovery of a new component, a new property of a
component, or a new feature of the organization of a mechanism can open
previously closed regions of the space of plausible mechanisms. Watson and
Crick’s (1953) discovery of the double helix structure of DNA immediately
suggested to them a mechanism for copying the genetic material, and
the gating charge suggested to Hille and Armstrong that the activation of
Na+ channels might involve the outward rotation of an α-helix. Other
constraints direct attention to a given region of the space of possible
mechanisms. A particular arrangement of components, a particular by-
product, and the susceptibility of a mechanism to speciﬁc forms of regulation
and control indicate that a speciﬁc kind of mechanism is involved, even if
one is not yet in a position to describe all its components or all aspects of
its organization. Constraints on the space of possible mechanisms, in short,
constitute the relevant evidence for evaluating how-possibly descriptions of
mechanisms. Progress from how-possibly to how-actually descriptions of a
mechanism can thus be conceived as a process of shaping and constricting
the space of plausible mechanisms.
Different ﬁelds of neuroscience are characterized by different central
problems, different techniques, and different theoretical vocabularies (Dar-
den and Maul 1977). Individually, these ﬁelds often direct their attention
only to a narrow range of constraints required for constructing and eval-
uating a given mechanistic explanation. Researchers in a ﬁeld might, for
example, attend exclusively to mechanisms involved in gene regulation
and protein synthesis, to biochemical cascades in the cytoplasm, or to
the behavior of ion channels or receptors. Some researchers characterize
the anatomical structures in neural pathways, monitor the gross activation
patterns of brain regions and systems, or observe the behaviors of whole
organisms. The mosaic unity of neuroscience results from the integration
of constraints from multiple ﬁelds on a common mechanism.
3.2 Speciﬁc constraints on the space of possible mechanisms
One cannot know in advance how many kinds of constraint there are or
which constraints are relevant to understanding a given mechanism. But a


=== PAGE 270 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 249
Table 7.1. Intralevel and interlevel
constraints on multilevel mechanisms
Intralevel constraints
Componency constraints
Spatial constraints
Size
Shape
Location
Connection
Compartmentalization
Temporal constraints
Order
Rate
Duration
Active constraints
Interlevel constraints
Accommodative constraints
Top-down accommodation
Bottom-up accommodation
Spatial and temporal constraints
Mutual manipulability constraints
number of general constraints follow from the characteristic organization
of mechanisms discussed in Chapter 4. A preliminary list of intralevel
constraints on the space of possible mechanisms is shown in Table 7.1.I n
this section, I describe these different constraints, show how they are used
in the process of building theories, and I discuss cases in which they have
served as loci for interﬁeld integration.
3.2.1. Componency constraints At different times in history, neuroscientists
have used different kinds of components to construct models of neural
mechanisms. Renaissance anatomists described animal spirits that moved
through the brain’s ventricles, and they took the surrounding cerebrum
to be just so much padding. For Descartes, the brain is an organ where
memories are stored, and it has the power to move the body by controlling
the ﬂow of physical animal spirits through hollow nerves. Hartley described
the brain as a medullary substance, in which vibrating ﬁbers transmit sensory
input and form associations. Prior to the neuron doctrine, many believed
that the brain is a holistic reticulum, with all of its parts contributing
to its activity. Only faint echoes of these ideas remain in contemporary
neuroscience. The brain is composed of neurons. Neurons transmit signals


=== PAGE 271 ===

250 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
in the form of action potentials. They communicate across electrical and
chemical synapses. They are composed of a complicated array of cytoplasmic
molecules. They have characteristic ways of generating electricity, of
repairing themselves, and of eliminating waste products. They are organized
into networks of cells that make up systems, many of which have widely
conserved patterns of organization. These diverse items constitute the ontic
store of contemporary neuroscience: the set of stock-in-trade items out
of which models of mechanisms can be built. Introductory neuroscience
textbooks acquaint students with this store.
The store of entities and activities expands and contracts with the
addition and removal of established entities and activities over time. In
early theoretical discussions of synaptic plasticity, for example, researchers
conjectured that synapses could be strengthened as axons and dendrites
swell and move closer to one another, as neurons grow and shrink, as new
neurons are born and die, and as glial cells enter and recede from synapses.
Current models of LTP describe a mechanism that adds new receptors to
dendrites, changes the shape of dendritic spines, and activates silent synapses.
These mechanisms contain such components as NMDA receptors, AMPA
receptors, adenylyl cyclase, protein kinase A, MAP kinase, CREB, and
nitric oxide. One prima facie constraint on any mechanism is that it
should not add new items to the ontic store without justiﬁcation. For
example, the LTP researcher Robert Malinow gave faint praise to one
recent mechanism for the maintenance of LTP by saying, ‘‘If nothing else,
this model is attractive because it requires only established intracellular
signaling mechanisms’’ (Malinow 1998: 1226). Conversely, by expanding
the store of components, one can open up previously unrecognized regions
of the space of possible mechanisms. Prior to the 1980s it was widely
assumed that transmission at chemical synapses is unidirectional from axon
to dendrite. Then researchers noted that nitric oxide, which can ﬂow freely
in either direction, acts as a neurotransmitter. This opened the possibility
that events in the post-synaptic cell might exert inﬂuence on the activities
of mechanisms in pre-synaptic cells.
Researchers in the different ﬁelds that contribute to LTP research are pri-
marily concerned with different kinds of entities and activities. Biochemists,
for example, focus on chains of reactions in the cytoplasm. Molecular biol-
ogists study the machinery of protein production. Electron microscopists
investigate the structure of post-synaptic dendrites. Electrophysiologists


=== PAGE 272 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 251
investigate whether individual synapses are ‘‘silent’’ or ‘‘active.’’ Channel
physiologists study the ﬂow of current through individual channels. Protein
chemists study the structure of receptors and channels. Thus to construct
the explanation of LTP, one must integrate data from several different ﬁelds.
Componency constraints are one important locus of interﬁeld integration.
3.2.2. Spatial constraints Spatial organization is often crucial for the work-
ing of a mechanism. The components of mechanisms often must be
compartmentalized, localized, connected, structured, and oriented with
respect to one another (see Chapter 4, Section 7). Researchers in differ-
ent ﬁelds often investigate different forms of spatial organization and are
uniquely suited to provide certain spatial constraints.
Consider compartmentalization. Different components or stages of
mechanisms are conﬁned within reasonably well-deﬁned physical bound-
aries, such as a nuclear membrane, a cell membrane, or skin. In their
discussion section, Bliss and Lømo ( 1973) generate a set of how-possibly
mechanisms that might account for LTP. Some of these mechanisms involve
pre-synaptic elements, such as the pre-synaptic cell’s becoming more excit-
able by the test stimulus or an increase in the amount of neurotransmitter
released per synapse (1973: 252). They also consider post-synaptic mechan-
isms, including an ‘‘increase in the sensitivity of the post-synaptic junctional
membrane’’ (252) and ‘‘a reduction in the resistance of the narrow stem by
which [dendritic] spines are attached to the parent dendrite’’ (252). Debates
raged through the 1990s—and continue to some extent to this day—about
whether the mechanism of LTP is located in the pre-synaptic or the post-
synaptic cell, or (as a few participants in the debate argue) perhaps both.
At stake in these debates, besides the truth of the matter, is the question of
which ﬁelds and techniques investigate the most important aspects of LTP’s
mechanism. For example, if pre-synaptic mechanisms are responsible for
LTP, then ﬁelds of neuroscience that focus on the mechanisms of neuro-
transmitter synthesis and release are the most important for elaborating the
molecular aspects of this multilevel hierarchy. One can use quantal analysis
(that is, analysis of the number and frequency of vesicular release events
from the pre-synaptic neuron) to determine how many vesicles fuse to
the membrane and dump their contents into the synapse with each action
potential, and how the frequency of release changes with potentiation. One
can try to assess the number of neurotransmitter molecules contained per


=== PAGE 273 ===

252 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
vesicle to determine whether or not it changes with stimulation. One can
experiment to determine whether or not modiﬁcations in the mechanisms
of neurotransmitter release (such as changes in Ca 2+ regulation in the
axon terminal) account for any observed changes. If post-synaptic mecha-
nisms are involved, then the molecular mechanisms of LTP would be the
province of a different set of ﬁelds: those investigating the properties of
receptors and ion channels, the structures of dendrites, and the synthesis and
trafﬁcking of proteins in the post-synaptic cell. The question of whether
or not LTP is pre-synaptic or post-synaptic has played such a central role
in contemporary discussions of LTP because compartmentalizing the phe-
nomenon is a crucial step in determining which components are relevant to
explaining the phenomenon, and also, derivatively, which techniques and
theoretical perspectives are most useful for investigating the phenomenon.
Compartmentalization is thus an important constraint in the integration of
ﬁelds in neuroscience.
To understand a mechanism, one must oftenlocalize different component
entities and activities. For example, Bliss, Gardner-Medwin, and Lømo
(1973) argue for the importance of LTP in memory on the grounds
that it can be induced in the hippocampus and that the hippocampus
is a crucial brain region for various sorts of memory tasks. Bechtel and
Richardson ( 1993) and Bechtel ( 1988) discuss this aspect of the search
for mechanistic explanations in great detail. What I stress here is that
different ﬁelds in neuroscience are uniquely capable of providing different
kinds of evidence for localization. Researchers using PET, MRI, and
TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation) are well suited for discoveries
concerning the localization of different kinds of brain systems in different
brain regions. Electron microscopists are uniquely capable of determining
whether or not new synapses (if such there be) are located in the right places
to receive input from a pre-synaptic cell. As with compartmentalization,
localization at several grains of size directs researchers to look within those
locations for component entities in still lower-level mechanisms.
Knowing that the hippocampus is an important locus for the LM expla-
nation, one can then begin to describe the connections of these hippocampal
components. As discussed above, researchers at Oslo used several different
techniques to trace these connections. Some used Golgi stains. Others
used terminal degeneration techniques. Others used electrophysiological
methods to stimulate one population of cells and to determine which other


=== PAGE 274 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 253
areas respond to the stimulus. Researchers using these three perspectives
on synaptic connectivity address spatial organization with different sets of
assumptions and techniques.
Finally, structure and orientation are often crucial aspects of a mechanism’s
organization. The stages of mechanisms often depend crucially upon
entities with appropriate structures having appropriate orientations with
respect to one another. Thus, structural aspects of the LTP mechanism are
a major focus of recent research on LTP. Engert and Bonhoeffer ( 1999)
and Maletic-Savatic, Malinow, and Svoboda ( 1999) present evidence that
new dendritic spines are added to recently potentiated synapses. While
far from conclusive, such evidence suggests a structural basis for one
plausible mechanism sketch for LTP. The idea, yet to be conﬁrmed, is
that the addition of new dendritic spines makes the post-synaptic cell
more responsive to glutamate. The mechanism by which such dendritic
spines appear has also been subject to structural constraints investigated
by constructing three-dimensional images of dendrites and surrounding
cells (see Harris et al. 2003). Whether the structures involved are cells,
neurotransmitters, receptors, intracellular signaling molecules, or dendritic
spines, one must know which structures are involved to determine whether
the parts can do what a how-possibly description demands of them.
Researchers in different ﬁelds assess structural features of different kinds of
entities, and their results often must be combined to assess whether a given
how-possibly mechanism could work.
In sum, researchers in different ﬁelds are uniquely equipped to study
different aspects of a mechanism’s spatial organization. The mosaic unity
of neuroscience is built, in part, through the effort to combine spa-
tial constraints at and across levels into an adequate description of a
mechanism.
3.2.3. Temporal constraints The mosaic unity of neuroscience is also con-
structed through the search for temporal constraints. Findings from different
ﬁelds concerning the order, rate, duration, and frequency of activities in a
mechanism constrain the space of possible mechanisms.
Consider the order of the activities of the entities composing a mech-
anism—that is, their relative position in the series, forks, and cycles that
make up the mechanism. Spatial organization alone does not indicate the
direction of productivity in a mechanism—one must observe that electrical


=== PAGE 275 ===

254 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
activity ﬂows clockwise through the circuit of hippocampal neurons, and
that NMDA receptors allow Ca2+ inﬂux into the post-synaptic cell, there-
by initiating protein production. Knowledge of temporal sequence alone
is not sufﬁcient to establish these productive relationships, but temporal
relations place constraints on which entities and activities can be productive
of which others.
Temporal constraints on the space of possible mechanisms also include
ﬁndings concerning the rates and durations of different stages in the mech-
anism. Researchers who believe that enduring LTP might be sustained by
the addition of receptors to the post-synaptic cell, for example, cannot use
this mechanism to explain the initial induction of LTP because it takes
around thirty minutes to produce the required proteins, distribute them,
and insert them into the membrane. Short-term induction of LTP requires
some faster mechanism, such as the phosphorylation of AMPA receptors.
Possible mechanisms are pruned from the hypothesis space on the grounds
that the stages or steps take too long or happen too slowly to produce a
phenomenon with a given rate or duration.
Researchers in different ﬁelds investigate different temporal constraints on
mechanisms. Electrophysiologists investigate the time-course of electrical
activities in nerve cells, biochemists study enzyme kinetics and reaction
rates, and psychologists study rates of learning and forgetting. Different
constraints apply to different parts of a hierarchically organized mechanism.
These ﬁndings, like the tiles of a mosaic, ﬁll in the details of how-
possibly sketches to bring a complete and detailed image of the mechanism
into view.
3.2.4. Active constraints To understand a mechanism, one needs to know
how activities at one stage of the mechanism produce, alter, allow, or
prevent activities at other stages. I offer a manipulationist account of such
relations in Chapter 3.
The search for active constraints (relationships among variables under
ideal interventions and the conditions under which those relationships
obtain) is a frequent locus of interﬁeld integration. Results from different
ﬁelds are often required to assess which entities act and interact with one
another. In many cases, the techniques of different ﬁelds will be required to
intervene into one variable and to detect the other. Thus, one might inter-
vene to prevent protein synthesis in the post-synaptic cell (pharmacology


=== PAGE 276 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 255
or molecular biology) and detect the effects on the ability of the synapse
to induce LTP (electrophysiology); or intervene to induce LTP (electro-
physiology) and detect changes in the dendrites of the post-synaptic cell
(electron microscopy and cytological anatomy); or intervene to run a rat in a
maze (experimental psychology) and detect spatial maps in its hippocampus
(population electrophysiology). The techniques of different ﬁelds are often
combined to test the active aspects of the organization of a mechanism.
This constitutes progress in establishing the mosaic unity of neuroscience.
3.3 Reduction and the intralevel integration of ﬁelds
Above, I identify four main varieties of constraint on mechanistic expla-
nations. Each of these constraints is exclusively intralevel. The unity of
science thus achieved is a form of scientiﬁc integration that reduction is not
equipped to handle. For intralevel interﬁeld integration, the phenomena
are not at different levels; rather, the ﬁelds investigate different components
or stages of the same mechanism. The terms describing the different con-
straints are not translated into one another. Nor are the different constraints
identiﬁed with one another. Finally, the different constraints are usually not
homomorphic with one another; they may be as different as the entities and
processes studied by anatomy and electrophysiology. Reduction models are
focused on only a special case in the unity of neuroscience—interlevel
integration—to the neglect of common forms of intralevel integration.
Darden and Maull argued in 1977 that reduction is ill-equipped to
handle interﬁeld relations. They stress that interﬁeld integration is often
achieved by constructing interﬁeld theories rather than by reducing one
theory to another. Darden and Maull do not describe the structure of
interﬁeld theories, relying instead on traditional formal models of theories
as partially interpreted axiomatic systems (see Maull 1977). The account
of multilevel mechanistic explanation that I develop supplements Darden
and Maull’s account of the unity of science with a detailed view of the
structure of interﬁeld theories. When researchers explain a phenomenon,
their goal is not merely to build a ‘‘theory’’; they set out to discover a
mechanism, to identify its components, and to ﬁnd the crucial features
of its spatial, temporal, and active organization. The goal of discovering a
mechanism acts as an abstract framework that guides researchers’ attention
to speciﬁc kinds of evidence (that is, the constraints) that are relevant
to evaluating potential explanations. The mosaic unity of neuroscience is


=== PAGE 277 ===

256 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
achieved as researchers in different ﬁelds integrate their results as constraints
on multilevel mechanistic explanations.
4. Interlevel Integration and the Mosaic
Unity of Neuroscience
The mosaic model also has many advantages over reduction for understand-
ing interlevel forms of interﬁeld integration. According to classical reduction
models, levels are integrated by identifying the kind-terms describing phe-
nomena at one level with the kind-terms describing the phenomena of
another. Less formally precise models of reduction involve the formulation
of ‘‘ontological reductive links’’ and the construction of a homomorphic
model of the higher-level theory within the lower-level theory. The
mechanistic approach I develop in the preceding chapters provides an
alternative, causal-mechanical, approach to interlevel integration. It has
four main advantages over reduction for thinking about interlevel inte-
gration. First, it provides a straightforward way to interpret ‘‘levels’’ and,
accordingly, the idea of interlevel integration. Second, whereas reduction
models involve global relationships between theories at different levels,
the mosaic model accommodates the fact that interlevel relations are often
formulated piecemeal, within local mechanisms, by adding constraints on
interlevel relations. Third, the mechanistic account accommodates both
upward- and downward-looking interlevel integration. Finally, the mosa-
ic view details the varied forces driving the co-evolution of work at
different levels.
4.1 What is interlevel integration?
At least since the1973 watershed, the theory incorporating LTP has spanned
multiple levels. As I discuss in Chapter 5, there are at least four prominent
levels. At the top is learning and memory (for example, the performance
of some learning and memory task, such as learning to run a maze). Below
that is the hippocampus generating spatial maps, consolidating information,
or tutoring the cortex (there is still debate about the function of the
hippocampus). Beneath the hippocampus are the chemical and electrical
activities of synapses and cells. And at the lowest level are the activities
of the molecules that make up the synapse, such as the NMDA receptor


=== PAGE 278 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 257
activating and inactivating. These are levels of mechanisms—levels that
are related as parts to a whole with the additional restriction that the
parts are components. According to this dominant story, the NMDA
receptor is a component in the mechanism of LTP, LTP is a component
in the mechanism of spatial map formation, and spatial map formation is a
component in the mechanisms of spatial navigation.
What does it mean to integrate levels of mechanisms? The three papers
constituting the LTP watershed, recall, deﬁne two integrative goals for
the research program—one upward-looking, and the other downward-
looking. Upward-looking interlevel integration involves showing that an
item is a component in a higher-level mechanism. The downward-looking
aspect of interlevel integration involves describing lower-level mechanisms
for a higher-level phenomenon. This requires one to identify the compo-
nent entities and activities, the relevant properties, and their organization.
These forms of interlevel integration are represented in Figure 7.1.
Begin with X’s φ-ing at the 0-level. X’s φ-ing is integrated into a higher
Higher-Level Mechanism
Computation in the Hippocampus
Lower-Level Mechanism
Molecular Mechanism of LTP
+1 Level
−1 Level
LTP
0 Level
Sψ -ing
X φ-ing
Ps ρ-ing
Figure 7.1. Integrating levels of mechanisms


=== PAGE 279 ===

258 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
(+1) level by showing how X’s φ-ing is organized together with other
components in the mechanism of S’s ψ-ing at the +1 level. Integrating
the 0-level with the lower ( −1) level is a matter of describing the
mechanism for X’s φ-ing. This constitutive explanation describes the
activities {ρ1, ρ2, ... , ρk} and entities {P1,P 2,... , P j} in the mechanism
along with their organization such that X φs. A phenomenon is integrated
with adjacent levels to the extent that it is known: (i) what the relevant
aspects of the phenomenon at the 0 level are; (ii) how those aspects of that
phenomenon are organized within a higher +1 level mechanism; and (iii)
how those aspects of the phenomenon are constitutively explained by a
lower (– 1) level mechanism.
This view of interlevel integration provides a much more precise and
scientiﬁcally informed account of what is required to link levels in a hier-
archy of mechanisms than that provided by reduction models. Integrating
mechanistic levels is not a matter of establishing identities across levels
but of establishing relationships of componency and explanatory relevance
(see Chapter 4, Section 8). For example, it is not enough to integrate an
item into a contextual mechanism that one shows merely that X’s φ-ing is
perfectly correlated with S’s ψ-ing at the +1 level. Such correlation would
provide limited evidence that the levels are integrated, but correlation is
not integration. What is required in addition is that one should be able to
manipulate S’s ψ-ing by manipulating X’sφ-ing, and one should be able to
manipulate X’s φ-ing by manipulating S’s ψ-ing. In addition to satisfying
the mutual manipulability requirement, integrating a component into a
higher-level mechanism requires showing how Xa n di t sφ-ing are orga-
nized—spatially, temporally, and actively—with the other components
such that S ψs. To situate LTP within LM mechanisms, one must provide
a contextual description of how, at a given population of synapses, LTP is
organized spatially, temporally, and actively with the other components in
the system such that it is capable of, for example, encoding memories.
4.2 Constraints on interlevel integration
Like intralevel interﬁeld integration, interlevel interﬁeld integration is con-
structed piecemeal as constraints on a multilevel mechanism are discovered.
Consider some interlevel constraints that shape the space of plausible
multilevel mechanisms.


=== PAGE 280 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 259
4.2.1. Accommodative constraints In sciences driven by the search for mecha-
nisms, one goal is to accommodate the taxonomy ofexplanandum phenomena
to the taxonomy of mechanistic explanations. Patricia Churchland ( 1986;
Churchland and Sejnowski 1992) argues that levels often ‘‘co-evolve’’ dur-
ing reduction in the sense that what is known at the different levels must
be revised in order to bring them into sufﬁcient alignment for reduction to
succeed. As I argue in Section 4 of Chapter 4, there are a number of errors
of ﬁt between a mechanism and a phenomenon, including splitting errors,
lumping errors, and errors of mischaracterization. These errors derive from
a mismatch between the explanandum phenomena and the mechanisms that
explain them. The attempt to accommodate these taxonomies to one
another often forces researchers in different ﬁelds to change the way that
they think about their domain. Researchers in different ﬁelds thus expe-
rience epistemic pressure to change their characterization of phenomena
in their domain in the process of building bridges with other ﬁelds across
levels. Accommodation across levels proceeds either from the top-down or
from the bottom-up.
Top-down accommodation : the description of mechanisms is ineliminably
perspectival (see Chapter 4). Mechanisms include all and only the enti-
ties, activities and organizational features relevant to the phenomenon.
Researchers in ﬁelds characterizing higher-level phenomena inﬂuence
those investigating lower-level phenomena by setting (if only tentatively)
the boundaries of the mechanism. A world viewed only at the funda-
mental level would be a world of gory details unﬁltered by a higher-level
perspective (to borrow Kitcher’s apt phrase).
Consider one example of top-down inﬂuence in the history of the LM
research program. In his work on maze learning, Tolman (1948) led a gen-
eration of researchers to believe that animals navigate their environments
in part by forming spatial maps. Tolman trained rats to navigate a circuitous
route through a maze to reach a food reward. He then placed them in a
maze containing a more direct path to the reward in addition to the original
circuitous route. If spatial memory were a simple association between a
stimulus (being placed in the start box) and a pattern of motor responses, as
behaviorists suggest, one would expect the rat to take the circuitous route
through the new maze. That is the behavior that was reinforced. In fact,
however, rats prefer the direct path. Given the opportunity, rats construct
efﬁcient detours, shortcuts, and novel routes on their own (see, for example,


=== PAGE 281 ===

260 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
Chapui et al. 1987; Olton and Samuelson 1976). Experiments such as these
suggest that rats learn to run mazes not by learning stimulus-response pairs
but by forming internal representations—cognitive maps—which encode
different locations and directions in their environment. Experimental psy-
chologists have subsequently used a variety of techniques (for example,
radial arm mazes, three-table problems, and the Morris water maze) to
study different aspects of spatial memory and to identify the kinds of infor-
mation that would have to be stored in a cognitive map to produce the
observed behavioral proﬁles. The Morris water maze, one of the most pop-
ular spatial memory tests used by neuroscientists, tests the ability of rats and
mice to ﬁnd a platform beneath the surface of an opaque ﬂuid in a circular
pool. These protocols in experimental psychology are designed to exhibit
and test different aspects of a rat’s ability to navigate space, and each protocol
contributes constraints on any mechanism that might explain that ability.
In the early stages of this research program, Tolman’s results led behav-
ioral neuroscientists to search for regions of the brain that could play the
role of a spatial map. Because lesioning the hippocampus impairs perfor-
mance in mazes such as the Morris water maze, many neuroscientists came
to believe that a spatial map is located in the hippocampus. To test this
hypothesis, electrophysiologists used a variety of activation experiments
in which they engage a rat in various spatial tasks while recording the
activity of individual cells in the rat’s hippocampus. O’Keefe and Dostro-
vsky ( 1971), for example, report that individual pyramidal cells in the
hippocampus ﬁre preferentially when a rat enters a particular portion of a
maze in a particular orientation. These ﬁndings led to the idea that these
pyramidal cells function as ‘‘place cells’’ in the spatial map. Could activities
in a population of such cells represent the spatial layout of a maze? Much
later, Wilson and McNaughton (1993) used a cluster of electrodes to record
from over 150 pyramidal cells at once while a rat explored the inside of a
box. The surprising results of these experiments are that by observing the
patterns of activation in the hippocampus, these systems-level physiologists
were able to predict the trajectory of the rat through the box. (For more
recent developments, see Hafting et al. 2005.)
The spatial map hypothesis has subsequently come under attack from
those who claim that the hippocampus has a more general function
(Eichenbaum et al. 1999). These challenges are based on reﬁned behav-
ioral experiments by experimental psychologists, and their results are leading


=== PAGE 282 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 261
neuroscientists to revise their understanding of the mechanism. In each case,
however, the overall picture of scientiﬁc integration is the same. The effort
of researchers in one ﬁeld to characterize the phenomenon places accom-
modative constraints on the mechanism that must be honored by researchers
in ﬁelds whose primary domain includes the mechanism’s components.
Bottom-up accommodation: just as the description of a mechanism is con-
strained by discoveries concerning higher-level phenomena, so the character
of the higher-level phenomenon often must accommodate ﬁndings about
lower-level mechanisms. Again, this can be a locus of interﬁeld contact.
One well-known example from the history of the LM research program
is the case of H.M., as reported by Scoville and Milner ( 1957). Scoville
was a brain surgeon who worked in a psychiatric hospital, and Milner was
a graduate student in psychology. As part of a search for a more benign
form of psychosurgery than the lobotomy or leucotomy, Scoville decided
to perform a set of experimental surgeries to remove the hippocampus
bilaterally. Milner performed the psychiatric evaluations on these patients
before and after the surgery. The two were in an excellent position to
integrate psychological research on learning and memory with anatomical
research on the functional organization of the brain. They provided com-
pelling evidence that a crucial piece of the memory system is located in the
hippocampus and, further, that declarative and procedural memory have
distinct mechanisms. One conclusion drawn from this ﬁnding (and ﬁndings
from subsequent animal studies) is that memory is not a single kind of
thing, but a collection of loosely related phenomena. Scoville and Milner’s
research is but one example of how details of the underlying mechanism
can lead one to revise one’s assessment about higher-level phenomena.
When different ﬁelds investigate the phenomenon and the mechanism, this
accommodation constitutes another form of progress toward the mosaic
unity of neuroscience.
4.2.2. Spatial and temporal interlevel constraints Interlevel relationships are
also constrained by the spatial and temporal features of a phenomenon and
its mechanism. When researchers in different ﬁelds characterize different
aspects of the spatial and temporal organization of a mechanism at different
levels, a second kind of interlevel interﬁeld integration is achieved.
Localization is one of the most fundamental spatial constraints on
interlevel integration (Bechtel and Richardson 1993). Not all mechanisms


=== PAGE 283 ===

262 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
have easily localized components, but when they do, the location of
different processes can be crucial to understanding a mechanism that
incorporates them. In their effort to bridge the gap between LTP and
memory, Bliss, Gardner-Medwin, and Lømo ( 1973) appeal to ﬁndings
from anatomy, biochemistry, electrophysiology, and clinical psychology
to argue that the hippocampus is an especially important location in the
brain for memory. They argue that if the hippocampus is functionally
implicated in learning and memory, then one would expect the cells of
the hippocampus to exhibit changes (such as synaptic plasticity) that could
possibly explain its ability to play that role. The fact that LTP occurs within
the hippocampus, a region known for its contribution to memory, coupled
with the fact that synaptic plasticity is theoretically plausible as a memory
mechanism, provides suggestive evidence that LTP might be relevant to
learning and memory. In contrast, Eccles’s and Lloyd’s ( 1949) discovery
that synapses in the spinal cord are plastic is not taken to be evidence that
such plasticity might play a role in memory, in part because the spinal cord
is not a region of the CNS thought to be involved in memory encoding,
storage, or retrieval (although changes in the spinal cord might account for
the modiﬁcation of reﬂexes with experience).
Temporal constraints are also crucial for the integration of levels of
mechanisms. Learning and memory are inherently temporal phenomena.
Despite their signiﬁcant differences from one another, all forms of learning
and memory involve imposing some mark or trace of past experience on
a system and maintaining that trace for some time. Memory researchers
study, for example, how long it takes to learn a task or to memorize a list.
They ask how different practice schedules and reinforcement schedules alter
the rate at which something is learned and which items in a list are more or
less frequently forgotten (for example, primacy and recency effects). They
investigate how quickly memories begin to fade. Answers to these questions
can differ depending on, for example, the environmental conditions during
the learning or training, the kind of material that is learned, the task used
to evaluate the existence of the trace, the encoding strategies used by the
subject, and the kind of memory system called on in the performance of the
task. An adequate mechanistic explanation for memory must account for
these differences and these temporal features. It should account for learning
curves, forgetting curves, effects of different reinforcement schedules, and
the relationship between repetition and learning, just to name a few. To my


=== PAGE 284 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 263
knowledge, contemporary LM researchers have explained none of these
elementary temporal features of learning and memory (contra Bickle’s1998
suggestion that this represents an ‘‘accomplished psychoneural reduction’’).
Nevertheless, temporal arguments are relevant to interﬁeld integration in
the history of the LM research program.
Temporal constraints can be more sophisticated than these examples
suggest. One can generate a number of experiments involving temporal
constraints that should be done to assess hypothesized mechanisms for
different kinds of memory. ⁸ Here is one example. Different forms of
memory often have different temporal features; that is, the memories of
one kind take longer to acquire than those of another kind, and the two
decay at different rates. Consider, for example, the difference between
semantic memory (such as a memory that Fred MacMurray stars in Pardon
My Past ) and habit formation (such as acquiring a nicotine addiction).
There are important temporal differences between these kinds of memory.
For example, semantic memories are quickly acquired and rapidly lost.
Mere mention of the fact that Fred MacMurray stars in Pardon My Past can
sufﬁce for one to remember it for a while, but such memories are also often
ﬂeeting. Few will remember this fact hours, days, or weeks after reading it
for the ﬁrst time. Habits, in contrast, take much longer to form, but they
sometimes last forever. Smoking one cigarette, or even one pack, does not
doom one to a life of smoking in the way that months or years of continued
smoking can. Once the habit has been acquired, however, it is very difﬁcult
to lose. Semantic memories and habit memories thus differ both in the
temporal properties of their acquisition and their duration. These different
types of memory are also explained by mechanisms in different brain
structures. Many neuroscientists think that semantic memory is explained
by mechanisms in the hippocampus and perhaps in the parahippocampal
gyrus, and that habit learning is explained by mechanisms in structures such
as the caudate nucleus (also the ventral tegmental area and the nucleus
accumbens). These different brain regions are known to exhibit different
varieties of synaptic plasticity.
If synaptic changes underlie these different forms of memory, then
one would expect differences in the temporal properties of the varieties
of synaptic plasticity observed in these brain regions to correspond to
⁸ Thanks to Mortimer Mishkin for leading me to think about this sort of experiment.


=== PAGE 285 ===

264 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
differences in the temporal properties of the different kinds of memory. To
assess this matter, one would need expertise both in evaluating the different
kinds of memory and in evaluating the relevant temporal features of LTP.
These two types of questions are in the traditional domains of different
ﬁelds of neuroscience (psychology and electrophysiology). Answers to
these questions would thus help integrate the ﬁndings of different ﬁelds
and would constitute progress toward the mosaic unity of the LM research
program.
4.2.3. Interlevel manipulability constraints The most conspicuous varieties of
interﬁeld integration in contemporary neuroscience arise in the effort to
show that phenomena at different levels are mutually manipulable. This
form of interﬁeld integration is achieved by use of interlevel experiments
(activation, stimulation, and inhibition, discussed in Chapter4, Section 9.2).
If researchers in different ﬁelds study phenomena at different levels then
ﬁelds must collaborate to run such experiments. This unifying function of
interlevel experiments is exempliﬁed most strikingly by experiments that
span multiple levels. Consider a gene knockout experiment that provides
evidence for the multilevel explanation of spatial memory (different aspects
of which are reported in: Tsien et al. 1996a, 1996b; McHugh et al. 1996;
and Rotenberg et al. 1996). The researchers use a technique for triggering
the deletion of the NMDAR 1 gene in mice that encodes an essential
subunit of the NMDA receptor. They couple the deletion to a promoter
of a gene that is expressed selectively in CA 1 pyramidal cells and only in
the later stages of the hippocampal development. As a result, this technique
functionally deletes the NMDA receptor only in the CA1 region and only
after the hippocampus is fully developed. Once the deletion is triggered, the
researchers conﬁrm the absence of the NMDA receptors, test for the ability
of synapses in CA1 to induce LTP, monitor the formation of spatial maps
across populations of hippocampal cells, and then test the mice in the Morris
water maze. Knockout mice, those without functional NMDA receptors,
perform far worse in the Morris water maze than do controls. When
placed in a water maze without a platform, control mice concentrate their
swimming in the platform’s previous location. Knockout mice swim about
randomly (Tsien et al. 1996b). The knockout mice also exhibit profound
deﬁcits in spatial map formation, as shown by multi-unit recordings from
the CA 1 region. Finally, knocking out the NMDA receptor eliminates


=== PAGE 286 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 265
LTP induction in synapses of the CA1 region, and not in any other region
of the brain (Tsien et al. 1996b).
This experiment is a bottom-up inhibitory experiment monitored at
multiple levels. The intervention technique removes the NMDA receptor
by deleting the NMDAR 1 gene. The detection techniques register the
effects of this intervention on LTP, spatial map formation, and spatial
memory. I have not described all of the nuances of this experiment, and
I acknowledge that these experiments are subject to various criticisms of
the sort I discuss in Chapter 4. My goal is not to argue for this particular
multilevel explanation of spatial memory. Instead, I use it to show how
neuroscientists construct experiments that bridge multiple levels and that
require the disciplinary expertise of multiple ﬁelds. This experiment has
been praised as the ﬁrst in which the mechanisms of spatial memory are
investigated, ‘‘at all levels in a single set of experiments, from molecular
changes through altered patterns of neuronal ﬁring to impaired learning’’
(Roush 1997), and for taking an important ﬁrst step towards the ‘‘dream
of neurobiology ... to understand all aspects of interesting and important
cognitive phenomena—like memory—from the underlying molecular
mechanisms through behavior’’ (Stevens 1996). It is a mark of progress
toward the mosaic unity of neuroscience that the researchers participating
in this experiment are so interdisciplinary that it is difﬁcult to pigeonhole
them into tidy ﬁelds.
Nevertheless, as these quotations suggest, the techniques that these
researchers use, the theoretical constructs that they apply, and the problems
that they solve can be categorized roughly into different ﬁelds, including
molecular biology, biochemistry, electrophysiology, systems physiology,
and experimental psychology. Molecular biologists have the tools to design
the knockouts. Biochemists and histologists have the tools to conﬁrm the
deletion. Electrophysiologists can determine whether or not the knockout
synapses can induce LTP. Systems-level electrophysiologists can moni-
tor hundreds of cells at once to evaluate spatial map formation. Finally,
experimental psychologists are uniquely skilled at evaluating the spatial
memory performance of the knockout mice. This experiment provides
powerful (but inconclusive) evidence that the phenomena at each of these
levels—NMDA receptor function, LTP, spatial map formation, and spatial
memory—is constitutively relevant to the next. In turn, the experiment
places a set of constraints on the space of possible mechanisms by identifying


=== PAGE 287 ===

266 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
components at each level and by showing that each is relevant, not just to
higher-level activities, but to the top-most explanandum phenomenon .T h i s
experiment provides compelling evidence that the mechanism of spatial
memory is in the region of the space of possible mechanisms containing
those mechanisms that include NMDA receptors as components in LTP
mechanisms, LTP as a component in a hippocampal spatial map mechanism,
and spatial map formation as a component in a spatial memory mechanism.
4.3 Mosaic interlevel integration
Fields of neuroscience are often integrated when researchers in different
ﬁelds identify constraints on different levels in a multilevel mechanism or
collaborate to link levels in a mechanism. Common examples of integration
include the accommodation (top-down or bottom-up) of commitments
about the character of the phenomenon to ﬁndings about the components
of the mechanism, the identiﬁcation of spatial and temporal constraints,
and the use of interlevel experiments to establish interlevel relevance
relations. An item is linked into higher levels when it is shown that it
is a component in a higher-level mechanism and when it is shown to
be organized within the higher-level mechanism. The item is integrated
with lower-level components when one can describe the mechanism that
explains its behavior.
The mosaic unity of neuroscience in no way resembles the effort
to translate the theory of one ﬁeld into the theory of another. The
ﬁelds of neuroscience make only local contributions to these elaborate
explanations. Nor do researchers in one ﬁeld create a homomorphic image
of a phenomenon studied by those in another ﬁeld. Instead, researchers
begin with a rather nonspeciﬁc goal, such the goal of discovering a
mechanism for spatial memory. This goal provides a scaffold for their
constraints. They consider how-possibly models and attempt to show that
one such model (or one family of such models) is or is not consistent with
the known constraints established by observation and experiment. These
observations and experiments are performed by researchers in different
ﬁelds who often investigate different aspects of different components at
different levels in the mechanism. These different constraints are used, like
the tiles in a mosaic, to elaborate the mechanism sketch, showing piecemeal
which components and properties are relevant to the mechanism and how


=== PAGE 288 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 267
those components are organized spatially, temporally, and actively within
the mechanism.
Reduction models are differentiated in part by different characterizations
of the interlevel relationship, for example, as type identity, token identity,
realization, and supervenience. I suggest that the relationship between
levels should be understood as an explanation in terms of underlying
(rather than antecedent) mechanisms. One does not establish interlevel
explanatory linkages by showing that everything true of the higher level
is true of the lower level, that all the regularities governing the higher
can be derived from the lower, that every instance of the higher-level
property is identical to some instance of the lower, or that there can
be no difference in the higher level without a difference in the lower
level. These claims imply additional metaphysical commitments beyond
those required for a mechanistic model of explanation. One establishes
interlevel explanatory linkages by describing mechanisms, by identifying
the appropriate entities and activities, by showing how they are organized
together, and by showing, most importantly, that each of these features
of the mechanism is relevant to the explanandum phenomenon . The view
of mechanistic explanation that I develop in the preceding chapters thus
describes more concretely than reduction what is required to integrate
levels in a hierarchy of mechanisms. The account is not peripheral to
scientiﬁc practice but details precisely the kinds of evidence that scientists
think are relevant in evaluating interlevel relations.
5. Conclusion: The Epistemic Function
of the Mosaic Unity of Neuroscience
The phrase ‘‘Unity of Science’’ means many things to many people. For
some (for example, Popper 1959) it means that all of science shares a
common method, such as making risky predictions and testing them. Call
this methodological unity. The search for a unifying methodological principle
governing all of science is inextricably tied to the project of demarcating
science from pseudoscience. The guiding idea is that science proceeds by a
privileged set of principles for formulating and evaluating beliefs, and that
forms of pseudoscience (for example, astrology, witchcraft, scientology,


=== PAGE 289 ===

268 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
and philosophy) do not satisfy these principles. The search for such a
set of principles, however, is widely regarded to have failed. Oppenheim
and Putnam ( 1958) clearly distinguish their view of the unity of science
from the notion of methodological unity on these grounds. Others (for
example, Dupre 1993; Wylie 2002) claim that different sciences exhibit
such divergent practices and criteria for success that any effort to state
abstract principles that apply to all of science is likely either to be trivial
or to exclude paradigm cases of scientiﬁc practice. The mosaic unity of
science is not a form of methodological unity.
Dupre (1993: 226– 7) criticizes nonreductive approaches to the unity of
science, such as Darden and Maul’s ( 1977), because they fail to solve the
problem of demarcation. It is a mistake, however, to judge views of the
unity of science exclusively by whether or not they can provide a criterion
of demarcation. I believe that the unity of science serves an epistemic
function, one that captures at least much of the distinction between good
(neuro)science and bad. It is embodied in the normative view of explanation
that I develop in the preceding chapters and in the constraints discussed
above. My view is consistent with, although it is a much more precise
speciﬁcation of, Dupre’s pluralistic epistemology (see 1993: 242– 3). More
on this below.
Oppenheim and Putnam (1958) characterize the unity of science reduc-
tively in terms of the ability to explain the phenomena of higher-level
sciences in terms of the laws of some fundamental science. Call thisexplana-
tory unity of science . Their view of the explanatory unity of science has two
components: a unity of scientiﬁc vocabulary, and a unity of scientiﬁc laws.
The unity of scientiﬁc vocabulary is achieved by replacing the terms in a
reduced theory with the terms of the reducing theory ( 1958: 6). Likewise,
the unity of laws is achieved by making it possible to dispense with reduced
laws in favor of fundamental laws. What seems right about this view of
the unity of science is that higher-level (and higher-order) phenomena can
often be explained in terms of lower-order phenomena. But this is not an
argument for the thesis that the unity of science is achieved by reduction
to a common lowest level.
The mosaic unity of science is valuable not because it serves as a criterion
for distinguishing science from nonscience (it does not), nor because it
relates all phenomena to a single fundamental level (it does not), but
because it has the epistemic virtue of producing robust explanations—that


=== PAGE 290 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 269
is, explanations that can withstand scrutiny from independent perspectives
and with independent techniques. Fields are individuated by different
guiding questions, different theoretical vocabularies, different techniques,
and different domains of phenomena (see Darden and Maull1977). Precisely
because they are independent along these multiple dimensions, different
ﬁelds provide relatively independent means of access to different aspects
of a mechanism. An adequate description of a mechanism must be able
to withstand scrutiny from each of the different perspectives. The goal
is to use these constraints from different ﬁelds to shrink the space of
plausible mechanisms to a point or, short of that, to a region of the
space of possible mechanisms, variation within which makes no difference
for a given pragmatic aim. ⁹ Given that different ﬁelds have independent
means of access to the mechanism, one becomes increasingly conﬁdent that
the hypothesized mechanism consistent with all of the known constraints
is, in fact, the actual mechanism (see, for example, Culp 1994; Wimsatt
1981). The relative autonomy of different ﬁelds affords each of them the
theoretical and technical independence to provide a check on the ﬁndings
in other ﬁelds and so heighten one’s conﬁdence that the explanation is
correct (see Wylie 2002).
The fact that explanations in neuroscience are multilevel adds another
dimension to this mosaic unity of neuroscience. For example, the different
kinds of interlevel experiment provide independent paths of access to
phenomena that are part of the same multilevel theory. In the ﬁrst place,
the intervention techniques involved in these different kinds of experiment
are likely to be independent of one another. Top-down experiments
manipulate a phenomenon using different interventions from those used
by bottom-up experiments. Excitatory and inhibitory versions of these
experiments use different forms of intervention as well. To the extent
that they are distinct, they provide independent means of experimental
access to the same phenomenon. If lesioning a component inhibits a
phenomenon, exciting a component excites the phenomenon, engaging
the phenomenon activates the component, and suppressing a phenomenon
inhibits the component, one has four independent lines of evidence that
the component is relevant to the phenomenon.
⁹ Lindley Darden and I have shown how the effort to shape the space of possible mechanisms by
adding constraints constitutes a methodology of discovery formechanistic sciences, such as neuroscience
(Craver and Darden 2001).


=== PAGE 291 ===

270 the mosaic unity of neuroscience
Second, the act of integrating an item into a multilevel mechanism
situates it within a body of theory that both explains the item and shows
that the item has an explanatory role to play. Integrating LTP into both
lower and higher levels of mechanisms is one way that neuroscientists argue
that LTP is both real and of signiﬁcance for understanding the brain. Failure
to ﬁnd a lower-level mechanism can often (though not always) be decisive
in the fate of such a putative component. Likewise, failure to ﬁnd a role
for LTP by situating it within a higher-level mechanism would leave LTP
as no more than a curious laboratory phenomenon with no signiﬁcance
for the theories of neuroscience. Multilevel integration through interlevel
experiments is thus a way of establishing the robustness of a phenomenon
and of securing its place in the ontology of neuroscience.
Dupre argues that science should be understood as a ‘‘family resemblance
concept.’’ Nonetheless, he admits that good science might be distinguished
from bad using a kind of ‘‘virtue epistemology’’:
There are many possible and actual such virtues: sensitivity to empirical fact,
plausible background assumptions, coherence with other things we know, exposure
to criticism from the widest variety of sources, and no doubt others. (1993: 243)
The mosaic model of the unity of neuroscience encompasses these virtues,
but it adds precision in characterizing what one demands of explanations
in sciences that seek mechanistic explanations. Once one recognizes the
diversity of methodologies across different areas of science, it seems more
fruitful to characterize explanatory and investigative virtues within subdo-
mains of science than to formulate such abstract virtues as ‘‘make your
explanation sensitive to empirical fact,’’ or ‘‘make no implausible back-
ground assumptions.’’ In the sciences that seek mechanistic explanations,
there is a great deal more to be said about which empirical facts are most
likely to be evidentially relevant, which background assumptions are likely
to be plausible and implausible, and which kinds of criticism are likely to
be valuable. My claim is substantiated in this and previous chapters by pro-
viding a normative account of explanation in neuroscience, by revealing
the diverse kinds of constraint used to construct mechanistic explanations,
by detailing the different varieties of interlevel experiments (as well as their
strengths and weaknesses), and by articulating the difference between mere
models, sketches, and complete mechanistic explanations. The diversity
of scientiﬁc methodologies should lead one to more local epistemologies


=== PAGE 292 ===

the mosaic unity of neuroscience 271
that are premised on the explanatory and investigative ideals of individual
problem areas in sciences.
This mosaic view of the unity of neuroscience is broader in scope
than reduction because it covers both the integration of ﬁelds in research
at a given level and in research that crosses levels. This mosaic view
also provides a more accurate and elaborate view of interlevel interﬁeld
integration. Where reductionists understand the unity of science in terms
of stepwise reduction to lowest levels, the mosaic view treats the unity
of science as the collaborative accumulation of constraints at multiple
levels. Whereas reduction focuses on relations of identity, supervenience,
and ontological reductive links, the mechanistic mosaic view emphasizes
the importance of explanatory relevance as the bridge between levels.
Finally, whereas reduction models emphasize the importance of explanatory
reduction to fundamental levels, the mosaic view can be pluralistic about
levels, recognizing the genuine importance of higher-level causes and
explanations. The mosaic unity of science is constructed during the process
of collaboration by different ﬁelds in the search for multilevel mechanisms.
One task for the philosophy of neuroscience is to show how that research
ought to proceed.


=== PAGE 293 ===

Bibliography
Achinstein, P. (1975). ‘‘Causation, Transparency, and Emphasis,’’Canadian Journal
of Philosophy, 5: 1– 23.
(2002). ‘‘Is There a Valid Experimental Argument for Scientiﬁc Realism?,’’
Journal of Philosophy , 99: 470– 95.
A h n ,W . ,a n dK a l i s h ,C .W .(2000). ‘‘The Role of Mechanism Beliefs in Causal
Reasoning,’’ in F. Keil and R. A. Wilson (eds.), Explanation and Cognition .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 199– 226.
Allen, G. (2005). ‘‘Mechanism, Vitalism, and Organicism in Late Nineteenth and
Twentieth-Century Biology: The Importance of Historical Context,’’ Studies in
the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences , 36: 261– 84.
Anand, B. K., and Brobeck, J. R. (1951). ‘‘Hypothalamic Control of Food Intake
in Rats and Cats,’’ Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine , 24: 123– 40.
A n d e r s e n ,P .O .(1960a). ‘‘Interhippocampal Impulses II. Apical Dendritic Activa-
tion of CA1 Neurons,’’ Acta Physiologica Scandinavica , 48: 178– 208.
(1960b). ‘‘Interhippocampal Impulses III. Basal Dendritic Activation of CA3
Neurons,’’ Acta Physiologica Scandinavica , 48: 209– 30.
(1991). ‘‘LTP—An Exciting and Continuing Saga,’’ in M. Baudry and J.
Davis (eds.), Long Term Potentiation . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, xiii–xvii.
(2003). ‘‘A Prelude to Long-term Potentiation,’’Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society , 358: 613– 16.
, and Lømo, T. (1967). ‘‘Control of Hippocampal Output by Afferent Volley
Frequency,’’ Progress in Brain Research , 27: 400– 12.
, Bruland, H., and Kaada, B. R. ( 1961). ‘‘Activation of the Dentate Area by
Septal Stimulation,’’ Acta Physiologica Scandinavica , 51: 17– 28.
Armstrong, C. M. ( 1981). ‘‘Sodium Channels and Gating Currents,’’Physiological
reviews, 61(3): 644– 83.
Armstrong, D. (1983). What is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
A s h l e yC .C . ,a n dR i d g w a yE .B .(1968). ‘‘Simultaneous Recording of Membrane
Potential, Calcium Transient and Tension in Single Muscle Fibers,’’ Nature,
219: 1168– 9.
Barlow H. B. ( 1972). ‘‘Single Units and Sensati on: A Neuron Doctrine for
Perceptual Psychology?,’’ Perception, 1: 371– 94.
B a r n e s ,E .(1992). ‘‘Explanatory Uniﬁcation an d the Problem of Asymmetry,’’
Philosophy of Science , 59: 558– 71.


=== PAGE 294 ===

bibliography 273
Barondes, S. ( 1999). Molecules and Mental Illness (paperback edn). New York:
Scientiﬁc American Press.
B e a t t y ,J .(1995). ‘‘The Evolutionary Contingency Thesis,’’ in G. Wolters and
J. G. Lennox (eds.), Concepts, Theories, and Rationality in the Biological Sciences ,
The Second Pittsburgh-Konstanz Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 45– 81.
Bechtel, W. (1984). ‘‘Reconceptualizations and Interﬁeld Connections: The Dis-
covery of the Link Between Vitamins and Coenzymes,’’ Philosophy of Science ,
51: 265– 92.
(1986). ‘‘Teleological Functional Analysesand the Hierarchical Organization
of Nature,’’ in N. Rescher (ed.), Teleology and Natural Science . Landham, MD:
University Press of America, 26– 48.
(1988). Philosophy of Science: An Overview for Cognitive Science . Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
(2006). Discovering Cell Mechanisms: The Creation of Modern Cell Biology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(forthcoming). ‘‘The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience,’’
in R. Skipper, C. Allen, R. A. Ankeny, C. F. Craver, L. Darden, G. Mikkelson,
and R. Richardson (eds.), Philosophy and the Life Sciences: A Reader. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
, and Abrahamsen, A. ( 2005). ‘‘Explanation: A Mechanistic Alternative,’’
Studies in the History and Philosophy of the Biological and Biomedical Sciences , 36:
421– 41.
, and Mundale, J. (1999). ‘‘Multiple Realizability Revisited: Linking Cogni-
tive and Neural States,’’ Philosophy of Science , 66: 175– 207.
, and Richardson, R. C. ( 1993). Discovering Complexity: Decomposition and
Localization as Strategies in Scientiﬁc Research . Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
, and Stufﬂebeam, R. (2001). ‘‘Epistemic Issues in Procuring Evidence About
the Brain: The Importance of Research Instruments and Techniques,’’ in W.
Bechtel et al. (eds.),Philosophy and the Neurosciences: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell,
55– 81.
Beebee, H. ( 2004). ‘‘Causing and Nothingness,’’ in L. A. Paul, E. J. Hall and
J. Collins (eds.), Causation and Counterfactuals . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
291– 308.
Bennett, M. R. (2001). History of the Synapse . CRC, Overseas Publishers Associa-
tion, Amsterdam.
,a n dH a c k e r ,P .M .S .( 2003). Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience .
Oxford: Blackwell.
Best, A. R., and Wilson, D. A. ( 2004). ‘‘Coordinate Synaptic Mechanisms Con-
tributing to Olfactory Cortical Adaptation,’’ Journal of Neuroscience , 24: 652– 60.


=== PAGE 295 ===

274 bibliography
B i c k l e ,J .(1998). Psychoneural Reduction: The New Wave . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
(2003). Philosophy of Neuroscience: A Ruthlessly Reductive Approach . Dordrecht,
Holland: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bliss, T. V. P., and Collingridge, G. L. ( 1993). ‘‘A Synaptic Model of Memory:
Long-Term Potentiation in the Hippocampus,’’ Nature, 361/6407: 31– 9.
,a n dG a r d n e r - M e d w i n ,A .R .(1973). ‘‘Long-Lasting Potentiation of Synaptic
Transmission in the Dentate Area of the Unanaesthetized Rabbit Following
Stimulation of the Perforant Path,’’ Journal of Physiology , 232: 357– 74.
, Gardner-Medwin, A. R., and Lømo, T. ( 1973). ‘‘Synaptic Plasticity in the
Hippocampal Formation,’’ in G. B. Ansell and P. B. Bradley (eds.),Macromolecules
and Behavior. London: Macmillan, 193– 203.
, and Lømo, T. (1973). ‘‘Long-Lasting Potentiation of Synaptic Transmission
in the Dentate Area of the Anaesthe tized Rabbit Following Stimulation of the
Perforant Path,’’ Journal of Physiology , 232: 331– 56.
Bogen, J. ( 2001). ‘‘Functional Image Evidence: Some Epistemic Hot Spots,’’
in P. Machamer, R. Grush, and P. McLaughlin (eds.), Theory and Method in
Neuroscience. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 173– 99.
(2002). ‘‘Epistemological Custard Pies from Functional Brain Imaging,’’
Philosophy of Science , 69:S 59– 71.
(2004). ‘‘Analyzing Causality: The Opposite of Counterfactual is Factual,’’
International Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 18: 3– 26.
(2005). ‘‘Regularities and Causality; Generalizations and Causal Explana-
tions,’’ in C. F. Craver and L. Darden (eds.), ‘‘Mechanisms in Biology,’’Studies
in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences , 36: 397– 420.
Boyd, R. (1991). ‘‘Realism, Anti-Foundationalism, and the Enthusiasm for Natural
Kinds,’’ Philosophical Studies, 61: 127– 48.
Brandon, R. (1985). ‘‘Greene on Mechanism and Reductionism: More Than Just
a Side Issue,’’ in Peter Asquith and Philip Kitcher (eds.), PSA 1984,v o l .2.E a s t
Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association, 345– 53.
(1990). Adaptation and Environment . Princeton: Princeton University Press,
159– 61
Broca, P. ( 1861). ‘‘Remarques sur le Si`e g ed el aF a c u l t´e du Langage Articul ´e,
Suivies d’une Observation d’Aph ´emie,’’ Bulletin de la Soci ´et´eA n a t o m i q u e, tome
XXXVI: 330– 57.
Bromberger, S. ( 1966). ‘‘Why Questions,’’ in R. G. Colodny (ed.), Mind and
Cosmos. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 86– 111.
Bub, J. ( 1994). ‘‘Testing Models of Cognition Through the Analysis of Brain-
Damaged Performance,’’ British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 45: 837– 55.
B u c k n e r ,R .L . ,a n dW h e e l e r ,M .A .(2001). ‘‘The Cognitive Neuroscience of
Remembering,’’ Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 2: 624– 34.


=== PAGE 296 ===

bibliography 275
Burdo, J. D., Antonetti, D. A., Wolpert, E. B., and Connor J. R. ( 2003).
‘‘Mechanisms and Regulation of Transferrin and Iron Transport in a Model
Blood–Brain Barrier System,’’ Neuroscience, 122: 883– 90.
B u r i a n ,R .M .(1996). ‘‘Underappreciated Pathways Toward Molecular Genetics as
Illustrated by Jean Brachet’s Cytochemical Embryology,’’ in S. Sarkar (ed.),The
Philosophy and History of Molecular Biology: New Perspectives. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
67– 85.
Campbell, D. (1974). ‘‘Downward Causation in Hierarchically Organized Biolog-
ical Systems,’’ in F. J. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky (eds.), Studies in the Philosophy
of Biology: Reductionism and Related Problems . New York: Macmillan.
C a r t w r i g h t ,N .(1983). How the Laws of Physics Lie . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Catterall, W. ( 2000). ‘‘Structure and Regulation of Voltage-Gated Ca2+ Chan-
nels,’’ Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology , 16: 521– 5.
Cerella, J. (1986). ‘‘Pigeons and Perceptrons,’’Pattern Recognition, 19: 431– 8.
Chapui, N., Durop, M., and Thinus-Blanc, C. (1987). ‘‘The Role of Exploratory
Experience in a Shortcut in Golden Hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus),’’ Animal
Learning and Behavior , 15: 174– 8.
Cheng, P. ( 1999). ‘‘Causality in the Mind: Estimating Contextual and Conjunc-
tive Power,’’ in F. Keil and R. A. Wilson (eds.), Explanation and Cognition .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1989). A Neurocomputational Perspective: The Nature of Mind and
the Structure of Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1995). T h eE n g i n eo fR e a s o n ,t h eS e a to ft h eS o u l .Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. S. (1986). Neurophilosophy: Toward a Uniﬁed Science of the Mind/Brain.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
, and Sejnowski, T. J. (1992). The Computational Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
, and Sejnowski, T. J. ( 2000). ‘‘Perspectives on Neuroscience,’’ in M. S.
Gazzaniga (ed.), Cognitive Neuroscience. Oxford: Blackwell, 14– 24.
Clark, A. ( 1997). BeingThere: Putting Mind, Body, and World Back Together Again .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
, and Chalmers, D. (1998). ‘‘The Extended Mind,’’Analysis, 58: 7– 19.
Coffa, J. A. (1974). ‘‘Hempel’s Ambiguity,’’Synthese, 28: 141– 63.
Cole, K. (1992). ‘‘Neuromembranes: Paths of Ions,’’ in F. G. Worden, J. P. Swazey,
and G. Adelman (eds.), Neurosciences, Paths of Discovery ,v o l .I .C a m b r i d g e ,M A :
MIT Press.
,a n dC u r t i s ,H .G .(1939). ‘‘Electric Impedance of the Squid Giant Axon
during Activity,’’ Journal of General Physiology , 22: 649– 70.
Collingwood, R. (1940). An Essay on Metaphysics . Oxford: Clarendon Press.


=== PAGE 297 ===

276 bibliography
Collins, J., Hall, N., and Paul, L. (2004). Causation and Counterfactuals. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Cook, T. and Campbell, D. ( 1979). Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis
Issues for Field Settings . Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Craik, F. I. M., and Tulving, E. ( 1975). ‘‘Depth of Processing and the Retention
of Words in Episodic Memory,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 104:
268– 94.
Cragg, B. G., and Hamlyn, L. H. (1957). ‘‘Some Commissural and Septal Connex-
ions of the Hippocampus in the Rabbit. A Combined Histological and Electrical
Study,’’ Journal of Physiology , 135: 460– 85.
Crane, T. (1995). The Mechanical Mind: A Philosophical Introduction to Minds, Machines
and Mental Representation. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Craver, C. F. (2001). ‘‘Role Functions, Mechanisms and Hierarchy,’’Philosophy of
Science, 68: 31– 55.
(2002a). ‘‘Structures of Scientiﬁc Theories,’’ in P. K. Machamer and M.
Silberstein (eds.), The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Science .M a l d e n ,
MA: Blackwell.
(2002b). ‘‘Interlevel Experiments and Multilevel Mechanisms in the Neuro-
science of Memory,’’ Philosophy of Science (Suppl.), 69:S 83– 97.
(2003). ‘‘The Making of a Memory Mechanism,’’ Journal of the History of
Biology, 36: 153– 95.
(2004). ‘‘Dissociable Realization and Kind Splitting,’’ Philosophy of Science ,
71: 960– 71.
, and Bechtel, W. (forthcoming). ‘‘Top-down Causation without Top-down
Causes,’’ Biology and Philosophy .
,a n dD a r d e n ,L .(2001). ‘‘Discovering Mechanisms in Neurobiology: The
Case of Spatial Memory,’’ in P. K. Machamer, R. Grush, and P. McLaughlin
(eds.), Theory and Method in the Neurosciences. Pittsburgh, PA: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 112– 37.
,a n dD a r d e n ,L .(2005), ‘‘Introduction: Mechanisms Then and Now,’’ in
Special Issue, ‘‘Mechanisms in Biology,’’ Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences 36: 233– 44.
,a n dD a r d e n ,L .(2006). ‘‘Introduction,’’Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biology, 36: 233– 44.
Crick, F. H. C. (1988). What Mad Pursuit . New York: Basic Books.
(1994). The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientiﬁc Search for the Soul. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Culp, S. (1994). ‘‘Defending Robustness: The Bacterial Mesosome as a Test Case,’’
in D. Hull, M. Forbes, and R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA- 1994, Proceedings of the


=== PAGE 298 ===

bibliography 277
Biennial Meetings of the Philosophy of Science Association . East Lansing: Philosophy
of Science Association, 46– 57.
(1995). ‘‘Objectivity in Experimental Inquiry: Breaking Data-Technique
Circles,’’ Philosophy of Science , 62: 438– 58.
Cummins, R. (1975). ‘‘Functional Analysis,’’Journal of Philosophy , 72: 741– 64.
(1983). The Nature of Psychological Explanation . Cambridge, MA: Brad-
ford/MIT Press.
(2000). ‘‘How Does It Work? Vs. What Are The Laws? Two Conceptions
of Psychological Explanation,’’ in F. Keil and R. Wilson (eds.), Explanation and
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 117– 45.
and Cummins, D. (eds.) ( 1999). Minds, Brains and Computers : a collection of
essays in the foundation of cognitive science . Oxford: Blackwell.
C u r t i s ,H .G . ,a n dC o l e ,K .(1940). ‘‘Membrane Action Potentials from The Squid
Giant Axon,’’ Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology , 15: 147– 57.
D a r d e n ,L .(1987). ‘‘Viewing the History of Science as Compiled Hindsight,’’AI
Magazine, 8/2: 33– 41.
(1991). Theory Change in Science: Strategies from Mendelian Genetics .N e wY o r k :
Oxford University Press.
(2002). ‘‘Strategies for Discovering Mechanisms: Schema Instantiation, Mod-
ular Subassembly, Forward/Backward Chaining,’’ Philosophy of Science (Suppl.),
69:S 354– 65.
(2006) Reasoning in Biological Discoveries. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
,a n dC r a v e r ,C .F .(2002). ‘‘Strategies in the Interﬁeld Discovery of the
Mechanism of Protein Synthesis,’’ Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences , 33: 1– 28.
, and Maull, N. (1977). ‘‘Interﬁeld Theories,’’Philosophy of Science, 44: 43– 64.
Davidson, D. ( 1970). ‘‘Mental Events,’’ in L. Foster and J. Swanson (eds.),
Experience and Theory . Amherst: The University of Massachusetts Press.
[1969]. ‘‘The Individuation of Events,’’ in D. Davidson ( 2001), Essays on
Actions and Events. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(2001). Essays on Actions and Events . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Delmas, P., and Coste, B. ( 2003). ‘‘Na+ Channel Nav1.9:i nS e a r c ho faG a t i n g
Mechanism,’’ Trends in Neurosciences , 26: 55– 7.
Dennett, D. (1978). Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology . Mont-
gomery, VT: Bradford Books.
(1987). The Intentional Stance . Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
(1991). ‘‘Real Patterns,’’Journal of Philosophy , 88: 27– 51.
(1994). ‘‘Cognitive Science as Reverse Engineering: Several Meanings of
‘Top Down’ and ‘Bottom Up’,’’ in D. Prawitz and D. Westerstahl (eds.),


=== PAGE 299 ===

278 bibliography
International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science . Dordrecht:
Kluwer International Congress of Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of
Science (9th: 1991).
Des Chene, D. ( 2001). Spirits & Clocks: Machine & Organism in Descartes . Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
(2005). ‘‘Mechanisms of Life in the Seventeenth Century: Borelli, Perrault,
R´egis,’’ Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biology and Biomedical Sciences , 31:
245– 60.
Douglas, R. J. ( 1967). ‘‘The Hippocampus and Behavior,’’ Psychological Bulletin ,
67: 416– 42.
Dowe, P. (1992). ‘‘Wesley Salmon’s Process Theory of Causality and the Conserved
Quantity Theory,’’ Philosophy of Science , 59: 195– 216.
(2000). Physical Causation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
(2004). ‘‘Causes are Physically Connected to their Effects: Why Preventers
and Omissions are Not Causes,’’ in C. Hitchcock (ed.), Contemporary Debates in
Philosophy of Science . Oxford: Blackwell, 189– 96.
Dretske, F. ( 1977). ‘‘Referring to Events,’’ in P. French, T. Uehling, Jr., and
H. Wettstein (eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy II . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 90– 9.
(1994). ‘‘If You Can’t Make One, You Don’t Know How it Works,’’ in
P. French, T. Uehling, and H. Wettstein (eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy,
19, Philosophical Naturalism . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame
Press.
Dupre, J. (1993). The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of the Disunity of
Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Earman, J. and Roberts, J. ( 1999). ‘‘Ceteris Paribus: There is no Problem of
Provisos,’’ Synthese, 118: 439– 78.
E c c l e s ,J .C .(1953). The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind . Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Edelman, G. (1989). The Remembered Present . New York: Basic Books.
E e l l s ,E .(1991). Probabilistic Causalit y. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Ehring, P. (2003). ‘‘Part–whole Physicalism and Mental Causation,’’Synthese, 136:
359– 88.
Eichenbaum, H., Dudchenko, P., Wood, E., Shapiro, M., and Tanila, H. ( 1999).
‘‘The Hippocampus, Memory, and Place Cells: Is it Spatial Memory or Memory
Space,’’ Neuron, 23: 209– 26.
Elazar, Z., and Adey, W. R. (1967). ‘‘Electroencephalographic Correlates of Learn-
ing in Subcortical Structures,’’ Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology ,
23: 306– 19.


=== PAGE 300 ===

bibliography 279
E l s t e r ,J .(1983). Explaining Technical Change . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
(1989). Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Engert, F., and Bonhoeffer, T. (1999). ‘‘Dendritic Spine Changes Associated with
Hippocampal Long-Term Synaptic Plasticity,’’ Nature, 399: 66– 70.
Felleman, D. J., and Van Essen, D. C. (1991). ‘‘Distributed Hierarchical Processing
in the Primate Cerebral Cortex,’’ Cerebral Cortex, 1/1: 1– 47.
Fodor, J. A. (1968). Psychological Explanation. New York: Random House.
(1974). ‘‘Special Sciences (or: The Disunity of Science as a Working Hypoth-
esis),’’ Synthese, 28: 97– 115.
Freedman, D. ( 1997). ‘‘From Association to Causation via Regression,’’ in V.
McKim and S. Turner (eds.), Causality in Crisis? Statistical Methods and the Search
for Causal Knowledge in the Social Sciences . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press.
Friedman, M. ( 1974). ‘‘Explanation and Scientiﬁc Understanding,’’ Journal of
Philosophy, 71: 5– 19.
Fritsch, G., and Hitzig, E. ([ 1870] 1960). ‘‘On the Electrical Excitability of
the Cerebrum’’ (G. von Bonin trans.), in Some Papers on the Cerebral Cortex.
Springﬁeld, IL: Thomas Springﬁeld, 73– 96.
Fuster, J. ( 1997). The Prefrontal Cortex (3rd edn). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-
Raven.
Giere, R. ( 1999). Science without Laws. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Gillett, C. ( 2002). ‘‘The Dimensions of Realization: A Critique of the Standard
View,’’ Analysis, 62: 316– 23.
Glennan, S. S. (1996). ‘‘Mechanisms and the Nature of Causation,’’Erkenntnis, 44:
49– 71.
(1997). ‘‘Capacities, Universality and Singularity,’’ Philosophy of Science , 64:
605– 26.
(2002). ‘‘Rethinking Mechanistic Explanation,’’Philosophy of Science (Suppl.),
69:S 342– 53.
(2005). ‘‘Modeling Mechanisms,’’Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Science , 36: 443– 64.
Gloor, P., Vera, C. L., and Sperti, L. ( 1964). ‘‘Neurophysiological Studies of
Hippocampal Neurons III. Responses of Hippocampal Neurons to Repetitive
Perforant Path Volleys,’’ Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology , 17:
353– 70.
Glymour, C. (1994). ‘‘On the Methods of Cognitive Neursopsychology,’’British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 45: 815– 45.


=== PAGE 301 ===

280 bibliography
Glymour, C. ( 2001). Mind’s Arrows: Bayes Nets and Graphical Causal Models in
Psychology.C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s .
Gold, I., and Stoljar, D. ( 1999). ‘‘A Neuron Doctrine in the Philosophy of
Neuroscience,’’ Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 5: 585– 642.
Goodman, N. ( 1955). Fact, Fiction, and Forecast . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Gould, S. J. ( 1980). The Panda’s Thumb: More Reﬂections in Natural History .N e w
York: W. W. Norton.
Green, J. D., and Adey, W. R. ( 1956). ‘‘Neurophysiological Studies of Hip-
pocampal Connections and Excitability,’’ Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 8: 245– 62.
Grifﬁths, P. ( 1997). What Emotions Really Are: The Problem of Psychological Categories .
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Grush, R. (2003). ‘‘In Defense of Some ‘Cartesian’ Assumptions Concerning the
Brain and its Operation,’’ Biology and Philosophy , 18: 53– 93.
(2004). ‘‘The Emulation Theory of Representation: Motor Control, Imagery,
and Perception,’’ Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 27: 377– 96.
Hacking, I. ( 1983). Representing and Intervening . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M., and Moser, E. I. ( 2005).
‘‘Microstructure of a Spatial Map in the Entorhinal Cortex,’’ Nature, 436:
801– 6.
Hall, Z. W. ( 1992). ‘‘An Introduction to Molecular Neurobiology’’. Sinaur
Associates.
Hamer, D. (2002). ‘‘Genetics. Rethinking Behavior Genetics,’’Science, 298: 71– 2.
H a r d c a s t l e ,V .G .(1998). How to Build a Theory in Cognitive Science . Albany, NY:
SUNY Press.
(2002). ‘‘What Do Brain Data Really Show?,’’Philosophy of Science (Suppl.),
69:S 72– 82.
Harlow, J. M. ( 1868). ‘‘Recovery from the Passage of an Iron Bar through the
Head,’’ Publications of the Massachusetts Medical Society , 2: 327– 47.
H a r r i s ,K . ,F i a l a ,J .C . ,a n dO s t r o f ,L .(2003). ‘‘Structural Changes at Dendritic
Spine Synapses During Long-Term Potentiation,’’ Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society , 358: 745– 8.
Haugeland, J. (1998). Having Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hausman, D. M. (2002). ‘‘Physical Causation,’’Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 33: 717– 24.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. New York: Wiley.
Hegarty, M., Just, M. A., and Morrison, I. R. ( 1988). ‘‘Mental Models of
Mechanical Systems: Individual Differences in Qualitative and Quantitative
Reasoning,’’ Cognitive Psychology, 20: 191– 236.


=== PAGE 302 ===

bibliography 281
Heil, J. (2003). From an Ontological Point of View . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
,a n dM e l e ,A .( e d s . )(1993). Mental Causation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hempel, C. G. (1962). ‘‘Explanation in Science and History,’’ in R. G. Colodny
(ed.), Frontiers of Science and Philosophy . London: Allen & Unwin, 7– 33.
(1965). Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of
Science. New York: Free Press.
, and Oppenheim, P. (1948). ‘‘Studies in the Logic of Explanation,’’Philosophy
of Science, 15: 135– 75.
Hille, B. (1984). Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes . Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
(1992). Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes (2nd edn). Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer Associates.
, and Armstrong, D., and MacKinnon, R. (1999). ‘‘Ion Channels: From Idea
to Reality,’’ Nature Medicine, 5: 1105– 9.
Hitchcock, C. R. ( 1995). ‘‘Discussion: Salmon on Explanatory Relevance,’’
Philosophy of Science , 62: 304– 20.
(1996). ‘‘The Role of Contrast in Causal and Explanatory Claims,’’Synthese,
107: 395– 419.
H o d g k i n ,A .L .(1992). Chance & Design: Reminiscences of Science in Peace and War .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
, and Huxley, A. F. (1939). ‘‘Action Potentials Recorded from Inside a Nerve
Fibre,’’ Nature, 144: 710– 11.
,
 ,( 1952). ‘‘A Quantitative Description of Membrane Current and its
Application to Conduction and Excitation in Nerve,’’ Journal of Physiology , 117:
500– 44.
Hooker, C. A. (1981). ‘‘Towards a General Theory of Reduction. Part I: Historical
and Scientiﬁc Setting. Part II: Identity in Reduction. Part III: Cross-Categorical
Reduction,’’ Dialogue, 20: 38– 59; 201– 36; 496– 529.
Huber, L. (2001). ‘‘Visual Categorization in Pigeons,’’ in R. G. Cook (ed.),Avian
Visual Cognition (online). Available at <http://www.pigeon.psy.tufts.edu/avc-
/huber>.
Huxley, A. F. ( 1963). ‘‘The Quantitative Analysis ofExcitation and Conduction
in Nerve,’’ Nobel lecture: <http://nobelprize.org/medicine/laureates/1963-
/huxley-lecture.html>.
Hyden, H. ( 1973). ‘‘RNA Changes in Brain Cells During Changes in Behavior
and Function,’’ in G. B. Ansell and P. B. Bradley (eds.), Macromolecules and
Behaviour. London: Macmillan, 51– 75.
Jacob, F. (1977). ‘‘Evolution and Tinkering,’’Science, 196: 1161– 6.
Ji, R. R., Kohno, T., Moore, K. A., and Woolf, C. J. ( 2003). ‘‘Central Sensiti-
zation and LTP: Do Pain and Memory Share Similar Mechanisms?,’’ Trends in
Neurosciences, 26: 696– 705.


=== PAGE 303 ===

282 bibliography
K a t z ,B . ,a n dM i l e d iR .(1967). ‘‘The Timing of Calcium Action during Neuro-
muscular Transmission,’’ Journal of Physiology , 189: 535– 44.
Kauffman, S. A. ( 1971). ‘‘Articulation of Parts Explanation in Biology and the
Rational Search for Them,’’ in R. C. Buck and R. S. Cohen (eds.), PSA 1970.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Keil, F., and Wilson, R. A. (2000). ‘‘The Shadows and Shallows of Explanation,’’
in F. C. Keil and R. A. Wilson (eds.), Explanation and Cognition . Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kim, J. ( 1989). ‘‘Mechanism, Purpose, and Explanatory Exclusion,’’ Philosophical
Perspectives, 3: 77– 108.
(1993). Supervenience and Mind . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(1998). Mind in a Physical World. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(2000). ‘‘Making Sense of Downward Causation,’’ in Peter Bogh Andersen
et al. (eds.), Downward Causation. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, 305– 21.
Kirkpatrick, K. (2001). ‘‘Object Recognition,’’ in R. G. Cook (ed.),Avian Visual
Cognition. Comparative Cognition Press. Published online.
Kitcher, P. ( 1989). ‘‘Explanatory Uniﬁcation and t he Causal Structure Of The
World,’’ in P. Kitcher and W. Salmon (eds.), Scientiﬁc Explanation. Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume XIII , 410– 505.
(1993). The Advancement of Science . New York: Oxford University Press.
Kornblith, H. ( 1993). Inductive Inference and its Natural Ground .C a m b r i d g e ,M A :
MIT Press.
Kuhn, T. ( 1962). Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions . Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
K y b e r g ,H .E .(1965). ‘‘Comment,’’Philosophy of Science , 32: 147– 51.
Lakatos, I. ( 1977). The Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes: Philosophical
Papers Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lashley, K. S. ([1950] 2000). ‘‘In search of the Engram,’’ reprinted in R. Cummins
and D. D. Cummins (eds.),Minds, Brains and Computers. Malden, MA: Blackwell,
333– 50.
Lepore, E. and Loewer, B. (1989). ‘‘More on Making Mind Matter,’’Philosophical
Topics, 17: 175– 91.
Levitan, I. B., and Kaczmarek, L. K. (1991). The Neuron: Cell and Molecular Biology .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1973). ‘‘Causation,’’The Journal of Philosophy, 70: 556– 567.
(1979). ‘‘Counterfactual Dependence and Time’s Arrow,’’ Nous, 13:
455– 76.
(1983). ‘‘New Work for a Theory of Universals,’’ Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 61: 343– 77.


=== PAGE 304 ===

bibliography 283
(2000). ‘‘Causation as Inﬂuence,’’Journal of Philosophy, 97: 182– 198;r e p r i n t e d
in J. Collins, N. Hall, and L. A. Paul (eds.), Causation and Counterfactuals .
Bradford: MIT Press.
Lloyd, D. P. C. (1949). ‘‘Post-Tetanic Potentiation of Response in Monosynaptic
Reﬂex Pathways of the Spinal Cord,’’ Journal of General Physiology , 33: 147– 70.
Lømo, T. (1966). ‘‘Frequency Potentiation of Excitatory Synaptic Activity in the
Dentate Area of the Hippocampal Formation,’’ Acta Physiologica Scandinavica
(Suppl.), 277: 128.
Lycan, W. (1987). Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
(1999). ‘‘The Continuity of Levels of Nature,’’ in. W. Lycan (ed.),Mind and
Cognition: A Reader (2nd edn). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Lynch, M. A. (2004). ‘‘Long-term Potentiation and Memory,’’Physiological Review,
84: 87– 136.
McClelland, J. (1981). ‘‘Retrieving General and Speciﬁc Knowledge from Stored
Knowledge of Speciﬁcs,’’ Proceedings of the Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Berkeley, CA.
McCulloch, W., and Pitts, W. H. ( 1943). ‘‘A Logical Calculus of The Ideas
Immanent in Nervous Activity,’’ Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics , 7: 115– 33.
Reprinted in R. Cummins and D. D. Cummins (eds.) (2000), Minds, Brains and
Computers: The Foundations of Cognitive Science . Oxford: Blackwell: 351– 60.
Machamer, P. ( 2004). ‘‘Activities and Causation: The Metaphysics and Episte-
mology of Mechanisms,’’ International Studies in the Philosophy of Science , 18:
27– 39.
Machamer, P. K., Darden, L., and Craver, C. F. ( 2000). ‘‘Thinking about
Mechanisms,’’ Philosophy of Science , 57: 1– 25.
McHugh, T. J., Blum, K., Tsien, J. Z., Tonegawa, S., and Wilson, M. ( 1996).
‘‘Impaired Hippocampal Representation of Space in CA1-Speciﬁc NMDAR 1
Knockout Mice,’’ Cell, 87: 1339– 49.
M a l e n k a ,R .C . ,a n dB e a r ,M .F .(2004). ‘‘LTP and LTD: An Embarrassment of
Riches,’’ Neuron, 44: 5– 21.
Maletic-Savatic, M., Malinow, R., and Svoboda, K. ( 1999). ‘‘Rapid Dendritic
Morphogenesis in CA1 Hippocampal Dendrites Induced by Synaptic Activity,’’
Science, 283: 1923– 7.
Malinow, R. (1998). ‘‘Silencing the Controversy in LTP?,’’Neuron, 21: 1226– 7.
Marr, D. ( 1969). ‘‘A Theory of Cerebellar Cortex,’’ Journal of Physiology , 202:
437– 70.
(1970). ‘‘A Theory for Cerebral Neocortex,’’Proceedings of the Royal Society ,
B. 176: 161– 234.
(1982). Vision. San Francisco, CA: Freeman Press.


=== PAGE 305 ===

284 bibliography
Mauk, M. (2000). ‘‘The Potential Effectiveness of Simulations Versus Phenomeno-
logical Models,’’ Nature Neuroscience, 3: 649– 51.
Maull, N. ( 1977). ‘‘Unifying Science without Reduction,’’ Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Science , 8: 143– 62.
M i l e d i ,R .(1973). ‘‘Transmitter Release Induced by Injection of Calcium Ions
into Nerve Terminals,’’Proceedings of the Royal Society London B Biological Sciences ,
183: 421– 5.
Milner, B. ( 1970). ‘‘Memory and the Medial Temporal Lobe Regions of the
Brain,’’ in K. H. Pribram and D. E. Broadbent (eds.), Biology of Memory .N e w
York: Academic Press, 29– 50.
Morairty, S., Rainnie, D. McCarley, R., and Greene, R. ( 2004). ‘‘Disinhibition
of Ventrolateral Preoptic Area S leep-Active Neurons by Adenosine: A New
Mechanism for Sleep Promotion,’’ Neuroscience, 123: 451– 7.
Morgan, C., and Stellar, E. ( 1950). Physiological Psychology. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Mundale, J., and Bechtel, W. (1996). ‘‘Integrating Neuroscience, Psychology, and
Evolutionary Biology Through a Teleological Conception of Function,’’ Minds
and Machines, 6: 481– 505.
Nadel, L., and O’Keefe, J. ( 1974). ‘‘The Hippocampus in Pieces and Patches: An
Essay on Modes of Explanation in Physiological Psychology,’’ in R. Bellairs and
E. G. Gray (eds.), Essays on the Nervous System: A Festschrift for Prof J. Z. Young.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 367– 90.
Nagel, E. ( 1949). ‘‘The Meaning of Reduction in the Natural Sciences,’’ in R.
Stauffer (ed.), Science and Civilization . Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press, 97– 135.
(1961). The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientiﬁc Explanation .
New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc.
Northcott, R. (under review). Causation and Contrast Classes.
Norton, J. (2003). ‘‘Causation as Folk Science,’’Philosopher’s Imprint, 3/4.
O’Keefe, J., and Dostrovsky, J. ( 1971). ‘‘The Hippocampus as a Spatial Map.
Preliminary Evidence from Unit Activity in the Freely Moving Rat,’’ Brain
Research, 34: 171– 5.
, and Nadel. L. (1978). The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Olton, D. S., and Samuelson, R. J. (1976). ‘‘Remembrances of Places Past: Spatial
Memory in Rats,’’ Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes , 2:
97– 116.
Oppenheim, P. and Putnam, H. (1958). ‘‘Unity of Science as a Working Hypoth-
esis,’’ in H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and G. Maxwell (eds.), Concepts, Theories, and the
Mind–Body Problem, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science II. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 3– 36.


=== PAGE 306 ===

bibliography 285
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Penﬁeld, W. ( 1952). ‘‘Memory Mechanisms,’’Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry ,
67: 178– 91.
Pera, M. (1992). The Ambiguous Frog: The Galvani-Volta Controversy on Animal Elec-
tricity (Jonathan Mandelbaum trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
P e r k e l ,D .H .(1990). ‘‘Computational Neuroscience: Scope and Structure,’’ in
E. L. Schwartz (ed.), Computational Neuroscience . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
38– 45.
Pietrosky, P., and Rey, G. ( 1995). ‘‘When Other Things Aren’t Equal: Saving
Ceteris Paribus Laws from Vacuity,’’ The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 46: 81– 110.
Poland, J. (1994). Physicalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
P o l g e r ,T .(2004). Natural Minds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery . London: Hutchinson and Co.
Posner M. I., and DiGirolamo G. ( 1998). ‘‘Executive Attention: Conﬂict, Target
Detection and Cognitive Control,’’ in R. Parasuraman (ed.),The Attentive Brain.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 401– 23.
Povinelli, D. ( 2000). Folk Physics for Apes: The Chimpanzee’s Theory of How the
World Works. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Price, H. ( 1996). Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Prinz, A., Bucher, D., and Marder, E. ( 2004). ‘‘Similar Network Activity from
Disparate Circuit Parameters,’’ Nature Neuroscience, 7: 1345– 52.
Psillos, S. (1999). Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks Truth . New York: Routledge.
Putnam, H. ( 1960). ‘‘Minds and Machines,’’ in Mind, Language, and Reality:
Philosophical Papers Volume 2. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Raichle, M. E.. and Mintun, M. A. ( 2006). ‘‘Brain Work and Brain Imaging,’’
Annual Reviews of Neuroscience , 29: 449– 76.
Railton, P. ( 1978). ‘‘A Deductive-Nomological Model of Probabilistic Explana-
tion,’’ Philosophy of Science , 45: 206– 26.
Reichenbach, H. (1956). The Direction of Time. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Rescher, N. (1955). ‘‘Axioms for the Part Relation,’’Philosophical Studies, 6: 8– 11.
Rescorla, R. A., and Wagner, A. R. (1972). ‘‘A Theory of Pavlovian Conditioning:
Variations in the Effectiveness of Reinforcement and Nonreinforcement,’’ in A.
H. Black and W. F. Prokasy (eds.), Classical Conditioning II: Current Theory and
Research. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 64– 99.
Roberts, J. ( 2004). ‘‘There Are No Laws of the Social Sciences,’’ in C. Hitch-
cock (ed.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Science . Oxford: Blackwell,
151– 67.


=== PAGE 307 ===

286 bibliography
Rosenberg, A. ( 1985). The Structure of Biological Science .C a m b r i d g e :C a m b r i d g e
University Press.
(1994). Instrumental Biology or the Unity of Science. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
(2001). ‘‘How is Biological Explanation Possible?,’’ British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science , 52: 735– 60.
Rotenberg, A., Mayford, M., Hawkins, R. D., Kandel, E. R., and Muller, R. U.
(1996). ‘‘Mice Expressing Activated CaMKII Low Frequency LTP and Do Not
Form Stable Place Cells in The CA 1 Region of the Hippocampus,’’ Cell, 87:
1351– 61.
Roush, W. (1997). ‘‘New Knockout Mice Point to Molecular Basis of Memory,’’
Science, 275: 32– 3.
Rowan, M. J., Klyubin, I., Cullen, W. K., and Anwyl, R. (2003). ‘‘Synaptic Plas-
ticity in Animal Models of Early Alzheimer’s Disease,’’ Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society , 358: 821– 8.
Ruben D. ( 1999). ‘‘Arguments, Laws, and Explanation,’’ in M. Curd and J. A.
Cover (eds.), Introduction to Philosophy of Science . New York and London: W. W.
Norton and Company, 720– 45.
Rumelhart, D. E., and McClelland, J. L. (eds.) (1986). Parallel Distributed Processing,
vol. 1.C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s .
Russell, B. (1913). ‘‘On the Notion of Cause,’’Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society.
13: 1– 26.
Salmon, W. C. ( 1977). ‘‘An ‘At-At’ Theory of Causal Inﬂuence,’’ Philosophy of
Science. 44: 215– 25.
(1984). Scientiﬁc Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
(1989). ‘‘Four Decades of Scientiﬁc Explanation,’’ in P. Kitcher and W.
Salmon (eds.), Scientiﬁc Explanation, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science
XVIII. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 3– 219.
(1994). ‘‘Causality Without Counterfactuals,’’ Philosophy of Science , 61:
297– 312.
(1997). ‘‘Causality and Explanation: A Reply to Two Critiques,’’Philosophy
of Science, 64: 461– 77.
(1998). Causality and Explanation . New York: Oxford University Press.
Sands, Z., Grottesi, A., and Sansom, M. S. (2005). ‘‘Voltage-Gated Ion Channels,’’
Current Biology, 15:R 44– 7.
Sanes, J. R., and Lichtman, J. W. ( 1999). ‘‘Can Molecules Explain Long-Term
Potentiation?,’’ Nature Neuroscience, 2: 597– 604.
Sanford, D. H. (1993). ‘‘The Problem of the Many, Many Composition Questions,
and Na¨ıve Mereology,’’ Nous, 27: 219– 28.


=== PAGE 308 ===

bibliography 287
Sarkar, S. ( 1992). ‘‘Models of Reduction and Categories of Reductionism,’’
Synthese, 91: 167– 94.
S c h a c t e r ,D .L .(1996). Searching for Memory: The Brain, the Mind, and the Past. New
York: Basic Books.
,a n dT u l v i n g ,E .(1994). ‘‘What are the Memory Systems of1994?,’’ in D.
L. Schacter and E. Tulving (eds.),Memory Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1– 38.
, Wagner, A. D., and Buckner, R. L. ( 2000). ‘‘Memory Systems of1999,’’
in E. Tulving and F. I. M. Craik (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Memory .O x f o r d :
Oxford University Press, 627– 43
S c h a f e ,G .E . ,A t k i n s ,C .M . ,S w a n k ,M .W . ,B a u e r ,E .P . ,S w e a t t ,J .D . ,a n d
L e D o u x ,J .E .(2000). ‘‘Activation of ERK/MAP Kinase in the Amygdale is
Required for Memory Consolidation of Pavlovian Fear Conditioning,’’ Journal
of Neuroscience, 20: 8177– 87.
, and LeDoux J. E. ( 2000). ‘‘Memory Consolidation of Auditory Pavlovian
Fear Conditioning Requires Protein Synth esis and Protein Kinase A in the
Amygdala,’’ Journal of Neuroscience , 20:R C96.
Schaffer, J. (2003). ‘‘Metaphysics of Causation,’’Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .
,( 2004). ‘‘Causes Need Not be Physically Connected to their Effects: The
Case for Negative Causation,’’ in C. Hitchcock (ed.), Contemporary Debates in
Philosophy of Science . Oxford: Blackwell, 197– 216.
(2005). ‘‘Contrastive Causation,’’Philosophical Review, 114: 297– 328.
Schaffner, K. F. ( 1967). ‘‘Approaches to Reduction’’, Philosophy of Science , 34:
137– 47.
(1974). ‘‘The Peripherality of Reductionism in the Development of Molec-
ular Biology,’’ J o u r n a lo ft h eH i s t o r yo fB i o l o g y, 7: 111– 39
(1993a). Discovery and Explanation in Biology and Medicine. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
(1993b). ‘‘Theory Structure, Reducti on, and Disciplinary Integration in
Biology’’, Biology and Philosophy , 8: 319– 47.
(forthcoming). Behaving: What’s Genetic and What’s Not, and Why Should We
Care? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schouten, M. K. D., and Looren de Jong, H. ( 1998). ‘‘Defusing Eliminative
Materialism: Reference and Revision,’’ Philosophical Psychology, 11: 489– 509.
,
 (1999). ‘‘Reduction, Elimination, and Levels: The Case of the LTP-
Learning Link,’’ Philosophical Psychology, 12: 237– 62.
Scoville, W. B., and Milner, B. ( 1957). ‘‘Loss of Recent Memory After Bilateral
Hippocampal Lesions,’’ Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20:
11– 20.
S h a h ,B .H . ,a n dK .J .C a t t .(2004). ‘‘GPCR-Mediated Transactivation of RTKs in
the CNS: Mechanisms and Consequences,’’ Trends in Neurosciences , 27: 48– 53.


=== PAGE 309 ===

288 bibliography
S h e p h e r d ,G .M .(1983). Neurobiology (2nd edn). New York: Oxford University
Press.
(1994). Neurobiology (3rd edn.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Shoemaker, S. ( 2001). ‘‘Realization and Mental Causation,’’ in C. Gillett and B.
Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and Its Discontents . New York: Cambridge University
Press, 74– 98.
Simon, H. (1969). The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial .C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s .
Skipper, R. ( 1999). ‘‘Selection and the Extent of Explanatory Uniﬁcation,’’
Philosophy of Science (Suppl.), 66:S 196– 209.
Skyrms, B. (1980). Causal Necessity. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press.
Smart, J. J. C. (1963). Philosophy and Scientiﬁc Realism . London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Smith E. E., and Jonides, J. (1999). ‘‘Storage and Executive Processes in the Frontal
Lobes,’’ Science, 283: 1657– 61.
Smith, P. (1992). ‘‘Modest Reductions and the Unity of Science,’’ in D. Charles
and K. Lennon (eds.), Reduction, Explanation and Realism. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 19– 43.
Sober, E., (ed.) ( 1984). Conceptual Issues in Evolutionary Biology .C a m b r i d g e ,M A :
Bradford/MIT Press.
Society for Neuroscience Web Pageb <www.sfn.org>.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. (1990). Causation, Prediction, and Search.
Springer Lecture Notes in Statistics , 2nd edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
,
 ,
 (2000). Causation, Prediction, and Search. Springer Lecture Notes in
Statistics, 2nd revised edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Squire, L. R., and Kandel, E. R. ( 2000). Memory: From Mind to Molecules .N e w
York: Scientiﬁc American Library.
Knowlton, B. J. ( 1994). ‘‘Memory, Hippocampus and Brain Systems,’’ in
M. Gazzaniga (ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
825– 37.
Stevens, C. F. ( 1996). ‘‘Spatial Memory: The Beginning of a Dream,’’ Cell, 87:
1147– 8.
(1998). ‘‘A Million Dollar Question: Does LTP = Memory?,’’ Neuron, 20:
1– 2.
Stricker, E., and Verbalis, J. ( 1988). ‘‘Hormones and Behavior: The Biology of
Thirst and Sodium Appetite,’’ American Scientist, 76: 261– 76.
S¨udhof, T. C. ( 2000). ‘‘The Synaptic Vesicle Cycle Revisited,’’ Neuron, 28:
317– 20.
(2004). ‘‘The Synaptic Vesicle Cycle,’’ Annual Reviews of Neuroscience , 27:
509– 47.
Sulloway, F. (1979). Freud: Biologist of the Mind. London: Burnett Books.


=== PAGE 310 ===

bibliography 289
S u p p e ,F .(1989). The Semantic Conception of Theories and Scientiﬁc Realism. Urbana,
IL: University of Illinois Press.
Swartz, K. J. (2004). ‘‘Towards a Structural View of Gating in Potassium Channels,’’
Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 5: 905– 16.
T a b e r y ,J .(2004). ‘‘Synthesizing Activities and Interactions in the Concept of a
Mechanism,’’ Philosophy of Science , 71: 1– 15.
Tang, Y., Shimizu, E., Dube, G. R., Rampon, C., Kerchner, G. A., Zhuo,
M. Liu, G., and Tsien, J. Z. ( 1999). ‘‘Genetic Enhancement of Learning and
Memory in Mice,’’ Nature, 401: 63– 9.
Tarski, A., ( 1929). ‘‘Les Fondements de la G´eom´etrie des Corps,’’ Ksiega Pami-
atkowa Pierwszkego Polskiego Zjazdu Matematycznego (suppl. to Annales de
la Soci ´et´e Polonaise de Math ´ematique), 7: 29– 33; Eng. trans. by J. H. Woodger
(1956): ‘‘Foundations of the Geometry of Solids,’’ in A. Tarski (ed.), Logics,
Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
24– 9.
Thagard, P. (1998). ‘‘Explaining Disease: Correlations, Causes, and Mechanisms,’’
Minds and Machines, 8: 61– 78.
(1999). How Scientists Explain Disease . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
(2003). ‘‘Pathways to Biomedical Discovery,’’ Philosophy of Science , 70:
235– 54.
Thielscher, A., and Neumann, H. ( 2003). ‘‘Neural Mechanisms of Cortico–
Cortical Interaction in Texture B oundary Detection: A Modeling Approach,’’
Neuroscience, 122: 921– 39.
Thomas, M. J., and Malenka, R. C. ( 2003). ‘‘Synaptic Plasticity in the Mesolim-
bic Dopamine System,’’ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , 358:
815– 20.
T o l m a n ,E .C .(1948). ‘‘Cognitive Maps in Rats and Man,’’Psychological Review,
55: 189– 208.
T r o u t ,J .D .(2002). ‘‘Scientiﬁc Explanation and the Sense of Understanding,’’
Philosophy of Science , 69/2: 212– 33.
Tsien, J. Z., Chen, D. F., Gerber, D., Tom, C., Mercer, E. H., Anderson, D. J.,
Mayford, M., Kandel, E. R., and Tonegawa, S. ( 1996a). ‘‘Subregion- and Cell
Type-Restricted Gene Knockout in Mouse Brain,’’ Cell, 87: 1317– 26.
, Huerta, P. T., and Tonegawa, S. ( 1996b). ‘‘The Essential Role of Hip-
pocampal CA 1 NMDA Receptor-Dependent Synaptic Plasticity in Spatial
Memory,’’ Cell, 87: 1327– 38.
Uttal, W. R. (2001). The New Phrenology .C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s .
Van Fraassen, B. (1980). The Scientiﬁc Image . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Gulick, R. ( 1993). ‘‘Who’s in Charge Here? And Who’s Doing All the
Work?,’’ in J. Heil and A. Mele (eds.), Mental Causation . Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 233– 56.


=== PAGE 311 ===

290 bibliography
Von Eckardt Klein, B. ( 1978). ‘‘Inferring Functional Localization From Neuro-
logical Evidence,’’ in E. Walker (ed.), Explorations in the Biology of Language .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
P o l a n d ,J .S .(2005). ‘‘Mechanism and Explanation in Cognitive Neuro-
science,’’ Philosophy of Science (Suppl.), 71: 972– 84
Von Wright, G. ( 1971). Explanation and Understanding . Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Watson, J. D., and Crick, F. H. C. (1953). ‘‘A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic
Acid,’’ Nature, 171: 737– 8.
Weber, M. ( 2005). Philosophy of Experimental Biology . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
W e i s k r a n t z ,L .(1990). ‘‘Problems of Learning and Memory: One or Multiple
Memory Systems?,’’ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London (Biology) ,
329: 99– 108.
Wilson, M. A., and McNaughton, B. ( 1993). ‘‘Dynamics of the Hippocampal
Ensemble Code for Space,’’ Science, 261: 1055– 8.
Wilson, R. A. ( 2001). ‘‘Two Views of Realization,’’ Philosophical Studies , 104:
1– 30.
(2004). Boundaries of the Mind: The Individual in the Fragile Sciences: Cognition .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Craver, C. F. (forthcoming). ‘‘Realization,’’ in P. Thagard (ed.),Handbook of
Philosophy of Psychology and Cognitive Science . North Holland.
Wimsatt, W. (1974). ‘‘Complexity and Organization,’’ in K. F. Schaffner and R.
S. Cohen (eds.), PSA 1972, (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2).
Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 67– 86.
(1976a). ‘‘Reductionism, Levels of Organization, and the Mind–Body Prob-
lem,’’ in G. Globus, I. Savodnik, and G. Maxwell (eds.), Consciousness and the
Brain.N e wY o r k :P l e n u mP r e s s ,199– 267.
(1976b). ‘‘Reductive Explanation: A Functional Account,’’ in E. Sober (ed.),
Conceptual Issues in Evolutionary Biology . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 369– 85.
(1981). ‘‘Robustness, Reliabilty and Overdetermination,’’ in M. Brewer and
B. Collins (eds.), Scientiﬁc Inquiry and the Social Sciences. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass Publishers, 124– 63.
(1985). ‘‘Forms of Aggregativity,’’ in A. Donagan, A. Perovich, and M.
Wedin (eds.), Human Nature and Natural Knowledge. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel,
259– 93.
(1994). ‘‘The Ontology of Complex Systems: Levels, Perspectives, and Causal
Thickets,’’ Canadian Journal of Philosophy (Suppl.), 20: 207– 74.
(1997). ‘‘Aggregativity: Reductive Heuristics for Finding Emergence,’’ in L.
Darden (ed.), PSA-1996,v o l .2. Philosophy of Science (Suppl.), S372– 84.


=== PAGE 312 ===

bibliography 291
Woodger, J. H. ( 1937). The Axiomatic Method in Biology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Woodward, J. (1984) ‘‘A Theory of Singular Causal Explanation,’’Erkenntnis, 21:
231– 62.
(1997). ‘‘Explanation, Invariance, and Intervention,’’PSA-1996 vol. 2.P h i l o s -
ophy of Science , 66:S 26– 41.
(2000). ‘‘Explanation and Invariance in the Special Sciences,’’British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science , 52: 197– 254.
(2002). ‘‘What is a Mechanism? A Counterfactual Account,’’ Philosophy of
Science (Suppl.), 69:S 366– 77.
(2003). Making Things Happen . New York: Oxford University Press.
, and Hitchcock, C. (2003a). ‘‘Explanatory Generalizations, Part I: A Coun-
terfactual Account,’’ Nous, 37: 1– 24.
, and Hitchcock, C. (2003b). ‘‘Explanatory Generalizations, Part II: Plumbing
Explanatory Depth,’’ Nous, 37: 181– 99.
W r i g h t ,L .(1973). ‘‘Functions,’’Philosophical Review, 82: 139– 68.
Wright, W. (forthcoming). ‘‘Explanation and the Hard Problem,’’ Philosophical
Studies.
Wylie, A. ( 2002). Thinking with Things . San Francisco: University of California
Press.
Yablo, S. (1992). ‘‘Mental Causation,’’Philosophical Review, 101: 245– 80.


=== PAGE 313 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 314 ===

Index
ablation 243
see also interference experiments
Abrahamsen, A. 5,n .6, 28, 30, 66, 110
Achinstein, P. 132, 202
and explanatory relevance 202
and robustness 132
action potential 49– 61, 50, 52, 53,
114– 21, 116
and aggregates 187
and boundaries of mechanisms 123,
141– 4
and byproducts 127
component currents 116
and constitutive explanation 59– 60
equivalent circuit model 56, 114– 16
features a-h of 51– 3, 52, 125– 6
and ﬁller terms 59
Hodgkin and Huxley Model of, see
Hodgkin and Huxley model
as higher-level cause 202– 19
historically contingent 100
how-possibly 57
inhibiting conditions of 126
interlevel experiments and 146– 54
laws and 52– 3
in McCulloch and Pitts 241
mechanism of 55– 6, 114– 21, 135– 6
and multiple realization 223
and negative causes 201
and neurotransmitter release 22– 6, 221,
223
in population spikes 66
as regularity 35
sketch of 57– 8
total current equation for 51
voltage clamp and 50– 1
waveform 50, 116
activities 6, 64, 133– 4
in action potential mechanism 117, 122
active organization 136– 7, 254– 5
and causal powers 224– 6
and causation 6, 211,n . 7
challenges to 224– 5
and change 211,n .7
and difference-making 201, 225
in explanatory schemata 43,n . 17
and ﬁller terms 113
and forces 211,n .7
and functions 125,n .10
in long-term potentiation 90, 250
and manipulation 95,n .22, 98, 105, 201
in mechanical philosophy 3
in mechanisms 6– 7, 130, 133– 4, 161– 2
at multiple levels 178
in neurotransmitter release 5
precipitating conditions 94
and productivity 6, 106
vs. pseudo-activities 9
real 131– 3
reductive analysis of 64
sterile 144
and temporal constraints 253– 4
and topping off 266
varieties of 3, 6, 64
see also active organization, causation,
relevance
A d e y ,W .R .238, 243
aggregates 135, 171, 186– 7
action potentials and 187
causal powers of 217
explanations 162
and gin 186
levels and 11, 186– 7
mechanisms vs. 216
and neurotransmitter release 187
and nonfundamental causes 214
Schaffner on 11
Wimsatt and 135, 186– 7
Ahn, W. 30
Allen, G. 3
Alzheimer’s Disease vii, 25,n .2
Long Term Potentiation and 244
AMPA receptors 70, 71, 250, 254
Anand, B. K. 148– 9
anatomy 16, 176, 228, 239
dendritic morphology 244
of hippocampus 239
and intralevel integration 255
Andersen, P. 236
discovery of LTP 236– 9


=== PAGE 315 ===

294 index
Andersen, P. ( cont.)
and Eccles 242
and electrophysiology 239
LTP as type of learning 241
synaptic plasticity and 237, 242
use of LTP as tool 237
see also LTP, history of
appropriateness 204– 211
see also contrast
Archimedes 3
Aristotle 24, 35
A r m s t r o n g ,C .M .57, 116– 11, 133, 248
Armstrong, D. 36
Ashley, C. C. 23
axon 116, 152
degeneration of 239
in plasticity 250
squid giant 52, 126
terminal 187, 190, 223, 252
axon hillock 116, 125, 137
background conditions 85, 140, 143,
157– 8
bandwidth and 143
CL model and 7, 34, 39, 61
vs. components 157– 8, 159
constitutive relevance and 144, 157
invariance and 99– 100
mechanistic fragility and 68, 88
negative causes and 85
sensitivity to 217
bandwidth 143– 4
Barlow, H. 11
Barnes, E. 42– 4
barometer and storm 25– 6, 134
Barondes, S. 11
basal ganglia 150
Bear, M. F. 66
Beatty, J. 66, 69
Bechtel, W.
and complex mechanisms 178
and functions 124,n .10
integration of ﬁelds 232
interlevel experiments 96, 144, 149– 51
and localization 137,n .17, 252,
261
and memory 124,n .8
and Richardson 5,n .6, 109, 122, 124,
n.8, 137
and reconstituting the phenomenon 123,
n.7
and the systems tradition 161
and top-down causation 155,n .34
Beebee, H. 83, 85
Behavioral genetics 245,n .7
Bennett, M. R. vii, 22
Bernstein, J. 125, 131
Best, A. 3
beta amyloid vii, ix, 25,n .2
Bickle, J. 12, 14, 148,n .28
formal reduction 17, 108, 229– 36
fundamentalism 12, 227
reduction as empirical thesis 14, 243– 4
and Long-Term Potentiation 236
biochemistry 243, 250, 265
cascades 138, 142
in LM research program 176
black box 7,n .8, 113– 14, 130
blessed neurons 36– 7, 60, 78– 9, 103, 134,
200
Bliss, T. V. P. 66– 8, 236– 7
discovery of LTP 240
LTP Watershed 237, 242– 4, 250– 2, 262
Bogen, J.
and activities 64
and counterfactuals 70, 86
on Hodgkin and Huxley 53
and interlevel experiments 96, 151– 2
probabilistic causes 26
Bonhoeffer, E. 253
B o r e l l i ,G .A .123
boundaries 123, 141– 4, 186– 7
compartmental 251
interactive 142
relevance 144, 259
spatial 141– 2
box-and-arrow diagrams 110, 139, 162,
260
boxology 115, 131
Boyd, R. 45, 131
Boyle, R. 3, 60,n . 27
Brandon, R. 4
how-possibly explanation 114
Brobeck, J. R. 148– 9
Broca, P. x, 147
Brodal, A. 239
Bromberger, S. 25, 43– 5
Br¨ucke, E. 3,n .4
Bub, J. 147
bucket of water, frozen 205– 6, 220
Buckner, R. 244
Burdo, J. D. 2


=== PAGE 316 ===

index 295
Burian, R. 5,n .6.
Campbell, D. 94, 172
capacities 133– 4
bona ﬁde vs. pseudo- 134
Cummins and 110, 122, 127, 133– 5
at different ‘‘levels’’129
Cartwright, N. 99
Catterall, W. 119,n .6
causal exclusion argument 196– 8, 211,
216– 18, 223– 7
causal nexus 39, 74
transmission view 78, 79
causal powers 198, 2ll, n.7, 214– 17, 220– 4
v s .c a u s a lr e l e v a n c e198, 224– 5
causal relevance 26, 33, 38, 198
and asymmetry 25,n .1
blessed neurons 78– 9, 86, 103
and causal powers 201
and contrast 203– 5
vs. constitutive relevance 140, 145, 153
and control 93– 4
higher levels of mechanisms 216
higher levels of realization 218, 223– 7
Jones’ syphilis 47
and making a difference 80, 86, 105, 201
manipulationist view 96– 8, 103– 6,
199– 201
and norms of explanation 105
pool ball example 78– 9, 86, 103
and transmission 65, 78– 9
see also relevance, causal
causal structure of the world 27, 42– 9,
226– 7
and manipulation 96– 7
causation 63– 105, 211– 27
across size scales 181– 3
activities and 6, 64, 133– 4
asymmetry of 25
vs. componency 154
and connection 201
conserved quantities and 72– 86
vs. constitution, see vs. componency
contact 201 see also transmission
contrast and 204 (see contrast)
and difference making 225
efﬁcacy 224
and explanation 22– 7
as folk notion 37– 9
Humean skepticism about 37– 8, 64– 5,
86– 93
interlevel 153– 4, 178– 80, 183, 195
laws and 65– 72, 88
levels and 177– 80
manipulation and 93– 5, 101– 6, 134
mechanical account 86– 93
mental 211
metaphysics of 105– 6, 226
negative 80– 6, 104, 201, 225
nonfundamental 217
nonreductive accounts 64, 226
in open system 38,n .10
probablistic 24, 26
reductive account of 64
sufﬁcient 200
time and 25, 102
transmission 72– 86, 200– 1 see also mark
transmission
uniﬁcation and 43– 49
see also causal relevance
Cerella, J. 207
ceteris paribus 8, 68
Chalmers, D. 141
Chapui, N. 260
Cheng, P. 30
Churchland, P. M. 8– 9, 21, 28– 34
and norms of explanation 31– 3
prototype view of explanation 28– 9
and relevance 31– 3
Churchland, P. S. 232– 3
coevolution 123– 4, 259– 61
and fundamentalism 11
and levels 163,n .1, 177, 180, 181
and multilevelism 17
and reduction 17– 18, 108, 229, 232– 3,
259
Clark, A. 33,n .7, 141
coevolution 123,n .7, 233, 256, 259– 61
Coffa, J. 27, 34
Cole, K. 55, 58, 125– 6
Collingridge, G. L. 66
Collingwood, R. 94
Collins, J. 81,n .14
color discrimination 1, 198– 9, 206– 7, 209,
223
in organology 124
compensation 148– 50, 152, 156– 9
as rule of brain function 222
compiled hindsight x
components/componency 189; 191– 2
real 131– 3, 190– 4
composition 162, 184


=== PAGE 317 ===

296 index
composition ( cont.)
and levels 164, 182– 4, 186– 7, 191– 2
material and spatial 187– 8
and mechanisms 188– 9
and pieces 188
see also components/componency,
constitution
connectionism 28– 34
conserved quantities 76
and causation 83
and counterfactuals 77
and difference-making 86, 105
and fundamentalism 77
and manipulationism 95
and negative causation 80– 4, 104
and relevance 78– 9
constitutive explanation 74; 107– 62,
128– 31, 258
and componency 128
and functional analysis 129, 133, 160– 2
constitutive relevance 139– 60
mutual manipulability 160
constraints on 59– 61, 156
vs. interpretive explanations 129– 30
mechanistic view of 111, 122, 160– 2,
258
normative vs. descriptive 161
reductive tradition 108– 9, 122, 160– 2
regulative ideal for 231
Salmon’s view of 73– 4
systems tradition 109– 11, 160– 1
see also functional analysis
constitutive relevance 139– 60
mutual manipulability 160
see also constitutive explanation, mutual
manipulability
constraints C1-C5 on accounts of
constitutive explanation 59– 60, 62
constraints on descriptions of
mechanisms 249
accommodative 259– 61
top-down 259– 61
bottom-up 261
active 254– 5
componency 249– 51
and integration of ﬁelds 266– 7
interlevel 261– 4
intralevel 258– 67
manipulability 264
spatial 251– 3
temporal 253– 4
constraints E1-E5 on accounts of etiological
explanation 26– 8, 64, 33, 36– 9, 198
and activities 225
and capacities 134
and historical contingency 200
and manipulation 47, 101– 6
mechanical account of causation
and 91– 3
and norms for explanation 49
and realized properties 220
and uniﬁcation 43
containment 184, 186– 7, 193
contextual unanimity 99
contrast 202– 11, 223– 4, 95,n .23
and ambiguity 202– 3, 208– 9
appropriateness 209– 11
bucket of water 205– 6
and causal relevance 202– 11, 220, 223
in controlled experiments 203
and negative causes 82
and pragmatics 203– 4
realized 223
control x, 1, 93, 160
see also manipulation, intervention
control, experimental 82, 96– 7, 97,
102– 3, 150, 155
and nonfundamental causes 199– 208,
227
control theory 179
Cook, T. 94
Copernicus, N. 1
correlation 24, 60, 159
imaging experiments 151
and integration of levels 144, 258
interlevel 151– 2, 258– 67
and manipulation 97, 102, 156
nonexplanatory 24, 36– 8, 55, 133– 4
vs. productive relation 6
Coulomb’s law 53
counterfactuals 36, 83, 86
backtracking 36, 102, 134
and conserved quantities 76– 7
and mark transmission 75– 6
and negative causation 84– 6
covering-law model
see explanation, CL model
Craik, F. I. M. 30
Cragg, B. G. 238
Crane, T. 3
Creuzfeldt-Jacob disease 107, 170
Crick, F. 14


=== PAGE 318 ===

index 297
evolution 70,n .5
fundamentalism 14
model of DNA 43,n .17, 248
reduction 18, 233
Culp, S. 19, 132, 269
Cummins, R. 5,n .6, 107– 62
and capacities 133– 5
and constitutive relevance 140
functional Analysis 109– 11, 122, 124– 5,
129– 30
functions 125,n .11
and laws 134
and organization 138
systems tradition 5,n .6, 161
Curtis, H. 125– 6
Darden, L. 113,n .4
activities 64, 93, 95, 106
compiled hindsight x
demarcation 268
discovery 139, 269
ﬁelds 16,n .16, 171, 228,n .1, 247– 8, 269
interﬁeld theories 247– 8, 255
mechanical philosophy 3
mechanisms 5,n .6, 88
Darwin, C. 1, 41
Davidson, D. 95
De Caus, S. 142
decomposition 5,n .6, 188, 194
into pieces 188
levels of 211
mechanistic 190– 1
systems tradition 109– 11
see also functional analysis
Delmas, P. 3
Demarcation 14, 20,n . 20, 268
Democritus 3
Dennett, D. 5,n .6, 226
design stance 109
homuncular explanation 109, 113
real patterns 226
reverse engineering 109
Descartes, R. 3, 142
Des Chene, D. 3
and animal spirits 123, 249
boundaries of mechanisms 142
determinable/determinate 94, 212,n .9, 219
difference making 24, 80, 198– 202, 225– 6
DiGirolamo 179
discovery 123,n .7, 248, 269,n .9
DNA ix, 101, 113, 248
Dostrovsky, J. 96, 167, 260
Douglas, R. J. 243
Dowe, P. 25,n .1, 95
causation∗ 85– 6
conserved quantities 72– 86
negative causes 83– 6
transmission account 63– 5, 200
Dretske, F. 82– 3
contrast 82– 3, 95,n .23, 202
and homuncular explanation 109
see also hemlock
Du Bois Reymond, E. 3– 4
Dupre, J. 230, 268
Earman, J. 68,n .3
Eccles, J. x, 242– 3, 262
Edelman, G. 13– 14
Eells, E. 99
Ehring, D. 79,n .12.
Eichenbaum, H. 261
Elazar, Z. 243
electroencephalography (EEG) 243
electromagnetism 187, 233
electron microscopy 121, 132, 250– 2
Elster, J. 7,n .8.
emergence 16, 216– 17
Engert, F. 253
entelechies 15, 131
epiphenomenalism 197
evidence 82, 96, 248
evolution 16, 86, 88, 229
of brain 43, 124,n .10, 127,n .13
contingency 69, 88
Darwin’s theory 41, 67
functions and 124,n .10, 127,n .13
experimental psychology
ﬁeld of 166, 176, 229, 265
and maze learning 255, 260
experiments 145– 7
and causal relevance 93– 9, 205– 11
interlevel 144– 52
explanandum phenomenon 22, 74, 122– 6
byproducts 127
in CL explanation 34
as core normative requirement 122– 3
counting 49,n .20
in DNP explanation 40
expectation of 40, 108
ﬁctional 123
in functional analysis 110, 124– 5
inhibitory conditions 126


=== PAGE 319 ===

298 index
explanandum phenomenon ( cont.)
lumping errors 123
manifestations 125
in mechanisms 121– 2
multifaceted 125
nonstandard conditions 126
precipitating conditions 125, 128
realism concerning 123
explanans 22, 139
explanation
causal/mechanical 8, 5,n .6, 8, 21, 74,
144, 256
constitutive (see constitutive
explanation)
contextual 258
and control x, 1– 2, 38, 47, 93– 4, 160,
198, 227
covering-law model 7– 8, 52, 108, 230
as arguments 7, 34– 40
nomic expectability thesis 39– 40, 61,
108, 161
shortcomings of 34– 40
criteria for account of 19– 20
deductive-nomological-probablistic
(DNP) 39– 40
epistemic account of 34
etiological 8, 22, 25, 74, 145
complete 83
vs. constitutive 61, 107– 8, 133, 154
prototypes of 29– 31
explanatory texts 27, 101
vs. box-and-arrow diagrams 139
depth of 101
mechanistic 140
vs. objective explanations 27
history of philosophy of viii
inferential account 34– 5, 40, 61
vs. justiﬁcation 42
manipulation and 93– 104, 152– 60
vs. mere models 20, 58– 9, 231, 271
morphological 136, 162
nonfundamental 196– 227
objective see ontic
ontic 27– 8, 34, 200, 217
pragmatics of 28, 131, 142– 3, 156– 7,
203– 4, 269
and prediction 7,n .8, 34– 45, 46
probabilistic 24– 6, 68, 72, 104, 200
and prototype activation 28– 34
rational expectation and 34– 5, 39– 40,
108, 140, 161
and representation 28– 34
vs. taxonomy 20, 42
and understanding ix, 21– 2, 28– 31,
see also understanding
and uniﬁcation 8, 40– 9
explanatory interfacing 230
explanatory text 27, 101, 140
falsiﬁcation 69 n.5
family resemblance 197, 224, 270
Felleman, D. J. 33
ﬁelds 16– 19, 171, 176, 228– 9
deﬁnition of 247– 8
integration of 266– 71
see also integration
ﬁller terms 6, 58– 9, 113, 130
and action potential 115– 17
and causation 225
ﬂagpole and shadow 25, 43– 4, 47
fMRI 60, 151, 156, 252
see also activation experiments
Fodor, J. A. 5,n .6, 109, 230
Freedman, D. 94
Friedman, M. 40– 1
Fritsch, G. 149– 50
functional analysis 5,n .6, 107– 62
vs. componential analysis 129– 30
Cummins’ view 110– 11
interpretive vs. descriptive 129– 30, 139
and laws 134
and mechanisms 122, 129– 30, 133,
161– 2
prototypes of 29
and systems tradition 109
see also constitutive explanation, systems
tradition
function (and malfunction) x, 124– 5
account of 125,n .10
Cummins’ view reformulated 161– 2
of hippocampus 167, 238, 262
levels of 164
localization of 251– 2
and norms 127,n .13
and physiological plausibility 132
recovery of 134, 148
fundamentalism 11– 16, 89, 93, 162,
196– 227
Fuster, J. 179
Gage, P. 147


=== PAGE 320 ===

index 299
Gall, F. J. x, 124
Galvani, L. 123
Gardner-Medwin, A. 237, 242– 4, 252, 262
gating charge 60, 119, 121, 127– 8, 248
generalizations 66– 72, 99– 100, 233
accidental 35– 6
historically contingent 69, 86, 88,
99– 100
invariant 99– 100, 190 see also stability
limited scope 66, 68
mechanistically fragile 68, 86, 88,
99– 100, 133– 4, 200
realized properties and 198– 200, 220– 7,
237
stochastic 68
support of counterfactuals 36, 84
universal 36, 99– 100
see also laws, invariance
genes 33, 66, 248, 264
see also DNA, knockouts
genetics 235
code 66, 248
psychiatric 1, 245,n .7
see also DNA, knockouts
Giere, R. 175
Gillett, C. 212
gin, Bombay 135– 6, 186– 8
Glennan, S. 5,n .6, 49, 81,n .13
and capacities 100
and mechanical view 86– 93
and mechanisms 122– 3
and models 175
systems tradition 109
and Woodward 94
see also causation, mechanical view
Gloor, P. 237
Glymour, C. 30, 94, 147
Gold, I. 11– 12
Golgi, C. 239– 40, 252
Goodman, N. 45
Gould, S. J. 172
grandmother cells 214
Green, J. D. 238
grey box 133
Grifﬁths, P. 45
Grottesi, A. 121
Grush, R. 143– 5, 179
Hacking, I. 132, 232
Hafting, T. 261
Hall, Z. 120
Hamer, D. 245,n .7
Hardcastle, V. 39,n .13, 152,n .32, 163,n .1
Harlow, B. 147
Harris, K. 253
Hartley, J. 123, 249
Haugeland, J. 5,n .6, 15
and decomposition 109, 188
and fundamentalism 15
morphological explanation 136
and parts 188
and systems 141– 3, 161
Hausman, D. 79
Hebb, D. O. 70, 243
Hegarty, M. 30, 33
Heil, J. 13, 196– 7, 224
Hemlock 82– 3; 202– 3
Hempel, C. G. 8, 19, 60 n.27
and CL explanation 34– 40
and theories 175
Hille, B. 57– 9, 116– 19, 248
hippocampus 167, 176, 178, 236– 45
as experimental model 239
functions of 260– 1, 238
and learning/memory 238, 252, 255– 7,
260– 4
long-term potentiation in 236– 45 (see
long-term potentiation)
and semantic memory 263
slice preparation 167, 237
spatial memory 96, 108, 167– 9, 178– 9
histology 265
history of science
activities across 106
case studies vii, x, 114, 232– 7, 243– 6
and norms of science x, 3
and uniﬁcation 41, 48
Hitchcock, C.
and conserved quantities 77,n .10
and contrast 82, 202– 3
and manipulation 94– 6
statistical view of causation 106
and relevance 78– 9, 82
Hitzig, E. 149– 50
H.M. 147
Hodgkin, A. 49, 54, 62 (see also Hodgkin
and Huxley Model)
Hodgkin and Huxley model 22, 50, 52, 53,
114– 21, 151
action potential phenomenon 125
activation molecules 57
and CL model 52, 59– 60


=== PAGE 321 ===

300 index
Hodgkin and Huxley model ( cont.)
equivalent circuit model 115
and functional analysis 111– 21, 130
how-possibly mechanisms 131
not an explanation 53– 60
and mechanisms 49– 62, 121– 2
total current equation 51– 2, 54, 114– 15
holy water, isotonic 36– 7, 78– 9, 103
homomorphism 229
homuncular functionalism 9, 109– 110, 113
H o o k e r ,C .A .17, 229
how-possibly 56– 69, 111– 13, 129– 31, 139
of action potential 126, 58– 9
of channel gating 117-118
ﬁctional components 129
and functional analysis 130– 3
and interﬁeld integration 253, 266
and long-term potentiation 251
space of possible mechanisms 247– 8, 253
Huber, L. 207
Humean supervenience 76,n . 9
Hume, D. 64, 86– 93
independence of cause and effect 153
Kitcher and 43,n . 16
problem of causation 86– 93, 225
secret connection 64, 86– 93
Huxley, A. F. 51– 62, 114– 15, 125– 8,
130– 1
see also Hodgkin and Huxley model
Huygens, C. 3
Hyden, H. 243
hypothalamus
lateral 148– 9, 158
and sexual preference vii
identity 108, 213, 229, 241, 267, 271
Ike the bookie 30– 2
immediate early genes 151
indirect effects 148, 150, 154
integration of ﬁelds 16– 19, 266– 7
interlevel 232, 256– 67
constraints on 258– 67
mosaic 266– 7
intralevel 232, 236– 40, 246– 56
constraints on 248– 55
mosaic 255
intratheoretic 237
mosaic 255– 6
integration of levels 139– 160, 256– 68
interaction
and boundaries of mechanisms 141– 4
intensity of 142
see also activities, causation
interlevel experiments 144– 52, 264– 6
activation 151– 2
and constitutive relevance 144– 7,
152– 60
interference 147– 9
mutually reinforcing 152, 158
and robustness 270
stimulation 149– 51
top-down inhibitory 146,n .27
intervention 37
and active constraints 254
and blessed neurons 103
as causal 105, 226
constraints I1–I 4 on 96– 8, 97, 199, 204,
226
in constitutive relations 154
and contrast 82, 223
and difference making 104, 198– 200,
202, 206, 209
and ‘‘do operator’’94
etiological experiments 145, 169,
198– 200
and experimental control 198– 200, 202
ideal 94– 8, 97
interlevel experiments 146– 9, 154– 60,
183, 265, 269
and multiple realization 223
and realism 131, 139, 162
and relevance 221, 223 see also relevance
and switch-points 209– 10, 223
testing 209,n .4
invariance 94, 99– 101, 135, 234
Jacob, F. 88
Ji, R. R. 3
Kaczmarek, L. K. 168
Kalish, C. W. 30
Kandel, E. 66, 164, 237
Katz, B. 22– 3, 25, 205
Kauffman, S. A.
and mechanism 122
relativity of 122– 3, 188
stock in trade entities 113,n .4
systems tradition 5,n .6, 109
Keil, F. ix, 34,n .8
Kepler, J. 60
Kim, J. 196– 8, 200, 217


=== PAGE 322 ===

index 301
causal exclusion argument 13, 197– 200,
211– 27, 223
interlevel causes 154,n .34
levels of realization 165,n .2, 212,n .9,
214, 216– 17, 219– 20
and mechanistic reduction 161
mereological levels 184
micro-based properties 219
orders see levels of realization
size levels 172
Kirkpatrick, K. 207– 8
Kitcher, P. 8, 21
inferential view 27
uniﬁcation and 40– 9 (see explanation,
uniﬁcation)
knockout, genetic 264– 5
Knowlton, B. J. 124
Kornblith, H. 45
Kuhn, T. 171
Kuru 48
Kyburg, H. E. 37,n .9
Lakatos, I. 171, 197, 235
Lashley, K. 238
lateral geniculate nucleus 177
laws 52, 66– 9, 88, 125, 233
vs. accidents 35– 6
bridge 240
and capacities 124– 5, 133– 4
causal relevance 199
conservation 77
ceteris paribus 8, 68
direct causal 87– 91, 93
and explanation 59– 61 see also covering
law model
fundamental 37, 49,n .21, 89– 91, 93
general and statistical 34
input-output 133
in situ 133, 139
levels and 164, 172– 5
na¨ıve regularity view 36, 38– 9
of neuroscience 233, 241
special science 8
strict 66, 199– 200
and unity of science 246– 7, 268
L-Dopa 150
Le Doux, J. 244
learning and memory
behaviorism and 259– 60
cannibalistic x
coevolution of ﬁelds 123
declarative 61,
261
episodic vii
habit 263
hippocampus and 167, 238, 262
levels of 165– 70, 166, 256– 7
long-term potentiation and 69– 70, 244
multilevel mechanisms 164, 238– 42,
244– 5, 265
procedural 261
rates of 254, 262– 3
reductive history of 236, 238– 42
semantic 30, 70,n .6, 263
splitting 123, 261
spatial 167, 178, 259
Lepore, E. 213,n .9, 218
lesion experiments 147– 9, 155, 157– 8,
238, 260, 269
levels 9– 16, 163– 95
of aggregates 186
– 7
ambiguities of 163– 4
causal 177– 80
Churchland, P. S. and 180
of composition 184
of control 179– 80
deﬁning questions 171– 2, 192– 3
of ﬁelds 176
LM levels 164– 70, 166,ﬁ g .5.1
local 191– 5
Marr’s 165, 218
of mechanisms 164, 188– 95, 197– 8,
211– 17, 256– 8
mereological 184
micro-macro 211
monolithic 190– 1
of nature 174, 177
Oppenheim and Putnam 172– 7, 190– 1
of processing 177– 9
of realization 165, 197– 8, 211– 17,
217– 27
of sciences 172– 7
Units 174– 4
Products 174– 7
and Sejnowski 180
of size 175– 6, 180– 4
taxonomy of 170
of theories 173, 175
Wimsatt’s View 164, 174– 5, 180– 3, 190
see also integration, interlevel experiment,
reduction, unity of science
Levitan, I. B. 168
Lewis, D. 35– 6, 39,n .11, 76,n .9, 94,n .21


=== PAGE 323 ===

302 index
Lewis, D. ( cont.)
backtracking counterfactuals 36, 102
fragility 68 ,n .2
Lichtman, J. W. 68, 103
Linnaeus, R. 42, 137
LISP 112, 138
Lloyd, D. P. C. 262
lobster 221– 2
localization of function x, 238, 252, 261
Loewer, B. 213,n .9, 218
logical positivism 35
Lømo, T. 66, 236– 7
long-term potentiation 65– 72, 167– 9
associative 70– 1
calcium, role of in 70– 1, 80– 1
as causal 65– 72
coincidence detector 70– 1, 80– 1
history of 236– 46
intralevel integration 245
mechanistic shift 240
as nonreductive 240
as reduction 236
watershed 240– 3
as identical to learning 241– 3
input speciﬁc 69– 70
interlevel experiments and 264– 6
as laboratory tool 237
and levels 164– 70, 175; 240– 5, 256– 8,
266– 7
magnesium and 70– 1, 80– 1
mechanisms of 70– 1, 80– 1, 169
and memory 65, 164– 70, 228– 67
NMDA receptors 70, 80– 1
phenomenon 66, 167– 9
presynaptic vs. postsynaptic 251– 2
stochastic 66
variability of 66
Looren de Jong, H. 124,n .10
lumping 123– 4, 259
Lycan, W. 5,n .6, 9
homuncular explanation 109, 113, 124,
n.10, 218
and levels 11,n .12
Lynch, G. 66
Machamer, P. 84,n .16
and activities 64, 211,n .7, 224– 5
and laws 88
and levels 163,n .1
and mechanisms 5,n .6, 28, 105– 6, 113,
n.2, 122
and productivity 94
MacMurray, F. 263
Malenka, R. C. 66, 244
Maletic-Savatic, M. 253
Malinow, R. 250, 253
manipulability see manipulation
manipulation 1– 2, 160, 209– 11
and causation 9, 38, 93– 100, 102– 4,
105– 6, 145, 198– 202
and difference making 86
and explanation 6, 47, 100– 1
goal of neuroscience ix
and higher-level (of realization)
causes 217– 27
interlevel 264– 5
laws vs. accidents 134
mutual 141, 152– 60, 258, 264 see also
mutual manipulability
and realism 132
manipulationist see manipulation
M a r c u s ,E .M .223
mark transmission 73– 80
see also causation
Marr, D. 165, 218, 243
mathematical biophysics 241
Mauk, M. 58, 62
Maull, N. 16, 228,n .1, 247, 255, 269
maxwell’s equations 41
mazes
behaviorism and 259– 60
Morris water 166– 7, 169, 264
spatial maps and 96, 261
varieties of 165– 6, 260
McClelland, J. 28, 30,n .4
McConnell, J. x
McCulloch, W. 241, 245
McHugh, T. J. 169, 176, 264
McNaughton, B. 96, 167, 260
mechanical Philosophy 3– 4
mechanisms 2– 8, 107– 62
vs. aggregates 135, 216
boundaries of 141– 4, 186– 7
constitutive 59– 61
Elster’s view 7,n .8
vs. equations 53– 59
etiological 74
features of 2– 8, 111– 12, 160– 2
and functional analysis 122, 160– 2
Glennan’s view 89
historical perspective 3– 4
how-possibly 112– 13, 248


=== PAGE 324 ===

index 303
levels of 188– 94
and machines 4, 69, 140
vs. models 55– 9, 230, 270
phenomenon 121– 8, 259– 61
vs. reduction 267– 71 243, 255, 266– 71
Salmon’s view 8, 21, 27
space of plausible 59, 247– 8, 258, 269
space of possible 18, 247– 54, 269
and uniﬁcation 49
Woodward’s view of 94
mechanism schema 111, 114, 130, 247
mechanism sketch 18, 53, 56, 111, 113– 14,
247, 267
mereology 184– 6
concrete vs. abstract 186
extensionality 185– 6
reﬂexivity 184– 5
Oppenheim and Putnam 173
micro-based property 219– 21
micro-structural property 221
see also microbased property
middle range sciences 11
Miledi, R. 22– 3, 25, 205, 221
Milner, B. 147, 236, 238– 9, 243, 261
Mintun, M. A. 151
models 53– 61, 107– 12, 230, 270
how-possibly see how possibly
mathematical 55, 114, 140
of mechanism 113, 139, 160– 2
see also explanatory texts
Monet, C. 208
Morgan, C. 2,n .1
Morris water maze 166, 260, 264
mosaic Unity 19, 231– 3, 236
and explanatory progress 255, 261, 264,
265
and interlevel integration 258, 266– 7
and intralevel integration 255
vs. reduction 218– 24, 235, 266– 71
and robustness 269
as working hypothesis 246– 7
see also unity, mosaic
multiple realization 108, 120, 160, 214,
n.10, 221– 2
multiunit recording 15, 151
Mundale, J. 124,n .10
mutual manipulability 141– 60
constitutive relevance and 152– 9
counterfactuals in 155– 60
deﬁnition of 153, 159
vs. derivation 160
and integration of levels 258
as sufﬁcient 159
Nadel, L. 17, 96
Nagel, E. 17– 18, 229, 233
natural kinds 45
Neanderthal 42– 3
necessity
and causation 87, 90– 1
and explanation 60,n .4
and realization 213,n .10
negative causes see causation, negative
Nernst Equation 52
Neumann, H. 2
neurophilosophy vii–viii, xi, 217, 226
neuroscience
goals of 1, 246
molecular 235
as multiﬁeld 16, 176, 228
origin of 246
vs. physics 233– 4
society for 16, 229, 246
neurotransmitter release 4– 8, 21– 7
in LTP 251– 2
role of calcium in 199– 201
role of sodium in 221
nitric oxide 71, 250
NMDA receptor 66, 166, 254
knockout 183, 264– 5
in levels 166, 169– 70, 175– 6, 186
in LTP 66, 70– 3
and negative causation 80, 104– 5
perspectives of different ﬁelds on 244
and relevance 89, 92
NMDAR1 gene 264– 5
Nobel Prize 236
nomic expectability 39– 40, 61, 108, 161
norms
and causation 64
Chuchland, P. M. on 32
in CL model 36
of constitutive explanation 111– 14,
144– 7, 161– 2
descriptive vs. normative 19, 21
of explanation vii–xi, 111, 160
and history of science x, 233
implicit in evidence x, 22– 6, 144
and manipulation 9, 100– 4
normal vs. abnormal 85, 127, 155– 6
see also constraints E1–E 5, constraints
C1–C 5, constraints I1–I 4


=== PAGE 325 ===

304 index
Northcott, R. 82
Norton, J. 37– 8, 91
nucleus rotundus 207– 10, 223
Ohm’s Law 52, 66
O’Keefe, J. 17, 96, 167, 260
Olton, D. S. 260
omission 80– 4, 104– 5, 201, 225
ontic store 113,n .4, 250
Oppenheim, P.
and CL model 34
and fundamentalism 14
and levels 172– 7, 190– 3
and McCulloch and Pitts 241
and reduction 17, 243, 245– 6
and unity of science 17, 230, 234, 268
optics 233– 4
organization 6, 134– 9, 189
active 136– 7, 255
and aggregates 136– 7
columnar 193
hierarchical 189
and morphological explanation 136
spatial 136– 8, 142, 251, 253
temporal 137– 8, 162, 261
see also box-and-arrow, aggregattes
organology ix, x
Oslo, Norway 236, 239, 241– 2, 244,
252
osmoregulation 9, 170, 191
overdetermination, causal 13, 197
see also causal exclusion argument
parahippocampal gyrus 263
parallel distributed processing
and explanation 28– 34, 106
explanation vs. recognition 30
and prototypes 28– 34
and relevance 32
see also Churchland, P.M.,
connectionism
‘Pardon my Past’ 263
Parkinson’s disease 48, 150
parts-plus-organization 213, 216– 17, 219,
221
see also micro-based properties
part-whole relation
see aggregates, composition,
containment, mereology
Pearl, J. 38,n .10, 94
Penﬁeld, W. 238
Pera, M. 123
periodic table, the
42, 137
Perkel, D. H. 10
PET see positron emission tomography
pharmacology 255
phenomenological models 59
phenomenon, explanandum
see explanandum phenomenon
phrenology
see organology
philosophy of mind xi, 140, 165
philosophy of neuroscience vii, xi, 108,
149,n .30, 227, 230, 271
vs. neurophilosophy vii
philosophy of science, aim and methods
of vii–xi, 271
physiological plausibility 131– 2, 162
Picasso, P. 208
pieces vs. Components 187– 8
Pietrosky, P. 69,n .3
planaria x
plasticity, synaptic 242, 250
before LTP 238– 42
as identical to memory 241– 2
in spinal cord 262
see also long-term potentiation
pigeons 206– 8
Pitts, W. 241, 245
Poland 141,n .21, 213,n .9
Polger, T. 187,n .10, 211, 212,n .9, 213
Popper, K. 267
positron emission tomography (PET)
151,
252
Posner, M. 179
potassium (K+) channels 115, 116, 117,
213
in action potential 51– 8, 115– 17,
130– 2
Shaker 120– 1
TEA 23
Povinelli, D. 30
powers, causal (see causal powers)
prevention 80– 4, 104– 5, 201, 225
see causation, negative
Price, H. 25, 102
Prinz, A. 221– 3
process, causal 73, 76, 78– 9, 225
in negative causation 84
vs. pseudoprocesses 31, 73, 75
productivity 6, 93, 224, 253– 4


=== PAGE 326 ===

index 305
projectablility 45– 6, 49
properties 82, 196– 8, 257 (see micro-based
properties, variables)
absences and 201
aggregative 135, 186
causal powers 196– 8
clusters 131
difference-making 201
emergent 15
enabling 95,n .22
fundamental 197– 8
geometrical 3
holistic 207– 8
in levels of mechanisms 211– 12
nonfundamental 13, 217– 27
realized 129, 165, 196– 8
temporal 263
and variables 198
protein chemistry 250– 1
proteins, synthesis of 71, 123, 193, 248, 254
prototypes 27– 33
Psillos, S. 33, 132
Ptolemy 54
Putnam, H. 14
and fundamentalism 14
and levels 172– 7, 190– 3
and McCulloch and Pitts 241
and realization 212,n .9, 218
and reduction 17, 243, 245– 6
and unity of science 17, 230, 234, 268
pyloric rhythm 222– 3
Raichle, M. 151
Railton, P. 5,n .6, 39– 40
Ramon y Cajal, S. 185
realization 267
abstraction 122
and causal relevance 225– 7
Cummins and 131
deﬁnition of 212– 13
ﬂat vs. dimensioned 212
levels of 165, 212– 14, 217– 27
see also levels of realization
vs. levels of mechanisms 197– 8,
210– 17
multiple see multiple realization
values of variables 224
reduction
in 1950sn e u r o s c i e n c e240– 2, 246
Bickle’s view 229– 36, 243– 4
CL model and 35, 60, 108, 139– 40, 161
classical 17– 9, 35, 59– 61, 107– 9,
160– 2, 228– 30, 256
empirical thesis 233– 4, 243– 4
vs. interlevel integration 256– 8, 266
vs. intralevel integration 237, 240,
244– 5, 246, 255
and long-term potentiation 236– 45
vs. mechanism 107, 111, 246, 267– 71
modest 18,n .19
and multiple realization 110
Nagel and 17– 9
peripherality of 18, 233– 4
as regulative ideal 161
replaced by mechanism 245
and unity of science 18, 255, 266– 8, 271
weak (see modest)
redundancy 156– 7
regularities
interlevel 182– 3
see also generalizations
regulative ideal
CL account 35– 6, 39– 40, 60
mechanism as 111, 144, 160– 1
reduction as 18– 19, 108– 9, 233
Reichenbach, H. 25
relevance
causal 63– 105, 198– 211, 217– 27
see causal relevance
and causal powers 225– 7
CL model 36
and connection 201
constitutive 139– 60, see also constitutive
relevance
and functional analysis 162
constitutive vs. etiological 153
see causation, top down
contrast and 201– 11
and control 93
difference-making 105
experiments to test 208– 11
explanatory 13, 31– 3
of higher levels of mechanisms 211– 16
of higher levels of realization 10, 217– 27
manipulationist account 94– 5, 98,
105– 6
see manipulationist account
mutual manipulability 141, 152– 60, 199,
201– 11
and negative causes 83
of nonfundamental items 196– 227
objective 100, 204


=== PAGE 327 ===

306 index
relevance ( cont.)
of realized items 223
statistical 24
transmission and 78– 80
Rescher, N. 185
Rescorla, R. 30
research programs 171
channel physiology 57
Lakatos, I. 171– 2, 228
learning and memory 332– 46, 257– 64
reticular theory 249
Rey, G. 68,n .3
Richardson, R.C. 105
and Bechtel 5,n .6, 109, 122, 124,
n.8, 137
and complex mechanisms 178
interlevel experiments 96, 144, 149– 51
and localization 137,n .17, 252, 261
and memory 124,n .8
and reconstituting the phenomenon 123,
n.7
and the systems tradition 161
Ridgway, E. B. 23
Roberts, J. 68,n .3
robustness 19, 131– 2, 162, 232– 3, 270
roles 27, 125,n .11
Rosenberg, A. 33, 66, 69, 200
Rotenberg, A. 264
Roush, W. 265
Rowan, M. J. 244
Ruben, D. 36
R u m m e l h a r t ,D .E .28
Russell, B. 37– 8, 90
Salmon, W. C. 21, 26, 34, 37, 39, 49, 60,
n.27, 63– 5, 72– 86
against CL model 35– 9
and causal interactions 73, 76
causal/mechanical explanation 8, 21, 74
causal nexus 74
see causal nexus
and causal processes 73, 75
conserved quantities 76– 7
constitutive explanation 108,n .1, 140,
n.19
counterfactuals 75– 6
history of scientiﬁc explanation viii
‘infamous footnote33’ 60,n .27
and mechanisms 5,n .6
and mechanistic uniﬁcation 49
probabilistic explanation 24
robustness and realism 19, 132
transmission 72– 85, 200, 202
see also mark transmission, conserved
quantities
Sands, Z. 121
Sanes, J. 68, 103
Sanford, D. H. 184, 187
Sansom, M. 121
Sarkar, S. 18, 161, 230
Schachter, D. 123– 4
Schafe, G. E. 244
Schaffer, J. 81– 2
Schaffner, K. F.
behavioral and psychiatric genetics 245
historical contingency 69
interlevel explanations 11, 175, 184
levels of generality 193
peripherality 109, 233
and reduction 17, 108, 229– 32
regulative ideals 19
Schmitt, F. O. 246
Schouten, M. 124
Schwann cells 152
Scoville, W. B. 147, 238– 9, 261
screening off 154, 205
set theory 230
Shah, B. H. 3
Shepherd, G. M. 2,n .1,10, 14, 16– 17
Shoemaker, S. 212,n .9
Simon, H. 5,n .6, 109, 142, 161
single unit recording 151
sketch, mechanism see mechanism sketch
Skipper, R. 5,n .6, 43,n .17
Skyrms, B. 73, 99
Smart, J. J. C. 66
Smith, E. E. 179
Smith, P. 18,n .19, 161, 230
Sober, E. 125
Society for Neuroscience 16, 229
sodium channels 3, 117– 121, 118, 120
in action potential mechanism 116– 17,
135
activation of 119, 120, 121, 128, 248
and constitutive relevance 155
gating charge 127
how-possibly models of 118, 247
inactivation of 119, 155
levels of realization 213
manipulation of 132
probabilistic 103, 114,n .5
protein structure 118-120


=== PAGE 328 ===

index 307
robustness 132
TTX 23, 126, 205
space clamp 52,n . 22, 127
space of plausible mechanisms 259
see also mechanisms, space of plausible
space of possible mechanisms 247– 8
constraints on 248– 55
relevant evidence 248
see also mechanisms, space of possible
spark plugs 215
spatial constraints see constraints, spatial
spatial map 166
in hippocampus 95, 167
and interlevel experiments 176, 264– 5
level of 167, 178, 257, 265– 6
LTP and 167– 9
manipulation 96
place cells 259– 60
Tolman and 260
spatial memory
interelevel experiments 176, 264– 6
levels of 164– 70, 166, 175
place cells 259– 60
Tolman and 260
see also hippocampus, LTP, spatial maps
Spirtes, P. 94
splitting 124, 259
Squire, L. 66, 124,n .8, 164, 236– 7
Stellar, E. 2,n .1
sterile effects 143– 4, 152, 156
Stevens, C. F. 65, 164, 265
Stoljar, D. 11– 12
stomatogastric ganglion 221– 3
store, ontic see ontic store
Stricker, E. 9
Stufﬂebeam, B. J. 150
Sudhof, T. C. 4
Sulloway, F. 3,n .4
supervenience 271
and causal exclusion 211
Humean 76,n .9
and ‘in virtue of’ 213
interlevel relation 126, 153,n .33,
197
Suppe, F. 175
Svoboda, K. 253
Swartz, K. J. 121
switch-points 209– 11; 219– 20, 223, 227
syphilis and Paresis 26, 39– 40, 46– 7
systems tradition 109– 11, 133, 140,
160– 1
Tabery, J. 106
Tang, Y. 176
Tarski, A. 184
taxonomy 42, 123, 137
terminal degeneration technique 239, 252
tetra-ethyl ammonium, TEA 23, 148
tetrodotoxin (TTX) 23, 126, 147, 205
Thagard, P. 5,n .6, 30
theories 175, 255
building 247
comprehensive 9
interﬁeld 255, 269
levels and 173– 6, 231
theory reduction 35, 108– 10, 229, 256,
266– 70
thermodynamics 233
Thielscher, A. 2
Thomas, M. J. 244
Thunders, J. 31
Tolman, E. C. 259– 60
tonic contributions 152
topping off 165, 193, 266
total current equation 51
transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) 252
T r o u t ,J .D . i x
truth-makers 106, 224, 226
Tsien, J. Z. 169, 264– 5
Tulving, E. 30, 124
understanding 28– 30, 89– 90
and constructivism 109
vs. explanation ix–x, 21, 33– 4, 41
illusion of 113– 14
mechanisms 137, 262
and rational expectation 108
vs. recognition 29– 30
types of 29
and w-questions 104
uniﬁcation (as explanation) 40– 9
assessing 47– 9
and causation 43– 9
in connectionist models 32– 3
explanatory store 41
ﬂagpole and shadow 43– 5
Friedman and 40– 1
in history 41
and justiﬁcation 43
Kitcher and 40– 9
mechanisms and 17


=== PAGE 329 ===

308 index
uniﬁcation ( cont.)
non-explanatory 42– 3
progress in 41
projectability and 45
stringency 41– 2
trivial 41
unity of science 17– 18, 233
explanatory 40– 9, 172– 3, 193, 268
of laws 268
levels and 172– 3, 193
methodological 267
mosaic 18– 19, 193, 231, 244, 246, 248
epistemic virtues of 270
interlevel 264, 269
progress toward 240
vs. reductive 18– 19, 271
and robustness 268– 9
see also mosaic unity
nonreductive 268
Oppenheim and Putnam 172– 3, 193
reductive 17– 18, 268
of vocabulary 268
see also mosaic unity, levels
Uttal, W. R. viii, 152,n .32
Van Essen, D. 33
Van Fraassen, B. 202
Van Gulick, R. 217
variables 209– 10
in causal relevance 82, 94– 5, 198– 9
in explanatory schemata 41
and realization 219– 20
switch-points in 204– 6, 209– 10
in systems 142
in total current equation 51– 2, 54– 7,
114– 15
Verbalis, J. 9
virtue epistemology 270
vital ﬂuids ix
vital forces 15
voltage clamp 50, 53, 57, 126, 168, 169,
205
Von Eckardt, B. 141,n .21, 147
Von Wright, G. 94
W a g n e r ,A .R .30
Watson, J. B. 43,n .17, 129, 248
Watson, J. D. 129, 138
Weber, M. 36, 49, 66, 69,n .4,
134,
230
Weiskrantz, L. 124,n .8
Wheeler, M. A. 244
Wilson, D. A. 96, 167, 260
Wilson, R. A.
and explanation ix, 34,n .8
and externalism 141
and fragility 68,n .2
and fundamentalism 12,n .13
and realization 212,n . 9, 213,n .11
Wimsatt, W.
aggregates 135– 6, 186
boundaries of systems 142– 3
and emergence 216– 17
and levels 164, 171– 6, 174, 181, 180– 3,
190– 1
and mechanisms 5,n .6
organization 6, 135– 6
perspectives 171
and reduction 3, 18,n .19, 161
and robustness 19, 132, 233, 269
systems tradition 109
Woodger, J. H. 184
Woodward, J. 5,n .6, 94
contrast 202
difference-making 86
invariance 94
laws 88
manipulationist account 65, 94– 104,
97
nonexplanatory uniﬁcation 42
syphilis 46– 7
word-stem completion 157– 8
Wright, L. 124,n .10
Wylie, A. 231, 233, 240, 268– 9
Yablo, S. 204,n .2
