--- Page 1 ---

FACT
FICTION
AND
FORECAST
Nelson Goodman

--- Page 2 ---



--- Page 3 ---

|
PREDICAMENT
1946
. The chapter to follow was originally delivered as a lecture
at the New York Philosophical Circle on May 11, 1946; and |
published with some revisions in the Journal of Philosophy in |
February 1947, volume xliv, pages 113-28. Only minor
changes have been made in the present text. |
|
|
,
|

\.

COMMA

6096132 "

--- Page 4 ---

Fact, Fiction,
and Forecast
| Fourth Edition
NELSON GOODMAN
Harvard University Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
and London, England

--- Page 5 ---

| CONTENTS
FOREWORD TO THE FOURTH EDITION
by Hilary Putnam vii
INTRODUCTORY NOTES XVii
Introduction to the First Edition, 1954 XVil
Copyright © 1979, 1983 by Nelson Goodman Note to the Third Edition, 1973 xxi
; Note to the Fourth Edition, 1983 XXIV
Foreword copyright © 1983 by the President and Fellows
of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America PREDI C4 MENT
194
This book has been digitally reprinted. .The content
remains identical to that of previous printings. I. THE PROBLEM OF
COUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS 3
1. The Problem in General 3
2. The Problem of Relevant Conditions 9
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 3. The Problem of Law 17
Goodman, Nelson.
Fact, fiction, and forecast. , PROJECT
Includes bibliographical references and index. 1953
1. Induction (Logic)—Addresses, essays, lectures.
2. Conditionals (Logic) —Addresses, essays, lectures, Il. THE PASSING OF THE P OSSIBLE 31
3. Possibility—Addresses, essays, lectures. 4. Fore- 1, Foreword: On the P bilosophic Conscience 31
casting— Addresses, essays, lectures. 5. Science— 2. Counterfactuals 34
Philosophy—Addresses, essays, lectures. I. Title. 3. Dispositions 40
BC91.G66_ 1983 161 82-15764 4. Possibles . 49
ISBN 0-674-29070-4 5: The P. assing 57
ISBN 0-674-29071-2 (pbk) II. THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION 59
1. The Old Problem of Induction 59
2. Dissolution of the Old Problem 62
3. The Constructive Task of
Confirmation Theory 66
, v
|

--- Page 6 ---



--- Page 7 ---



--- Page 8 ---



--- Page 9 ---



--- Page 10 ---



--- Page 11 ---

* FOREWORD -
implies things are getting better, or must in the future. But
he does believe that novelty can be exciting and good as
well as boring and bad; he finds construction and creation
exciting and challenging. He believes, in short, that there
is much, much we can do, and he prefers concrete and
partial progress to grand and ultimately empty visions. INTRODUCTORY NOTES
Hilary Putnam INTRODUCTION TO THE First Eprrion, 1954. |
The chapters to follow were all originally delivered as
lectures, Although seven years and a few thousand miles |
separated the delivery of the first from the delivery of |
the remaining three, the four represent a consecutive
effort of thought on a closely integrated group of prob-
lems. Only the first has been published before.
In the summer of 1944, I had nearly completed a manu-
| script entitled “Two Essays on Not-Being’. The first essay
explained the counterfactual conditional, and the second
made use of this explanation in dealing with potentiality,
possibility, and dispositions. Some minor difficulties in the
first essay still needed attention, however, and these led to
less minor ones until, a few weeks later, my two essays
were instances rather than treatments of not-being.
Grasping at the scientist’s slim straw of solace, that
failure is as significant as success, I used the detailed his-
tory of this frustration as the subject for a talk given in
New York in May of 1946. It was published a few months
later in the Journal of Philosophy as ‘The Problem of
Counterfactual Conditionals’.
The scores of articles that have been published since
then have made so little progress towards settling the
matter that current opinion varies all the way from the
| view that the problem is no problem at all to the view ,
xvi xvii |

--- Page 12 ---

* INTRODUCTORY NOTES : * INTRODUCTORY NOTES -

that it is insoluble. Neither of these extremes is very well don in May of 1953 under the general title Fact, Fiction,
substantiated. The former is usually supported by the and Forecast.
claim that we can, theoretically at least, get along without In the present book, the first part ‘Predicament—1946’
counterfactuals in the sciences, But however that may be, consists of ‘The Problem of Counterfactual Conditionals’,
we do not yet by any means know how to get along with- reprinted without major changes. The second part ‘Pro-
out them (or transparent substitutes for them) in philoso- ject—1953’ consists of the three London lectures now
phy. The view that the problem is insoluble is sometimes printed for the first time. These have been somewhat
supported by the citation of paradoxical counterfactuals revised, and rather extensive notes have been added. The
that confound commonsense. But such cases do not argue greatest change, involving many additions and improve-
insolubility; for if we can provide an interpretation that ments, has occurred in the expansion of the last quarter of
handles the clear cases successfully, we can let the unclear the final lecture into the last half of the fourth chapter.
ones fall where they may. . I am indebted to C. G. Hempel for many useful sugges-

The urge to dispose of the problem as spurious or in- tions, and to Elizabeth F. Flower for valuable editorial
soluble is understandable, of course, in view of the re- assistance,
peated failures to find a solution. The trouble is, though, The two parts of the book are intimately related to each
that what confronts us is not a single isolated problem but other in the ways I have described; but no attempt has
a closely knit family of problems. If we set one of them been made to revise them to make a more continuous
aside, we usually encounter much the same difficulties whole. The occasional duplications and minor disparities
when we try to deal with the others. And if we set aside between the work of 1946 and the work of 1953 have
all the problems of dispositions, possibility, scientific law, been left untouched. Thus readers familiar with the article
confirmation, and the like, we virtually abandon the phi- on counterfactuals or unready for its technicalities will
losophy of science. find the second part a more or less self-contained unit,

For some years, work on a book dealing with other while other readers will find in the first part an essentially
matters took most of my time; but after The Structure of unaltered description of the state of affairs from which the
Appearance was published in 1951, I turned again to the London lectures took their departure. The layman and the
problem of counterfactuals and kindred problems—and beginning student may well read the second part first.
began to travel in all the old circles. When, in 1952, the ; Throughout I have used commonplace and even trivial
University of London invited me to give some lectures illustrations rather than more intriguing ones drawn from
the following year, I set to work with a conviction that the sciences; for I feel that examples that attract the least
some new approach must be found. The results of that interest to themselves are the least likely to divert atten-
work were reported in three lectures delivered in Lon- tion from the problem or principle being explained. Once

xvii xix

--- Page 13 ---



--- Page 14 ---



--- Page 15 ---



--- Page 16 ---

Fact, Fiction, and Forecast
Fourth Edition
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
| |
|

--- Page 17 ---



--- Page 18 ---



--- Page 19 ---



--- Page 20 ---



--- Page 21 ---



--- Page 22 ---



--- Page 23 ---



--- Page 24 ---



--- Page 25 ---



--- Page 26 ---



--- Page 27 ---



--- Page 28 ---

- !
|
|
* COUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS - * COUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS :
|
acceptance is to be independent of all determination of in- | publications on confirmation not only have failed to make
stances, but only that there is no particular instance on the i clear the distinction between confirmable and non-con-
determination of which acceptance depends. This crite- firmable statements, but show little recognition that such
rion excludes from the class of laws a statement like a problem exists.® Yet obviously in the case of some sen- |
. . i tences like
That book is black and oranges are spherical
. . Everything in my pocket is silver
on the ground that acceptance requires knowing whether r munginmyP
the book is black; it excludes or
Everything that is in my pocket or is a dime is silver No twentieth-century president of the United States will be
between 6 feet 1 inch and 6 feet 14 inches tall,
on the ground that acceptance demands examination of all the test} ith positi Its of all b incl
things in my pocket. Moreover, it excludes a statement like Not even ene esting wilh Positive results oF al Dut a single
instance is likely to lead us to accept the sentence and pre-
All the marbles in this bag except Number 19 are red, and dict that the one remaining instance will conform to it;
Number 19 is black ; while for other sentences such as
on the ground that acceptance would depend on examina- All dimes are silver
tion of or knowledge gained otherwise concerning marble . or
Number 19. In fact the principle involved in the proposed 7
criterion is a rather powerful one and seems to exclude All butter melts at 150° F.
most of the troublesome cases. or
We must still, however, replace the notion of the accep- . .
tability of a sentence, or of its acceptance depending or not ' All flowers of plants descended from this seed will be yellow,
depe nding on some given knowledge, by a positive defini- | positive determination of even a few instances may lead us
tion of such dependence. It is clear that to say that the ac- | to accept the sentence with confidence and make predic-
ceptance of a given statement depends upon a certain kind | tions in accordance with it.
and amount of evidence is to say that given such evidence, | There is some hope that cases like these can be dealt with
acceptance of the statement is in accord with certain | by a sufficiently careful and intricate elaboration of cur-
general standards for the acceptance of statements that are rent confirmation theories; but inattention to the problem
not fully tested. So one turns naturally to theories of in- '
duction and confirmation to learn the distinguishing fac- | 16 The points discussed in this and the following paragraph
tors or circumstances that determine whether or not 2 | have been dealt with a little more fully in my ‘A Query on Con-
sentence is acceptable without complete evidence. But firmation’, Journal of Philosophy, vol. xliii (1946), pp. 383-5. |
24 25
ee

--- Page 29 ---



--- Page 30 ---

|
|
| PROJECT
1953
q The three chapters to follow are somewhat revised versions
, of the Special Lectures in Philosopby delivered at the Univer- |
| | sity of London on May 21, 26 and 28,1 953. The first of the |
three was repeated at Harvard University on December 2 of |
‘| the same year, All are now published for the first time. The
| Introductory Notes to this book (pp. xvii-xxv) contain
some remarks on the relationship between these three
' chapters and the preceding one.
| ;
| |
|
|
|
|

--- Page 31 ---

fi
| ,
|
| 2
| i
|

|
| :
|
ji II
| THE PASSING OF THE POSSIBLE |
! |
| 1. Foreword: On the Philosophic Conscience
| In life our problems often result from our indulgences; in :

| philosophy they derive rather from our abnegations. Yet

| if life is not worthwhile without its enjoyments, philos-

ophy hardly exists without its restraints. A philosophic

I problem is a call to provide an adequate explanation in
| terms of an acceptable basis. If we are ready to tolerate |
| everything as understood, there is nothing left to explain; |
| while if we sourly refuse to take anything, even tenta- |

tively, as clear, no explanation can be given. What in-

| trigues us as a problem, and what will satisfy us as a solu-

| tion, will depend upon the line we draw between what is
| already clear and what needs to be clarified.
1 Yet I am afraid that we are nowhere near having any
| sound general principle for drawing this line. Surely I need |
| not in this place and before this audience recount the tragic |
history of the verification theory of meaning.’ The failure |
: of this gallant effort to distinguish sense from nonsense,
1 J allude here, of course, to A. J. Ayer’s diligent but unsuccess- |
] ful attempts to formulate the theory; see his Language, Truth, and |
Logic, London, 1946, pp. 5-16, 35-42. For a compact but compre- |
hensive survey of the matter, see Hempel’s article ‘Problems and
Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of Meaning’ in Revue Inter- |
nationale de Philosophie, vol. iv (1950), pp. 41~63. A verification |
|
|
i |
| |

--- Page 32 ---

|
|
* THE PASSING OF THE POSSIBLE -: { * THE PASSING OF THE POSSIBLE -
like the failure of various worthy efforts to codify the | and declaring them loudly, about all we can do is to dis-
difference between right and wrong, has encouraged in | parage any alternatives. If your conscience is more liberal |
some quarters the libertine doctrine that anything goes. | than mine, I shall call some of your explanations obscure or |
The perverse maxim that whatever you can get away with metaphysical, while you will dismiss some of my prob-
is right has its counterpart in the claim that whatever | lems as trivial or quixotic. |
works is clear. So crude a pragmatism deserves mention | All this is by way of preface to declaring that some of |
only because it seems to be spreading. I may not under- the things that seem to me inacceptable without explana-
stand the devices I employ in making useful computations | tion are powers or dispositions, counterfactual assertions,
or predictions any more than the housewife understands I entities or experiences that are possible but not actual,
the car she drives to bring home the groceries, The utility neutrinos, angels, devils, and classes. Concerning the last
of a notion testifies not to its clarity but rather to the phi- of these, I have had a good deal to say elsewhere,? and I
losophic importance of clarifying it. shall not press the point in these lectures. I shall use the |
In the absence of any convenient and reliable criterion | language of classes rather freely because means have now |
of what is clear, the individual thinker can only search his ! been provided for giving a satisfactory interpretation of
philosophic conscience. As is the way with consciences, it most or dinary statements about classes, and because I don’t |
is elusive, variable, and too easily silenced in the face of want to grind too many axes at once. Some other items on |
hardship or temptation. At best it yields only specific | my list—angels and devils—enter so little into my daily
judgments rather than general principles; and honest judg- discourse or into scientific discussions that I can wait :
ments made at different times or by different persons may ' patiently a long time for them to be explained. As for
differ in any degree. Indeed this talk of conscience is neutrinos and some other particles of physics, I think they
simply a figurative way of disclaiming any idea of justify- : are as yet beyond our philosophic reach, But the interre- |
ing these basic judgments. Beyond making them carefully | lated problems of dispositions, counterfactuals, and pos-
| sibles are among the most urgent and most pervasive that
et ws : confront us today in the theory of knowledge and the |
criterion of meaningfulness was earnestly sought as a definitive philosophy of science. It is this cluster of problems that
basis for ruling out of court an immense amount of philosophical | . :
rubbish. But to find a formula that will do that without ruling out I want to discuss in these lectures,
at the same time a good deal of perfectly respectable scientific | My sample listing of suspect notions is of course far from
theory has proved embarrassingly difficult. The disproportionate : | complete. Some of my other prejudices will be revealed
emphasis put on the problem has resulted in gross exaggeration of | by what I abjure in seeking a solution to the problems
the consequences of the failure to solve it. Lack of a general nals
theory of goodness does not turn vice into virtue; and lack of a : 2See my book The Structure of Appearance, 3d ed. (Dor-
general theory of significance does not turn empty verbiage into drecht: D, Reidel, 1977), chap. II, sec. 2~3, and the articles there
illuminating discourse. cited.
32 33 :

--- Page 33 ---



--- Page 34 ---



--- Page 35 ---

. POSSIBLE - |
* THE PASSING OF THE POSSIBLE - | THE PASSING OF THE

} +s i e, although

or follows from a law, while the generalization about _| the structure of the conditional, ahs te aid, may actually |
knowledge of English is only contingently or acciden- it promised at the outset to * heer disanalysis effected :
tally true; but to define this distinction is a delicate mat- have become a hin farce ihe ve y statements, which
ter. Since we shall soon encounter the problem again, I by returning to consider eh ong free us to explore |
shall go into no details at the moment; but this second are indicative and simple un forms may
aspect of the problem of counterfactuals, like the first, is a better scheme of ote ch roblem of dispositions is
formidable enough to have defied Many intensive efforts Second, , oehen the  oble P of counterfactuals. This |
to solve it. really simpler than the p |

in vi ent full converti

These difficulties and the unsullied record of frustra- may sound strange in view of the ap Pate rfactual state-
tion in attempting to meet them have pretty thoroughly bility between Cispositiona o_ disnositional state. |
deflated our initial hope of finding a relatively easy ap- ments; but it turns ond t nbn wait wk counterfac- |
proach to our problems through the study of the counter- ments often correspond to cof dr ye d during a given |
factual conditional. We are still a very long way from tuals. Suppose that wisa pie oe aly suppose that a state- |
having a solution to the problem of counterfactuals;® and brief period of time. We co y |
by this time we may be ready to try another tack. After ment like
a eee of years of Peating our heads against the ame | aw is inflammable
wall and of chasing eagerly up the same blind a eys, f 1 |
. . . ounterfactual as
we may welcome a change in strategy if only for its psy- amounts to some such normal c
chological benefits. But I think there are at least two better _ If w had been heated enough, it would have burned. |
reasons for turning our attention for a while to the prob- i
lem of dispositions P | Once we look more closely, however, nck of readily
° . . 0) I

First, in dealing with counterfactuals we are looking describe Circumstances for, oxample, I statement en
less at what is said than at the Way it is said. We are near w—under whic t . a translation guilty of no
expressly concerning ourselves with a form of statement; and the counterfactual a < or rv Cored beck t come
and the pattern of analysis we seek is largely dictated by discrepancies like this we I
such fainthearted counterfactual as |

ene! |
°I am not alone in this opinion. For example, Roderick If all conditions had been propitious and w had been heated |
Chisholm in a review in Philosophy and Phenomenological Re- enough, it would have burned. if
search for September 1953 (vol. 14), p. 120, has just written con- ia . .. t savs |
cerning my article on counterfactuals: “It is safe to say, I think, To speak very loosely, the dispositional statemen y
that the extensive amount of material which has subsequently 5 omething exclusively about the ‘internal state of w,
been published on us dificule Philosophical problem has not while our original counterfactual says in addition some- |
thrown any additiona Ignt upon it,
38 39 |

|

|

--- Page 36 ---



--- Page 37 ---



--- Page 38 ---



--- Page 39 ---



--- Page 40 ---



--- Page 41 ---



--- Page 42 ---



--- Page 43 ---



--- Page 44 ---



--- Page 45 ---

7: Be il

y

* THE PASSING OF THE POSSIBLE -

fest to non-manifest cases is obviously not very different
from the problem of going from known to unknown or | !
from past to future cases. The problem of dispositions |
looks suspiciously like one of the philosopher’s oldest
friends and enemies: the problem of induction. Indeed, |
the two are but different aspects of the general problem Il
of proceeding from a given set of cases to 2 wider set. The { i|
critical questions throughout are the same: when, how, | THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION
why is such a transition or expansion legitimate? In the 1. The Old Problem of Induction :
next lecture, then, we must see how matters stand at |
present with the familiar problem of induction. At the close of the preceding lecture, I said that today I :
Thus passes the possible. It passes, indeed, only into should examine how matters stand with respect to the |
another and exceedingly difficult problem. But that prob- j problem of induction, In a word, I think they stand ill. ;
lem has been troubling our sleep for a long time on its own ; But the real difficulties that confront us today are not the
account. There is perhaps some solace in the thought that traditional ones. What is commonly thought of as the }
at least the ghost of the possible will no longer be thump- Problem of Induction has been solved, or dissolved, and |
ing in the attic. we face new problems that are not as yet very widely |
; understood. To approach them, I shall have to run as

: quickly as possible over some very familiar ground. i

The problem of the validity of judgments about future

| or unknown cases arises, as Hume pointed out, because

such judgments are neither reports of experience nor logi-

cal consequences of it. Predictions, of course, pertain to |

what has not yet been observed. And they cannot be

logically inferred from what has been observed; for what !

bas happened imposes no logical restrictions on what will \

happen. Although Hume’s dictum that there are no neces- |

sary connections of matters of fact has been challenged 1

at times, it has withstood all attacks. Indeed, I should be

inclined not merely to agree that there are no necessary 1

connections of matters of fact, but to ask whether there

59

8 ,

| |

| :

--- Page 46 ---



--- Page 47 ---

|
- HE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION - * THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION -

anyone else; and the easier course of accepting an unsub- standing of our problem can be gained by looking for a |
stantiated and even dubious assumption much more sweep- ] moment at what is involved in justifying non-inductive |
ing than any actual predictions we make seems an odd and inferences. How do we justify a deduction? Plainly, by
expensive way of justifying them. showing that it conforms to the general rules of deductive
inference. An argument that so conforms is justified or
valid, even if its conclusion happens to be false. An argu- |
2. Dissolution of the Old Problem ment that violates a rule is fallacious even if its conclusion |
Understandably, then, more critical thinkers have sus- happens to be true. To justify a deductive conclusion |
pected that there might be something awry with the prob- therefore requires no knowledge of the facts it pertains to.

lem we are trying to solve. Come to think of it, what | Moreover, when a deductive argument has been shown to

precisely would constitute the justification we seek? If j conform to the rules of logical inference, we usually con-
the problem is to explain how we know that certain pre- sider it justified without going on to ask what justifies the
dictions will turn out to be correct, the sufficient answer : rules. Analogously, the basic task in justifying an inductive :
is that we don’t know any such thing. If the problem is to j inference is to show that it conforms to the general rules
find some way of distinguishing antecedently between | of induction. Once we have recognized this, we have gone
true and false predictions, we are asking for prevision a long way towards clarifying our problem. |
rather than for philosophical explanation. Nor does it help q Yet, of course, the rules themselves must eventually be :

matters much to say that we are merely trying to show ; justified. The validity of a deduction depends not upon
that or why certain predictions are probable. Often it is { conformity to any purely arbitrary rules we may contrive, :
said that while we cannot tell in advance whether a pre- : but upon conformity to valid rules, When we speak of |
diction concerning a given throw of a die is true, we can the rules of inference we mean the valid rules—or better, |
decide whether the prediction is a probable one. But if this ; some valid rules, since there may be alternative sets of
means determining how the prediction is related to actual equally valid rules. But how is the validity of rules to be
frequency distributions of future throws of the die, surely determined? Here again we encounter philosophers who
there is no way of knowing or proving this in advance. | insist that these rules follow from some self-evident axiom, |
On the other hand, if the judgment that the prediction is and others who try to show that the rules are grounded
probable has nothing to do with subsequent occurrences, j in the very nature of the human mind. I think the answer
then the question remains in what sense a probable pre- lies much nearer the surface, Principles of deductive in- |
diction is any better justified than an improbable one. ference are Justified by their conformity with accepted
Now obviously the genuine problem cannot be one of j deductive practice. Their validity depends upon accord- |
attaining unattainable knowledge or of accounting for ance with the particular deductive inferences we actually

knowledge that we do not in fact have. A better under- q make and sanction. If a rule yields inacceptable inferences,

62 7 63
|
: |
|

--- Page 48 ---



--- Page 49 ---



--- Page 50 ---

- i
|
- THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION - | - THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION -
ther that whatever confirms a given statement confirms 5497 A a priine number and the other side of the moon is flat |
also whatever follows from that statement.> But if we 4 an rst was crowned on a Tuesday. _ |
combine this assumption with our proposed principle, we | To show that any one of the three component statements
get the embarrassing result that every statement confirms is true is to support the conjunction by reducing the net |
every other. Surprising as it may be that such innocent undetermined claim. But support® of this kind is not con- |
ry prising 7 ; = pp |
beginnings lead to such an intolerable conclusion, the j firmation; for establishment of one component endows |
proof is very easy. Start with any statement $i. It is a " the whole statement with no credibility that is transmit- [
consequence of, and so by our present criterion confirms, 5 ted to other component statements. Confirmation of a
the conjunction of S: and any statement whatsoever— . hypothesis occurs only when an instance imparts to the
call it Sz. But the confirmed conjunction, S:°S2, of course hypothesis some credibility that is conveyed to other
has Sz as a consequence. Thus every statement confirms instances. Appraisal of hypotheses, indeed, is incidental
all statements. ; e prediction, to the judgment of new cases on the basis |
The fault lies in careless formulation of our first pro- f of o ones. . .
posal. While some statements that confirm a general hy- : Our nn mes needs rgntening: his is readily
pothesis are consequences of it, not all its consequences ! ane ished, as Hempel points out, if we observe that
confirm it. This may not be immediately evident; for a ypothesis Is genuinely confirmed only by a state-
indeed we do in some sense furnish support for a state- 4 ment that Is an instance of it in the special sense of
, : Ww entailing not the hypothesis itself but its relativization or
ment when we establish one of its consequences. We ; an a !
f th : bout it. Consider the hetero- : restriction to the class of entities mentioned by that |
settle one 0 Ene questions a statement. The relativization of a general hypothesis to
geneous conjunction: a class results from restricting the range of its uni-
! versal and existential quantifiers to the members of that |
5] am not here asserting that this is an indispensable require- , class. Less technically, what the hypothesis says of all |
ment upon a definition of confirmation. Since our commonsense ; things the evidence statement says of one thing (or |
assumptions taken in combination quickly lead us to absurd con- , |
clusions, some of these assumptions have to be dropped; and dif- : ; oo . oa a
ferent theorists may make different decisions about which to drop Any hypothesis is supported by its own positive instances;
and which to preserve. Hempel gives up the converse conse- but support—or better, direct factual support—is only one factor
quence condition, while Carnap (Logical Foundations of Proba- : in confirmation. This factor has been separately studied by John
bility, Chicago and London, 1950, pp. 474-6) drops both the j G. Kemeny and Paul Oppenheim in ‘Degree of Factual Support’,
3 oe , . . \
consequence condition and the converse consequence condition. 4 Philosophy of Science, vol. 19 (1952), PP- 307-24. As will appear
Such differences of detail between different treatments of con- 7 presently, my concern in these lectures is primarily with certain
firmation do not affect the central points [ am making in this ' other important factors in confirmation, some of them quite gen-
lecture. i erally neglected.
68 ' 69

--- Page 51 ---



--- Page 52 ---



--- Page 53 ---



--- Page 54 ---



--- Page 55 ---



--- Page 56 ---



--- Page 57 ---

* THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION - | * THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION -

admitted, our definition makes no distinction whatsoever ! confirmed by statements related to it in the prescribed way
between valid and invalid inductive inferences. provided it is so confirmed. This is a good deal like having

The real inadequacy of Hume’s account lay not in his : a theory that tells us that the area of a plane figure is one-
descriptive approach but in the imprecision of his descrip- half the base times the altitude, without telling us for what |
tion. Regularities in experience, according to him, give figures this holds. We must somehow find a way of dis- |
rise to habits of expectation; and thus it is predictions tinguishing lawlike hypotheses, to which our definition of |
conforming to past regularities that are normal or valid. confirmation applies, from accidental hypotheses, to |
But Hume overlooks the fact that some regularities do and which it does not.
some do not establish such habits; that predictions based | Today I have been speaking solely of the problem of |
on some regularities are valid while predictions based on induction, but what has been said applies equally to the |
other regularities are not. Every word you have heard me more general problem of projection. As pointed out |
say has occurred prior to the final sentence of this lecture, ' earlier, the problem of prediction from past to future cases :
but that does not, I hope, create any expectation that | is but a narrower version of the problem of projecting |
every word you will hear me say will be prior to that sen- from any set of cases to others. We saw that a whole clus-
tence. Again, consider our case of emeralds. All those | ter of troublesome problems concerning dispositions and |
examined before time ¢ are green; and this leads us to . possibility can be reduced to this problem of projection. |
expect, and confirms the prediction, that the next one That is why the new riddle of induction, which is more
will be green. But also, all those examined are grue; and broadly the problem of distinguishing between projectible |
this does not lead us to expect, and does not confirm the and non-projectible hypotheses, is as important as it is
prediction, that the next one will be grue. Regularity in exasperating. |
greenness confirms the prediction of further cases; regu- Our failures teach us, I think, that lawlike or project-
larity in grueness does not. To say that valid predictions ible hypotheses cannot be distinguished on any merely |
are those Dased on. past regularities, without being able fo syntactical grounds or even on the ground that these hy- |
we ene you é i Ath on ‘and y on find om a ny- | potheses are somehow purely general in meaning. Our |
where. As we have seen Hume’s failure to recognize and ) Y nope ies in re-examining the problem ones more

. ; gn and looking for some new approach. This will be my

deal with this problem has been shared even by his most course in the final lecture.
recent successors. |

As a result, what we have in current confirmation |
theory is a definition that is adequate for certain cases that
so far can be described only as those for which it is ade-
quate. The theory works where it works. A hypothesis is |

82 83

--- Page 58 ---

i ‘ ee

* THEORY OF PROJECTION -

I

| | and hypotheses. The fact is that whenever we set about

: determining the validity of a given projection from a given :

: base, we have and use a good deal of other relevant i

: knowledge. I am not speaking of additional evidence state-

ments, but rather of the record of past predictions actually

IV | made and their outcome. Whether these predictions—

‘| regardless of their success or failure—were valid or not \

PROSPECTS FOR A remains in question; but that some were made and how

THEORY OF PROJECTION | they turned out is legitimately available information. |
| Proper use of such information will admittedly require

1. A New Look at the Problem some care. Surely we cannot subscribe to the naive sug- |

The problem of confirmation, or of valid projection, is the | gestion that induction is validated simply by its past '

problem of defining a certain relationship between evi- successes. Every so often someone proclaims that the |

dence or base cases on the one hand, and hypotheses, whole problem is solved just by recognizing that the pre- |

predictions or projections on the other. Since numerous diction of future from past cases of a hypothesis is justified |
and varied attacks on the problem have brought us no by the success of past predictions according to the hypoth-
solution, we may well ask ourselves whether we are still in | esis. Critics quickly point out that all the questions that

any way misconceiving the nature of our task. I think the arise about the validity of predicting future cases from past
answer is affirmative: that we have come to mistake the i ones arise also about the validity of predicting future suc-
statement of the required result for an unduly restricted a cesses from past ones. But the fact that legitimately avail-

statement of the means allowed for reaching that result. able information has been ineptly used should not lead us |
What we want, indeed, is an accurate and general way to discard it. In our present straits, we cannot afford to

of saying which hypotheses are confirmed by, or which deprive ourselves of any honest means that may prove to

projections are validly made from, any given evidence. be helpful. .

Thus each particular case that arises does concern the [think we should recognize, therefore, that our task is to i

relationship of given evidence to entertained hypotheses. define the relation of confirmation or valid projection i

But this does not imply that the only materials available between evidence and hypothesis in terms of anything :

to us in determining the relationship are the given evidence that does not beg the question, that meets our other de- |

and the entertained hypotheses. In other words, while mands for acceptable terms of explanation, and that may i

confirmation is indeed a relation between evidence and reasonably be supposed to be at hand when a question of

hypotheses, this does not mean that our definition of this inductive validity arises, This will include, among other

relation must refer to nothing other than such evidence things, some knowledge of past predictions and their

84 85 |

:

7 |

--- Page 59 ---



--- Page 60 ---



--- Page 61 ---



--- Page 62 ---



--- Page 63 ---



--- Page 64 ---



--- Page 65 ---



--- Page 66 ---



--- Page 67 ---



--- Page 68 ---



--- Page 69 ---



--- Page 70 ---

| 1
go |
- THEORY OF PROJECTION - » THEORY OF PROJECTION -
ously covers all hypotheses, whether projected or not; only moderate inherited entrenchment, Ho will not have
that is, a hypothesis not actually projected may be pro- a high initial projectibility index. Now suppose further
jectible according to the rule and may override other that we have emptied a few other bags from the stack |
hypotheses. In effect, our rule offers us the following and have found that while the marbles in different bagfuls
definitions: a hypothesis is projectible when and only so examined sometimes differ in color, still all the marbles
when it is supported, unviolated, and unexhausted, and all in each bagful are of the same color. This information, |
such hypotheses that conflict with it are overridden; non- which of course furnishes no direct evidence for or against |
projectible when and only when it and a conflicting Ho, appreciably enhances the projectibility of Ho in the ;
hypothesis are supported, unviolated, unexhausted, and following way: Each time we find that all the marbles in
not overridden; and unprojectible when and only when a given bagful are of the same color, we establish a positive | |
it is unsupported, violated, exhausted, or overridden. instance of the hypothesis G |
These formulae, though, are only provisional, and the Every bagful in stack S is uniform in color;
projectibility here defined is at best presuzizptive projecti- . . wey . |
bility. The sorting into three categories is gross and tenta- by thus confirming G we increase the credibility of its
tive. Hypotheses assigned to the same category may differ undetermined instances, among them the statement Gi |
greatly in degree of projectibility; and the degree of pro- Bagful B is uniform in color;
jectibility of a given hypothesis may be affected by indi- . . ays .
rect evidence. and by so increasing the credibility of Gi, we increase the |
credibility H» derives from its own positive cases. In short, |

s. Comparative Projectibility the evidence for G, by increasing the credibility of Gi,

hmong presumptively projectible hypotheses, the ini- increases the projectibility of He. |
tial index of degree of projectibility is determine i
on the basis of comparative entrenchment, But wha now b * have supposed that every marble from each of the emptied
demand special attention are the factors that result in a ags has been examined for color; but all that is really required Js |
. . . that from each bag we have examined enough to be willing to
higher or lower ultimate index. accept, as a positive case for G, the statement that all the marbles |
Consider, for example, the hypothesis Ho in that bagful are of a certain color. As pointed out earlier, the |
All the marbles in bag B are red nature of the examination that yields a determined case of a hy- }
’ pothesis is irrelevant to our central problem. Just as a glance at

where B is one in a recently discovered stack $ of bags of donce stent thatthe arble ed, so plane as bagful may
marbles; and let us suppose that the evidence is such that be enough for acceptance of the evidence evatement thet all the
9 is presumptively projectible. With a well entrenched marbles in it are, say, green. Projected hypotheses, in other words, |
consequent but with an antecedent having no earned and may sometimes be accepted as positive cases for other hypotheses. |
|

108 109

|

|

|

--- Page 71 ---



--- Page 72 ---



--- Page 73 ---

* THEORY OF PROJECTION : * THEORY OF PROJECTION -
level can acquire appreciable projectibility only through noted fact that some new predicates derive entrenchment
some overhypothesis at the next higher level; and the over- from coextensive or from parent predicates, shows how ,
hypotheses at this next higher level are in the same pre- groundless is the complaint that our theory excludes
dicament. Nowhere in this hierarchy do we reach a hypotheses with unfamiliar predicates. |
hypothesis that is appreciably projectible in its own right The projectibility of and evidence for an overhypothe- |
and thus capable of increasing the projectibility of hy- sis are not the only factors that must be considered. Much |
potheses beneath it. Hence the initial negligible index of depends also upon, so to speak, how closely the evidence :
our hypothesis concerning zig A will remain unmodified; for an overhypothesis is allied to the hypothesis in ques- |
and any hypothesis with an extremely low initial index tion, or in other words, upon how specific the overhy- |
will have an extremely low final degree of projectibility. pothesis is. Information concerning bagfuls examined |

This has two useful consequences. One, as we have from stack S clearly has more bearing upon H» than upon i
already seen, is that the process of appraising the projecti- a similar hypothesis concerning marbles in some bag in
bility of a hypothesis need not run up through an endless another stack in Utah—for example, the hypothesis 110 |
hierarchy of overhypotheses. The other is that even when All the marbles in bag W are red,
a hypothesis such as the one about zig A is presumptively |
projectible, its lack of any appreciable degree of projecti- where W is a bag in stack T. Our examination of bagfuls
bility can be inferred from its very low initial index. from S provides us with exactly the same number of posi- i

Emphatic warnings must be issued at this point against tive cases for the overhypothesis U ;
some misunderstandings. In the first place, nothing I have Every bagful of marbles in Utah is uniform in color |.
said implies that a hypothesis with more than a negligible a
initial index may not have a considerably higher final as it does for G i!
degree of projectibility. For example, since a predicate Every bagful of marbles in stack $ is uniform in color.
with no earned entrenchment and a modest inheritance “het . “nai ive i
may have parent predicates of very appreciable entrench- Yet the information we have is plainly less effe coven
ment, a hypothesis containing this predicate may have *AlsIng the projectibility of Ho through U than in raising |
overhypotheses with considerable power to increase pro- the projectibility of Ho through G. Briefly, where both |
jectibility. Moreover, even a hypothesis with a negligible projectibility and amount of support are equal, the effect
initia] index at one time may gain greatly in projectibility rs ,
when circumstances change—for example, when the asia hae sacolent predates that are nor mutually exclusive,
predicates in question become well-entrenched through a further factor that must be taken into account is the extent of

frequent projection, or when new evidence violates con- duplication in the evidence claimed by two or more of these | |
flicting hypotheses. All this, together with the already hypotheses. |
114 Img |

|

--- Page 74 ---



--- Page 75 ---



--- Page 76 ---

|
* THEORY OF PROJECTION - * THEORY OF PROJECTION -
(
extending the treatment of comparative projectibility The suggestion I have been developing here is that such |
even further: to hypotheses that, though supported and agreement with regularities in what has been observed is
unviolated and unexhausted, are unprojectible through a function of our linguistic practices. Thus the line be- |
being overridden. But I shall not pursue this here. Compli- tween valid and invalid predictions (or inductions or |
cations have already multiplied almost beyond manage- projections) is drawn upon the basis of how the world is j
ability, with the degree of projectibility of a hypothesis and has been described and anticipated in words.
being affected by numerous positive and negative over- -You will remember that in our inspection of several in-
hypotheses varying in projectibility, specificity, and terrelated problems we found that some of them could in
supporting evidence. effect be reduced to the problem of projectibiliry. Thus
To appraise the projectibility of a hypothesis, methodi- insofar as we have found a way of dealing with that prob- i
cally taking all these factors into account, could be a dis- lem, we have not only found a way of handling a neglected |
couraging task; but in practice we seldom need to go dimension of confirmation theory and so of answering the |
through all that. When faced with a conflict between two persistent residual question concerning induction, but we |
actually entertained hypotheses, we usually know quite have also found a way of dealing with the problem of dis-
well where to look for circumstances likely to make for positions and the problem of possible entities.
a significant difference in projectibiliry. Moreover, the A theory of projectibility or lawlikeness also removes
present inquiry has not been devoted to describing or pre- one of the obstacles to a satisfactory treatment of counter-
scribing a procedure. The concern here has been with factual conditionals; but the problem of counterfactuals,
definition rather than description, with theory rather than as we saw, offers other difficulties of its own. One further
practice. The results are indeed intricate, incomplete, and suggestion, however, may perhaps help some here. I said
often tentative, falling far short of a full and final theory. earlier that the falsity of such a counterfactual? as V |
All I have offered is a study of some of the resources that If that penny (also) had been put in my pocket on VE day,
a new approach offers us for dealing with a difficult prob- it (also) would have been silver on VE day
lem. If you were expecting more, may I remind you of .. .
the title of this lecture? results from the fact that the requisite general principle P
6. Survey and Speculations ‘ny the coins put in my pocket on VE day were silver on VE
. If Lam at all correct, then, the roots of inductive valid- even though true, is not lawlike. But this analysis is incom-
ity are to be found in our use of language. A valid pre- plete. For suppose that circumstances are such as to make |
diction is, admittedly, one that is in agreement with past |
regularities in what has been observed; but the difficulty 28 The example used earlier (1.8) has here been altered a little | |
has always been to say what constitutes such agreement. to remove some ambiguities. |
120 12 |

--- Page 77 ---



--- Page 78 ---



--- Page 79 ---



--- Page 80 ---

* INDEX : - INDEX - ;
ill-behaved predicates; see predi- law—Cont. non-positional predicates, see — possible—Cont.
___ Gates and empty (vacuous) princi- predicates passing of the, 31-58 |
induction ples, 10, 21 P nonprojectible hypotheses, see processes, 57 ,
canons (laws) of, 64, 65 of logic, 65 hypotheses, nonprojectible sense-data, 50
justification of, xxiii, 60~65 non-logical, 10-11 novel predicates; see predicates worlds, 57
new riddle of, xxii, 59-83, esp. problem of, 17-27 biective ch . adi postulates, reduction of, 46-47,
- simplicity of, 123 objective characteristics and dis- 47n.
old problem of, 59-66 lawlike, 22 ff., 73-83, 116, 121-1223 positions, 41 potentiality, 3
_ Valid, . see also projectibility observable properties, 40 powers, 33
inferences, see induction Lewis, C. I., 37. observation statements, accept- occult, 40
infinite regressus, 16 ; licenses ance of, 88 pragmatism, 91, 917.
initial index of degree of projecti- for making inferences, 36 Oppenheim, Paul, 697. crude, 32
___ bility; see projectibilicy _ for making predictions, 60-61 ornithology, indoor, 70-71 predicates
initial manifest predicates; see — linguistic vs. ontological problem, overhypothesis, 110-116, 117-120 auxiliary, 45-46 &
__ predicates 35 negative, 118-120 dispositional, 42 ff., 86
instance, 21, 69 ff.; see also cases postive, 110-111, 117-120 entrenchment of, xxii, 94-98,
confirming, 69 ff. manifest statistical, 119 100, 1047.-1057., 106-109,
pase instance tatement gr Preperties ‘ee predicates aradox of the ravens 7 ill ‘behaved - ff.
c-1 : perties; see properties paradox e ravens, 70-72 aie B y ,
pottery cone 89-91. 109 meaning and qualitativeness, 78- parent of predicate; see predicates initial manifest, 45 8. 8
; termined, 89-91, 109 79 Parry, William T., 137. manifest, 41740, 49, 57-75%
instantiation of a hypothesis, 69, Mill, John Stuart, 65 phenomenal place-time; see place- non-designative role of, 41-42,
9 Mill's canons, 65; see also induc- time 7p sitional, 78-8
. tion, Jaw henomenalism ead eran nen Feat |
judgments about future or un- modal terms, 35; see also disposi- phil osophic constienee 31-343 see novel (unfamiliar), 97
. known cases; see induction tion-terms, possible also explication , , parent, 106-107, 110, [I2-IT§,
justification; see description and physical objects or events 118 198 fF
justification i : positional, 78 1.
of a deduction, xxiii, 63-64 negate connections, §9~60, 6072. long-enduring, 43-44, 487-497. of possibles, 55-56
of induction; see induction Of antecedent, 9 ep ements of, 43-44, projectible, xxi, 84-124
. of consequent, 12, 13, 14-15 : li oo quaitatlve, ee
Kahane, Howard, xxii of a counterfactual; see cou physicalistic language; 49 well-behaved, 78 ff.
Kant, Immanuel, 96 terfactual , coun- place-time prediction, 20-21, 59-62, 69, 74-
Kaplan, Abraham, 467-477. negative; see cases fictive, 5° f ft 75s 81-83, 84 Bs, ae oon
Kemeny, John G., 697. instance; see instance P ossible. st gom 1 vessfi ry ad aso projection
Kina ae overhypothesisy see overhy- Pepper Karl xxii pre-systematic application of
cial, pothesis we were . : . : fo
genuine, 122-123 non-actual, 35, 42; see also possi- positional predicates; see predi- ori terms: see, expacarion postu:
label, 41 enduring things, 55 possibility, xxii, 31-58, esp. 49-58 lates, 46-47
law, 11-14, 17-27, 38, 45; see also entity, 51 possible principles; see also law
connecting principles happenings to actual things, 55 entities, 49 ff. 121 general, 36-37, 121
causal (natural, physical), 9, 37, occurrences, 54 experience, 53 physical, 36
45 non-dispositional predicates; see merely, 557. vacuous, 21
definition of, 20-22 predicates, manifest occurrences, 54 probability, 66
128 129

--- Page 81 ---

—— BS if
+ INDEX -; | * INDEX -
projectibility, xxi-xxiii, 84-124 sapphirubies, 105 truth functional , ; unprojectible hypotheses, see hy- |
comparative, 108-120 Scheffler, Israel, xxi-xxii, 717. compounds, counterfactuals as, potheses, unprojectible |
degree of, 1037., 108 ff. Schwartz, Robert, xxi, 104. criter} 5 utterance, 957., 10072. |
habitual, 97-98 scientific law; see law truth ee i f 1 36 validity, inductive, 65, 85, 120; see
initial index of degree of, 109, selective confirmation, xxi ruth value of a counterfactual, 3 _also induction, projectibility |
12-114, 117-118 self-compatible, 11-13, 217. types, 957. verification theory o' meaning, 31 |
overall, 117, 1177. self-contradictory hypothesis and . violated; see hypothesis |
presumptive, 99" 120 confirmation, 71 unexamined cases; see cases, in- well-behaved predicates, see
theory of, xxi-xxii, 121 stance ; ,
varieties of, 10. self-cotenable, 15, 217. any . ; predicates
os », 104 self-evidence and validity, 63 unfamiliar predicates; see predi- well entrenched 96-98, 102-103
Projection, xxii, 57-58, 81-83, 84— ’ , D ’
. i minati _  self-incompatible, 11 cates 105; see also entrenchment
124; see also elimination, hy. Pp UT Uniformity of N. Whi
potheses, predicates, rules sernifactual; see conditionals niformity of Nature, 61 hite, Morton, 147., 357., 6on. |
actual, 85-92 ff. sense-data |
conflicting, 92 ff. actual, 50, 52
could have been projected, 88, possible, 50
94, 100-101 Shipley, Elizabeth, xxii
Lars 85 fi. 1047. simplicity of ideas, laws, theories,
valid, 8 . 123
projective class, go source of predictions, 60
property statements
essential, 44-45 analytic, 197., 34, 607.
aie. 41, 42, 45 confirmable and non-confirm-
occult, 41 able, 25-26
pseudo-law, 23 synthetic, 197., 34
se . . Stegmiiller, Wolfgang, xxi
qualitative predicates; see predi- sure individual, s B
cates ; .
Quine, Willard Van Orman, q427., suPPom amount of; see hypoth
6on. syntactical, see also predicates
randomness, 123 criterion for lawlikeness, im- |
’ ossibility of, 20
security 96-97; see also regu- form and confirmation, 72-73
reduetion postulates or sentences. grounds, 83
ne 48 , universality, 20, 79
re tary, 60, 65, 82, 87, 120 system, phenomenialistic, 417.
relation of confirmation; see con- ,
firmation tempora d qualitati
relevant conditions; see condi- Position and qualltativeness, 79
tions segment, 4872.~497., 54
replicas, 957. tenseless, 7, 507., 88, toon.
roles of elimination, 92 ff.; see terms, defined vs. primitive, 417.
also deduction, elimination, token, 957.
induction, projectibility total evidence; see evidence
130 131
'
