--- Page 1 ---

Informational Realism 
Luciano Floridi 
Dipartimento di Scienze Filosofiche, Università degli Studi di Bari;  
Faculty of Philosophy; Sub-Faculty of Computation; and Information Ethics Group, Oxford University.  
Wolfson College, OX2 6UD, Oxford University, UK 
luciano.floridi@philosophy.oxford.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
What is th e ultimate n ature o f reality? This p aper 
defends a n answer i n term s of informational rea lism 
(IR). It does so in three stages. First, it is shown that, 
within th e debate ab out structural re alism (SR ), 
epistemic (ESR) and ontic (OSR) structural realism are 
reconcilable by using the methodology of the levels of 
abstractions. It fo llows th at OSR is defensible fr om a 
structuralist-friendly position. Second, it is argu ed that 
OSR is also plausible, beca use not all related objects  
are log ically prior to  all relatio nal stru ctures. The 
relation of differe nce is at least as funda mental as 
(because co nstitutive o f) an y relata. Third , it is 
suggested th at an  ontology of struct ural objects for 
OSR can re asonably be  devel oped i n t erms of 
informational o bjects, an d that Obje ct Oriented  
Programming pr ovides a  fl exible a nd powerful 
methodology wi th w hich t o cl arify and m ake p recise 
the concept of “informational object”. The outcome is 
informational rea lism, t he vi ew that the worl d is the  
totality o f in formational o bjects d ynamically 
interacting with each other. 
Keywords: St ructural realis m, epistemic structural 
realism, o ntic stru ctural realism, lev els o f ab straction, 
informational ontology, object oriented programming. 
1 Introduction: checkmate in three moves  
This pa per defends a metaphysical po sition – 
informational rea lism ( IR) – as a sol ution t o a  
problem. The problem is deceptively elementary: what 
is th e u ltimate n ature of reality? The answer is 
misleadingly si mple: it is in formational. Th e 
cumulative steps from the problem to the solution are 
the difficult part of the process. To explain them, the 
analogy of a  chess prob lem co mes h andy: wh ite 
checkmates in three moves.  
Here is th e outlin e o f th e strateg y. On th e board we 
find the debate about structural realism (SR; Maxwell 
[1970]; Worrall [1989]; Ladyman [1998]). This is the 
view that knowledge of the world is kn owledge of its 
structural prop erties. Epistemic structur al realism  
(ESR; M organti [fo rthcoming]) h olds that objects a re 
what rem ain i n pri nciple un knowable once t he 
                                                           
Copyright © 2004,  Aus tralian Computer S ociety, In c. This 
paper app eared at the Computing and Philosophy 
Conference, Canberra. Conferences in Research and Practice 
in Information Technology, Vol. 37. J. Weck ert and Y. Al-
Saggaf, Eds. Reproduction for academ ic, n ot-for profit 
purposes permitted provided this text is included. 
knowable structures of reality have been factored out. 
Ontic struct ural realism  (OSR; Vo tsis [forth coming]) 
holds that objects are themselves structures.  
The first m ove s hows that ESR and OSR a re 
reconcilable, and hence that OSR is defensible from a 
structuralist-friendly perspective.  
The second m ove s hows tha t OSR is also plausible 
because not all related object s are logically pri or to all 
relational structures: no relata are logically prior to the 
relation of difference.  
The th ird m ove sh ows th at an  on tology of stru ctural 
objects (C hakravartty [2002]) can reas onably be  
developed i n t erms of i nformational obj ects, and t hat 
Object Ori ented Pr ogramming (OO P) pr ovides a 
flexible an d powerful m ethodology with  wh ich t o 
clarify and make precise the concept of “informational 
object”.  
The ou tcome o f th e th ree moves is in formational 
realism, th e view th at th e world is t he totality o f 
informational o bjects dynamically in teracting with 
each other. Checkmate. 
2 The piece s on the board: structural 
realism and its ontological challenge 
Broadly constructed, Structural Realism argues that:  
SR) instrumentally and pre dictively successful models 
(especially, bu t no t on ly, th ose propounded by 
scientific theories) can be , in the best circ umstances, 
increasingly informative about the relations that obtain 
between t he (p ossibly u nobservable) objects t hat 
constitute the system  under i nvestigation (through the 
observable phenomena).  
SR leaves uns pecified the nature of the relata in th e 
structures. Th is prob lem h as resu scitated t he classic 
question about the knowability of the ontological status 
of ob jects. Consider the f ollowing fo rmalism. The 
scheme of a structure S comprises four sets: 
1) a non-empty set O of objects (the domain of S), 
2) a non -empty set P of first- order, one -place 
properties of the objects in O,  
3) a non-empty set of relations R on O, and 
4) a po tentially e mpty set  T o f transitio ns ru les 
(operations) on O. 
 2

--- Page 2 ---

 
Table 1: the SLMS scheme 
 
What are t he objects in O? A ccording to Epistemic 
Structural Re alism, ob jects c an o nly be po sited as ontic 
residua, what remains in principle unknowable once the 
knowable structures of reality have been factored out: 
ESR) models can be i ncreasingly informative only about 
the relations t hat obtain bet ween t he objects, but not 
about the  first-orde r, one-place predicates  (the i ntrinsic 
nature) qualifying the objects in themselves. 
According to  Ontic St ructural Re alism, h owever, th e 
closing clause needs not to be granted:  
OSR) ultimately, objects are themselves structures and in 
the be st cases  they can be  indirectly cap tured in  our 
models, at least in principle. 
3 First move: ESR and OSR are not 
incompatible  
The first m ove is to  try to  co mbine th e virtu es of bo th 
brands of SR without incurring their costs.  
3.1 Indirect knowledge 
Structural real ism seeks to  com bine som e ont ological 
commitment with  a degree o f ep istemic resilien ce to 
theory ch ange. It ach ieves t his flex ibility by d ecoupling 
not knowledge fro m reality,  lik e in strumentalism d oes, 
but, within kn owledge itself, th e descriptions of th e 
knowable structural characteristics of the system from the 
explanations of its in trinsic p roperties. Bo th can  still 
crash, but the structural descriptions are far more resilient 
to change than the ontological explanations.  
All th is co mes at a price. SR g ains ep istemic resilience 
only b y endo rsing a v iew of  kn owledge as an  indirect 
relation between the epistemic (possibly multi-) agent and 
the sy stem unde r a nalysis, an d at  t he expense o f a  
somewhat w eakened on tological co mmitment. This ca n 
be achi eved by rel ying o n t he method of levels of 
abstraction (LoAs) (Floridi and Sa nders [ 2004]), i n t he 
following way. 
3.2 Levels of abstraction 
The method of LoA comes from modelling in science and 
is influe nced by an area  of Com puter Science, called 
Formal Method s, in  which discrete mathematics is u sed 
to sp ecify an d a nalyse t he be haviour of i nformation 
systems.  
A LoA co nsists of a col lection of observables. An 
observable is an  interpreted typ ed va riable, th at is, a 
variable wi th a wel l-defined p ossible s et of val ues 
together with a statement of the properties of the system 
under c onsideration for which i t st ands. T he t arget o f a  
LoA is called the system. A system may be accessed and 
described at a range of LoAs and s o can have a ra nge of 
models.  
An explicit reference to the LoA clarifies that  
i) th e m odel of a system is a fu nction of the av ailable 
observables; 
ii) different LoA may be fairly ranked depending on how 
well th ey satisfy m odelling sp ecifications (e.g. 
informativeness, coherence, elegance, explanatory power, 
consistency with the data, predictive power, etc.); and  
iii) d ifferent an alyses can  be fairly co mpared provided 
that they share the same LoA.  
The m ethod of L oA i s al so an ef ficient way of m aking 
explicit and  m anaging th e on tological co mmitment o f a 
theory. Let us see how. 
3.3 Ontological commitments and levels of 
abstractions 
A theory comprises at least a LoA and a m odel. The LoA 
allows the theory to analyse the system and to elaborate a 
model that identifies a structure of the system at the given 
LoA. So the structuralist position becomes: 
SRLOA) instrumentally and predictively successful models 
(especially, but n ot only, those p ropounded by scientific 
theories) at a given LoA can be, in the best circumstances,  
 System 
Model
analysed at
Structure 
LoA
identifies
allowsbelongs to Theory 
 3

--- Page 3 ---

 
Table 2: the SLMS scheme with ontological commitment 
 
increasingly inform ative abou t th e relations th at ob tain 
between t he (p ossibly un observable) o bjects t hat 
constitute the system  unde r i nvestigation (through the  
observable phenomena).  
This is th e system-level-model-structure (SLMS) scheme 
(Table 1). 
The ontol ogical co mmitment of a theory can now be  
understood by distinguishing between a committing and a 
committed component.  
A the ory commits itself on tologically by adopting a (set 
of) Lo A. C ompare th is to th e case in  which one h as 
chosen a car model but has not bought one yet. A t heory 
shows its o ntological co mmitment in  full th rough its 
model, wh ich is th erefore the beare r of the actual 
commitment. The a nalogy here is with the specific ca r 
one has  act ually bo ught. S o Lo As c ommit a t heory t o 
types while models commit it to the corresponding tokens 
(Table 2).  
The d istinction j ust introduced can no w be u sed to 
reconcile ESR and OSR.  
3.4 How to reconcile ESR and OSR 
ESR e ndorses a minimalist approac h. It argues that a  
theory is justified in adopting a LoA th at commits it (th e 
theory itself) ontologically t o a realist in terpretation of 
only the structural properties of the system id entified by 
the m odel pr oduced by t he theory at the chosen LoA. 
This minimal ontological commitment is primary or first-
order, t hat i s, i t conce rns fi rst-order knowledge of t he 
structural properties of the system under investigation.  
ESR is arguably correct. On the one hand, the adoption of 
any Lo A s upporting a degree of first-order o ntological 
commitment higher than the epistemic-structuralist one is 
metaphysically risk y an d su spicious. It is certain ly 
unnecessary a nd not bac ked up  by  a general co nception 
of knowledge as an indirect rel ation wi th the wo rld. In  
short, Ockham’s ra zor a pplies. N ow, t he c urrent debate 
on SR has bee n developing on the assumption that OSR 
and ESR are incompatible, one of the two must go, and it 
is not ESR.  
This argum ent against OSR is misguided because ESR  
and OSR work at sepa rate Lo A. A s fa r a s a first- order 
analysis is co ncerned, SR ju stifies on ly o ne kind of 
ontological commitm ent, th e one endors ed by ESR. 
However, at  a deri vative or second-order lev el o f 
analysis, OSR correctly ar gues in f avour o f an 
economical view of objects.  
Consider again the SLMS scheme. The assumption is that 
there is no direct (i.e. Lo A-free) k nowledge of the  
intrinsic nature o f th e objects co nstituting th e system 
under i nvestigation. H owever, once a  t heory has  
ontologically committed itself to the structural properties 
of th e system, on e is en titled to infer indirectly th at, 
whatever the system and i ts components (i.e., the objects 
or relata) are in themselves, they must be such as to allow 
the theory to capture their structural/relational properties. 
But wh at are t he co nditions of possibility o f knowledge 
(the k nowledge of fered by  t he the ory) of the struct ural 
properties of th e system? The q uestion is whether th ere 
might b e a j ustifiable Lo A that co mmits the th eory to 
some kind of description of the type of relata that support 
the structural properties of the system  id entified by th e 
model produced by the theory. ESR simply has nothing to 
offer here, f or i ts c oncern i s with a fi rst-order 
commitment. OSR, on the contrary, can argue in favour 
of a m inimalist appr oach. A nd t his i s a very  reaso nable 
step to take. The LoA justifiably adoptable at this second 
level is on e according to which the relata are th emselves 
understood in structural terms.  
To s ummarise, at the first- order le vel (see Table 3 ), we 
adopt a transc endental appr oach t o k nowledge – as a  
LoA-mediated relatio n with reality –  and  use Ockham’s 
razor as  a m ethodologically sa fety m easure to  lim it th e 
number o f (types o f) components to wh ich a theory 
should be ontologically com mitted. In t he best 
circumstances, LoAs s hould ontologically co mmit a  
theory at most to the existence in the worl d of the (type 
of) structures identified by its models. At a second-order 
level, we re-adopt a t ranscendental ap proach t o what 
makes possi ble t he previ ous fi rst-order k nowledge o f 
structures, and ap ply a qu alitatively modified v ersion of 
Ockham’s razor, which now suggests to keep the nature 
of objects as  sim ple as pos sible: entia no n su nt 
complicanda praeter necessitatem, as it we re. According 
to th is new safety p rinciple, it is reaso nable to  assu me 
that relata are structural objects, for this is all the theory  
 System 
Model (O-committed)
analysed at
Structure 
LoA (O-committing) 
identifies
allowsbelongs to Theory 
 4

--- Page 4 ---

 
 
Table 3: the SLMS scheme with ordered ontological commitments 
 
needs to justify its first-order commitment. Since the two 
ontological commitments occur at different levels there is 
no in compatibility an d h ence n o obj ection. End  o f t he 
first move. 
4 Second move: relata are not logical prior to 
all relations 
Unfortunately, elim inating the app arent inconsistency 
between ESR  and OSR d oes not  y et show  t hat OSR  i s 
plausible. A direct and quite substantial objection against 
OSR still n eeds to  be neutralized. Th is is ou r secon d 
move. Relations (st ructures) req uire relat a (struct ured 
objects), w hich t herefore ca nnot be further i dentified as  
relations without running into some vicious circularity or 
infinite regress. Yet th is is p recisely what OSR n eeds to 
argue, if the very idea of structural objects is supposed to 
make sense. 
Certainly external relatio ns u sually req uire relata. 
Distance is  a  good exam ple. Yet internal relatio ns 
constitute their relata for what they are. “Married” comes 
easily t o one’ s mind: M ary and J ohn are  married o nly 
because of their mutual relation.  
Unfortunately, internal rela tions seem  t o supe rvene on 
their relata and  further qualify them. Mary and John did 
not co me into ex istence b y g etting m arried; th ey o nly 
acquired a new c ontingent property, t heir marital st atus, 
after t heir we dding. I f one wants t o defend t he l ogical 
priority of internal relations over their relata, then one has 
to show much more, namely that the essential properties 
of the objects in question depend upon some fundamental 
internal prop erties. This is difficu lt b ut not impossible. 
For th ere is a sign ificant case, m etaphysically more 
fundamental than the case i n wh ich th e essen ce of th e 
relata is in  qu estion. Th is is th e (in ternal) relatio n of 
difference, which con stitutes its relata as a p recondition 
for their existence. Relata as merely differentiated entities 
and n othing e lse (at  l east not  y et) a re possible only 
because there is a relation of difference in the first place. 
For consider what a c ompletely undifferentiated object x 
might be. It  w ould be o ne u nobservable at  any  possi ble 
LoA. This means that there would be no possible world in 
which x would exist. And this is equivalent to saying that 
x would not exist. Call th is the modified Leibnizian law 
of the neces sary i nexistence of t he undifferentiable in 
principle. The law still says very little about  the nature of 
the entities/relata in question, but there is fin ally a c lear 
sense in which relata are not necessarily prior to a m ore 
fundamental internal relation of diffe rence. Difference is 
our Ur-relation, as i t were . In E ddington’s wo rds: “T he 
relations un ite th e relata; th e relata are  the meeting 
points of the relations. The one is unthinkable apart from 
the other. I do not think that a more general starting-point 
of structure could be conceived” (Eddington [1928], 230–
231, quoted in Fr ench [2003], 233). This leads us to the 
last move. 
5 Third move: the concept of a structural 
object is empty 
Even if ESR and OSR are compatible, and even if it is not 
true th at, u ltimately, stru ctured relata are n ecessarily 
logically p rior to  all stru ctural relatio ns, we still lack  a 
System 
Model (O-committed)
analysed at 
Structure 
LoA (O-committing) 
identifies 
allowsbelongs to 
1st order ontological commitment: 
relational structures are knowable
2nd order ontological commitment: 
relata are structural objects
makes possible feedback 
Model (O-committed)
identifies
Objects 
belong to 
New LoA 
(O-committing) 
 5

--- Page 5 ---

clear grasp of what these structural objects might be like, 
even if indirectly or metatheoretically.  
A straightforward way of making sense of these structural 
objects is as informational ob jects, that is as clusters of  
data, not in the alphanumeric sense of the word, but in an 
equally com mon se nse o f d ifferences de re , i .e. m ind-
independent points of lack of uniformity.  
In its simplest form, a datum can be reduced to just a lack 
of uniformity, t hat i s, a bi nary di fference, l ike t he 
presence and the absence of a black dot, or a change of 
state, from there being no black dot at all to the re being 
one. Admittedly, a d atum is u sually classified  as t he 
relatum exhi biting t he an omaly, oft en bec ause t his i s 
perceptually m ore cons picuous or s ubjectively l ess 
redundant t han t he other rel atum, seen as a  bac kground 
condition. Howev er, th e rel ation of d ifference is b inary 
and symmetric . A wh ite sh eet o f p aper is a co nstitutive 
part of th e datum itself, to gether with th e fund amental 
relation of difference that couples it with  the dot. In this 
specific se nse, nothi ng is a  dat um per s e, wit hout its 
counterpart, ex actly lik e nob ody can  be a wife withou t 
there bei ng a  hus band. So , ont ologically, dat a, as st ill 
unqualified d ifferences, are pu rely relational en tities. Of 
course, from  a structural perspective, they rem ain 
unknowable i n them selves. One never deals with pure  
data bu t on ly with  so mewhat in terpreted d ata. Now 
clusters of data as relatio nal entities are th e relata we are 
looking for in our modified version of OSR. 
As French [ 2001] points out, i n t he co ntext of t he 
philosophy of physics, “if we want to continue to talk, in 
everyday language , a bout el ectrons as objects - because 
we lack the logico-linguistic resources to  do otherwise - 
then we can do so ‘only indirectly’, ‘... not insofar as they 
themselves, as individuals, a re give n, but so far as they 
are desc ribable as “poi nts of i ntersection” of ce rtain 
relations’ (Cassirer, ibid.)”.  
So what an  i nformational ontology co uld l ook l ike? 
Object Orien ted Pro gramming (O OP) pro vides an  
excellent e xample of a  flexi ble a nd powerful 
methodology with which to clarify and m ake precise the  
concept of “informational object”.  
OOP is a method of programming that radically changed 
the app roach to software development. Histo rically, a 
program was vi ewed as a n al gorithmic proce dure t hat 
takes i nput dat a, pr ocesses i t, and p roduces out put dat a. 
The difficulty was th en represented by the elaboration of 
the algorithmic process. OOP has shifted the focus from 
the logic procedures, required to m anipulate the objects , 
to the objects that nee d t o be m anipulated. C onsider a  
pawn in a chess game. Its identity is not determined by its 
contingent p roperties as a physical bo dy, including i ts 
shape and col our. Rathe r, a  pawn is a cluster of states 
(properties like white or b lack, and its strateg ic position 
on t he board) an d be havioural r ules (e. g., i t can m ove 
forward only), which in turn are possible only in relation 
to other pieces and the logic al space of the  board. For a 
good player, the pawn is only a pl aceholder standing for 
an “informational object”. It is not a material thing but a 
set of  t yped variables, using t he Lo A t erminology, a  
mental en tity, to pu t it in  Berk eley’s terms, o r an  en tity 
constituted by a bundle of properties, t o use a Hu mean 
expression, whose existence and nature is determined by 
the di fferences an d nomological rel ations t hat 
characterise the gam e of chess. Now in  OO P, d ata 
structures (e.g. t he pa wn’s p roperty o f bei ng w hite) a nd 
their behaviour ( programming c ode, e. g. t he pa wn’s 
power to capture pieces only by moving diagonally 
forward) are  packa ged t ogether as ( informational) 
objects. Objects are then grouped in a hierarchy of classes 
(e.g. pawns), with each class inhe riting characteristics 
from the class above it (e.g. all pieces but the king ca n be 
captured, s o e very pawn ca n be ca ptured). A class is a  
named repres entation for an a bstraction, where  an 
abstraction is a n amed c ollection of attributes and 
behaviour relevant to modelling a g iven entity fo r so me 
particular purpose at a certain  LoA. The routines or logic 
sequences tha t can m anipulate the objec ts are called 
methods. A m ethod is a p articular implementation of an 
operation, i .e. an act ion or transformation that an object 
performs o r i s s ubject t o by a certain class. Objects  
communicate with each other through well-defined 
interfaces called messages.  
Clearly OOP provides us with a concept of informational 
objects that is  richer t han our m inimalist approach t o 
informational realism may allow us. Recall that all we are 
placing in t he world are i nformational objects as the  
conditions of possibility of those structures that our first-
order LoAs allo w us to attribute to the world in the first 
place. OOP is  not a viable way of doing philosophical 
ontology, but a val uable methodology to cl arify t he 
nature of our ontological components.  
Time has come to summarise the proposed solution to the 
ontological problem. 
6 Informational realism 
Informational realism (IR) is a versio n of SR. As a f orm 
of realism, it is co mmitted t o th e ex istence o f a m ind-
independent reality. Lik e ESR, it su pports a first-o rder, 
minimal ont ological c ommitment i n fa vour of t he 
structural properties of reality. Like OSR, it also supports 
a second-orde r, m inimal o ntological commitm ent in 
favour of o bjects u nderstood i nformationally. T his 
second-order commitment is j ustified by ep istemic 
reasons. We are allowe d to commit ourselves  
ontologically to w hatever minimal conception of objects 
is useful to make sense of our first-order commitment. IR 
argues th at, as far as we can tell, th e u ltimate n ature of 
reality is in formational, that is, it makes sense to adop t a 
LoA at which our mind-independent reality is constituted 
by relata th at are n either sub stantial n or material (th ey 
might well be, but we have no reasons to suppose them to 
be so) but informational. We are ready for a definition: 
IR) in strumentally an d pred ictively su ccessful m odels 
(especially, but n ot only, those p ropounded by scientific 
theories) at a give n L oA can be, in the be st 
circumstances, increasingl y in formative ab out the 
relations that obtain between the (possibly unobservable) 
informational objects t hat constitute t he system unde r 
investigation (through the observable phenomena).  
 6

--- Page 6 ---

7 Conclusion 
Philosophers often rely on  spatial an alogies to  ex plain 
their the ories. Refere nces to room s are pa rticularly 
popular. Sextus E mpiricus tho ught th at we are lik e men 
searching for gold, or shooting at a target in a dark room: 
no matter how long the search or the shooting proceeds, it 
is poi ntless because in principle the re i s no way to 
establish whether any of us has f ound a nugget or hit the 
mark. Turing used different rooms for his test. And Searle 
devised a C hinese r oom for  hi s cout erexample. I shal l 
rely on thei r examples and suggest a double box analogy 
to illustrate IR. But first, a final bit of terminology. 
In software engineering, black-box refers to a test-desi gn 
method t hat f ocuses on t esting functional o r behavioral 
requirements of a program. The m ethodology t reats the  
analyisandum as a no ntransparent an d c losed sy stem, 
avoiding using explicit knowledge of its internal nature or 
structure t o understand t he way it wo rks. Th e opp osite 
methodology is known as white- or glass-box test design. 
This allo ws on e to  “lo ok in side” th e sy stem, an d it 
focuses on using specific and detailed knowledge of the 
program code t o guide the selection of t est data. A grey-
box approach is one that allows only a partial view of the 
internal properties of the system. 
According to IR, an y wh ite-box ap proach to  reality is  
excluded i n pri nciple, gi ven t he i ndirect nat ure of 
knowledge. We look at the world as if we were in Sextus’ 
dark room. Th is i s t he fi rst bo x. We are i n i t, but our 
target is n ot rep resentationalist, no r are our in teractions 
with th e fu rniture in  t he ro om u nidirectional, as Sex tus 
assumed. And contrary to Sextus’ it is a g rey-box. In the 
best cases, it allows the rec onstruction of the structural  
properties relating t he furniture of t he room, i.e. our 
informational o bjects. The l atter are our s econd type of 
boxes. Li ke i n Turi ng’s t est, t hey are bl ack-boxes, n ot 
directly k nowable, but “ep istemically in teractable”. 
Sometimes we can  in directly cap ture th eir n ature by 
observing their behaviour and mutual interactions, but we 
do not know their intrinsic properties.  
IR t akes our epistemic goal  t o be co nstructionist, n ot 
representationalist. Kn owledge is n ot a matter o f h itting 
or finding, but of designing an d co nstructing, an d one 
may construct  success fully ev en i n the dark. Since we 
wish to devise an intelligible conceptual environment, we 
do s o not by t rying t o photocopying whatever i s i n t he 
room (rep resentationalist ep istemology), but by  
interacting with it as a resource for ou r se mantic task s, 
interrogating it through experience, tests and experiments. 
Out of metaphor, reality is not a source but a resource for 
knowledge. Str uctural obj ects ( clusters o f data as 
relational en tities) wo rk lik e constraining af fordances, 
exploitable by  a t heory, at  a gi ven L oA, as i nput o f 
adequate qu eries to  produ ce information (th e m odel) as 
output. In thi s respect, we  are more like Tu ring’s 
interrogator, since the model of investigation is ero tetic: 
we query th e world as a database. Bu t since ou r task  is 
not to  find out who  is wh o, we resem ble Searle in  his 
Chinese room: we get  the data on o ne side and produce 
information on the other. The d ifference, in this case, is 
that we understand the semantic rules of the game. 
Black-boxes in a grey-box, th is is th e b asic idea b ehind 
IR. T he last s pecification is that the qualifications a re 
level-dependent, as t he di stinction between sy stem and  
component or unit of the system is. A bl ack-box may be 
opened, but opening i t t ransforms i t into a grey -box, i n 
which m ore black-boxes m ay be foun d. Whether ad 
infinitum we simply cannot know.  
8 References 
Chakravartty, A. forthcoming, "The Structuralist 
Conception of Objects", in 18th Biennial 
Meeting of the Philosophy of Science 
Association, Nov. 7-10, 2002, Milwaukee, WI. 
Eddington, A. 1928, The Nature of the Physical World 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  
Floridi, L., and Sanders, J. W. 2004, "The Method of 
Abstraction" in Yearbook of the Artificial. 
Nature, Culture and Technology. Models in 
Contemporary Sciences, edited by M. Negrotti 
(Bern: Peter Lang), Preprint from 
http://www.wolfson.ox.ac.uk/~floridi/papers.htm
French, S. 2001, "Symmetry, Structure and the 
Constitution of Objects", in Symmetries in 
Physics, New Reflections: Oxford Workshop, 
January 2001, Oxford. 
French, S. 2003, "Scribbling on the Blank Sheet: 
Eddington’s Structuralist Conception of 
Objects", Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Modern Physics, 34, 227–59.  
Ladyman, J. 1998, "What Is Structural Realism?" Studies 
in History and Philosophy of Science, 29A(3), 
409-24.  
Maxwell, G. 1970, "Structural Realism and the Meaning 
of Theoretical Terms" in Analyses of Theories, 
and Methods of Physics and Psychology, edited 
by Stephen Winokur and Michael Radner 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press), 
181-92.  
Morganti, M. forthcoming, "On the Preferability of 
Epistemic Structural Realism", Synthese.  
Votsis, I. forthcoming, "Is Structure Not Enough?" 
Philosophy of Science, Supplement. 
Worrall, J. 1989, "Structural Realism: The Best of Both 
Worlds?" Dialectica, 43, 99-124.  
 
Acknowledgements 
I am grateful to John Weckert and the Centre for Applied 
Philosophy an d Pu blic Et hics (C APPE) for t he ki nd 
invitation to deliver the keynote lecture at the Computing 
and P hilosophy co nference (t he A ustralian Nat ional 
University i n Canberra o n 31 Oct ober – 2 November, 
2003) on which this article i s based. I wish  to thank the 
colleagues attendi ng t he c onference for their use ful 
feedback. Gian luca Paron itti an d Matteo  Tu rilli read  a 
final ver sion of t he t ext and m ade several u seful 
comments. Of course I am the only person responsible for 
any remaining mistake.   
 7
