=== PAGE 1 ===

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Synthese (2024) 204:32
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-024-04684-y
Abstract
Existing metaphysical accounts of mechanisms commit to the existence of objects 
or entities posited in scientific theories, and thus fall within the category of maxi -
mal metaphysics. In this paper, I demonstrate the incompatibility of object-based 
metaphysics of mechanisms with the prevailing trend in the philosophy of physics 
by discussing the so-called bottoming-out problem. In response, I propose and flesh 
out a structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms based on Ontic Structural Realism 
(OSR), which is a kind of minimal metaphysics. I argue that the metaphysical un -
derpinnings of mechanisms are structures, whose metaphysical nature is elaborated 
through comparison with existing metaphysical theories of mechanisms. After that, 
I address the concern of whether objects in mechanisms can be accommodated in 
my account by invoking existing metaphysical theories of objects in special sci -
ence by structuralists, such as Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. ( 2007). Every Thing Must 
Go: Metaphysics Naturalized. Oxford University Press.)’s real pattern account, and 
suggesting a potential alignment between OSR and processual ontology. Finally, I 
demonstrate how my view can naturally serve as the metaphysics for Mechanism 
2.0 and be applied to systems biology.
Keywords Minimal metaphysics · Ontic structural realism · Mechanism · 
Philosophy of biology
1 Introduction
Over the past 20 years or so, the focus of discussions on explanation in the special 
sciences (as opposed to fundamental physics) has shifted from laws to mechanisms. 
The shift was the result of philosophers of science paying more attention to the actual 
Received: 3 December 2023 / Accepted: 19 June 2024 / Published online: 9 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
The metaphysics of mechanisms: an ontic structural realist 
perspective
Yihan Jiang1
  Yihan Jiang
humyj@leeds.ac.uk
1 School of Philosophy, Religion, and History of Science, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
1 3


=== PAGE 2 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
practice of scientists, and much of the contemporary practices of sciences (especially 
the life sciences) are driven by the search for mechanisms, which can be broadly 
defined as the interaction of objects that are organized in a certain way. The group 
of philosophers that have been spurring this shift are commonly referred to as new 
mechanists. The success achieved by the new mechanists in scientific explanation 
has also led to a new trend in the metaphysics of science. Metaphysics-minded new 
mechanists have engaged in a series of discussions regarding the metaphysical com-
mitments of mechanisms (e.g., Machamer et al., 2000; Glennan, 1996, 2011, 2017; 
Illari & Williamson, 2013; Kaiser & Krickel, 2017, Krickel, 2018).
It should be noted that all existing metaphysical accounts of mechanisms are based 
on an ontology of objects or entities, which can be traced back to an atomist tradition 
that holds that, “[t]he entities which we see in the world are typically composed of 
smaller entities, with these entities being composed in turn of smaller entities, and so 
on until one reaches some bottom level of entities– the atoms” (Glennan, 2010, p.1). 
In other words, proponents of these accounts believe that there are (object-like) enti-
ties all the way down to some fundamental level. By committing to the existence of 
objects posited in scientific theories, existing metaphysical theories of mechanisms 
fall within the category of maximal metaphysics. I take this metaphysical commit -
ment to be maximal because they typically invoke a ‘thick’ notion of objecthood just 
like standard scientific realism. According to this view, objects exist independently 
of the practice of sciences, possess intrinsic properties and identity, and often serve 
as the seat of causal dispositions.
In the debate on the metaphysics of science, the dominance of maximal metaphys-
ics is gradually being replaced by minimal metaphysics, with its supporters exhibit -
ing more restricted and minimal ontological commitments. In philosophy of physics, 
ontic structural realists argue that physical objects (with intrinsic identity and proper-
ties) are not part of our fundamental ontology, and all that exists at the fundamental 
level are structures (Ladyman & Ross, 2007; French & Ladyman, 2003, 2006, 2011; 
French, 2014) where the notion of ‘structure’ has been interpreted in different ways 
(see Ladyman, 2007/2023) but can be broadly understood as a set of modal relations. 
Ontic Structural Realism (OSR) is a form of minimal metaphysics because its onto -
logical commitments are confined to structures, with objects being reconceptualized 
as either ontologically ‘thin’ or merely conceptual. As ontic structural realists also 
aim to unify the metaphysics of different sciences and believe that the metaphysics 
of fundamental physics constrains that of special science (Ladyman & Ross, 2007), 
it is well-motivated to consider the question of whether we can incorporate the meta-
physics of mechanisms into the framework of OSR and have a structuralist account 
of mechanisms. 1
In this paper, I offer a positive answer to this question by proposing and fleshing 
out a structuralist metaphysics of mechanism. The significance of this paper should 
be twofold: on the one hand, I fill a gap in existing metaphysical theories of mecha -
1  It is worth noting that that Glennan, the leading metaphysician of mechanisms, views it as an important 
task to reconcile the ontology of fundamental physics and that of special sciences. He says, “[w]e should 
not assume, just because it conforms with our intuitions, that nature is ultimately grounded by a funda -
mental level of ‘little things and micro-bangings’”. (2017, p.190).
1 3
32 Page 2 of 23


=== PAGE 3 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
nisms by providing a metaphysics that is compatible with the leading metaphysi -
cal account of fundamental physics. On the other hand, given the current relative 
lack of exploration into how OSR applies to the special sciences (for initial work 
in this direction, see French, 2011; Ladyman & Ross, 2007; Beni, 2016), and the 
near absence of discussions on OSR and mechanisms, I demonstrate how to extend 
OSR to the special sciences within the framework of the new mechanical philosophy. 
This further rebuts objections asserting that OSR is only applicable to fundamental 
physics (see Ladyman, 2007/2023). Moreover, successfully extending OSR to new 
mechanical philosophy can be more broadly viewed as promoting the success of 
minimal metaphysics. In this regard, this paper contributes to the ongoing transition 
towards minimal metaphysics in the metaphysics of science debate. 2
The paper is structured as follows: after I briefly introduce two leading metaphysi-
cal accounts of mechanisms in the first section, I then discuss the so-called bottom -
ing-out problem which poses a serious challenge to these two accounts and serves 
as a motivation for the structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms. I further strengthen 
this motivation in Sect. 3. Afterwards, I briefly introduce Ontic Structural Realism 
in Sect. 4 before I flesh out my structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms. After that, I 
address the concern of whether objects in mechanisms can be accommodated in my 
account by invoking existing metaphysical theories of objects in special science by 
structuralists, such as Ladyman and Ross ( 2007)’s real pattern account and suggest-
ing a potential alignment between OSR and processual ontology. Finally, I demon -
strate how my view can naturally serve as the metaphysics for Mechanism 2.0 and be 
applied to systems biology.
2 New mechanism and metaphysics
According to new mechanists, mechanisms can be defined as follows,
The most fruitful way to define mechanisms is that a mechanism for a phe -
nomenon consists of entities (or parts) whose activities and interactions are 
organized so as to be responsible for the phenomenon (Glennan et al., 2022, p. 
145, italics original).
Within this definition, ‘entities’ refer to physical objects, which are the entities that 
engage in activities. Entities occupy spatio-temporal regions and serve as bearers 
of properties. Some examples include calcium ions, neurons, cells, DNA strands, 
ATP, chloroplasts, muscles, hearts, and organisms. On the other hand, ‘activities’ 
are the actions performed by these entities and are described by verbs. Activities are 
2  According to Hüttemann (2021), we should establish a metaphysics for scientific practice in the sense 
of ‘making explicit assumptions concerning the structure of reality that best explain the success of [that] 
practice’ (p. 1). Furthermore, this metaphysics should be minimal in that ‘it should contain no assumption 
that does not do any work in explaining scientific practice’ (p. 11) (See French’s book review, 2022) I am 
going to show that the mechanists’ invocation of an object-based ontology does no work in explaining 
the scientific practice they appeal to and that as a result, a structuralist account offers a metaphysically 
more minimal explanation.
1 3
Page 3 of 23 32


=== PAGE 4 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
temporally extended and require the involvement of entities. Examples of activities 
encompass binding, opening, diffusion, phosphorylation, triggering, pumping, inhi -
bition, reproduction, and stabilization (Glennan, 2017; Kaiser, 2017; Krickel, 2018).
There are (at least) two different ontological views regarding mechanisms. I fol -
low Kaiser ( 2018) and refer to them as dualism and monism. Monism only com -
mits to the existence of entities, positing that all that exist are entities. According to 
monism, activities are reducible to entities and are the manifestation of the powers 
of the entities involved in the activity (Glennan, 2017, p. 32). Glennan, the leading 
monist, acknowledges that his view on (causal) powers is similar to that of Cart -
wright (1994, 1999), who supports a form of the dispositionalist account of causation 
(p. 188). Therefore, he believes that causal power is located in the powers or disposi-
tions of entities3.
In contrast to monists, dualists (Machamer et al., 2000; Krickel, 2018; Illari & 
Williamson, 2013) commit to the existence of both entities and activities and they do 
not think that activities are reducible to the powers of entities. Instead, they argue that 
“the term ‘activity’ refers to a basic unit of the world that exists additionally to enti -
ties” (Krickel, 2018, p.76), and they hold that activities and entities are ontologically 
on a par with each other.
Krickel ( 2018) provides a comprehensive metaphysical analysis of the dualist 
notion of activities. According to her, the features of activities include, but are not 
limited to, the following:
1. Activities are the causal components of mechanisms.
2. Activities involve activeness.
3. Activities are occurrents, whereas entities are continuants.
4. Activities are necessarily manifest or actualized.
5. Activities are irreducible (p. 90).
The first two features mean that activities are inherently active and causal, serving 
as the ‘locus’ of causal power. According to Krickel, “activities are supposed to be 
the causal components of mechanisms,” and they (activities) ‘produce change’ (p. 
74). Illari and Williamson (2013) explain this point well by stating: “[a]ctivities in a 
mechanism have modal force; they can ground counterfactuals about how the mecha-
nisms would operate in other circumstances), and therefore, they can explain how 
the mechanism makes a difference to the phenomenon for which it is responsible” 
(p.75). 4
Moving on to the third feature, Krickel defines occurrents as something that 
extend in time and have different temporal parts. For example, a football match con-
sists of two temporal parts: the first half and the second half. Continuants, on the 
other hand, do not have temporal parts in this sense. An example would be a table, 
3  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out that the late Glennan (2017) has arguably converged 
to dualism and Kaiser’s interpretation of him as a monist is potentially controversial. Nevertheless, we 
agree that monism, supported at least by early Glennan (1996), is something worth considering.
4  This feature is also picked up in Ontic Structural Realism, according to which, structures have modal 
force.
1 3
32 Page 4 of 23


=== PAGE 5 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
which remains the same over different time spans. Activities are occurrents that are 
temporally extended.
The fourth feature is entailed by the third one, suggesting that activities are neces-
sarily manifest or actualized, rather than being merely dispositional. Krickel ( 2018) 
explains the difference between activities and entities’ dispositions by stating, “[a]
n entity might instantiate the capacity or disposition to φ even if it never φs. For 
activities it does not make sense to say that an entity engages in an activity without 
the activity actually occurring. If something is engaged in an activity φ, it is actually 
φ-ing” (p.76). Fifthly, activities are irreducible to entities but are ontologically on a 
par with entities.
The above is a brief introduction to New Mechanism and the two mainstream 
metaphysical theories of mechanisms. In the next section, I will discuss a significant 
challenge faced by these two theories, namely, the bottoming-out problem.
3 Bottoming-out problem
New mechanists argue that there exists a hierarchy or hierarchical organization of 
mechanisms. That is, mechanisms at a particular level of hierarchy depend on several 
mechanisms at lower levels, and the causal power manifested at a certain level can 
be reduced to the causal power at lower levels. Glennan ( 2017), for example, holds 
that “the productive capacities of wholes derive from the productive capacities of 
parts,” and “[t]he causal powers of systems arise from the organized causal powers 
of their components” (pp. 184). This concept can be illustrated through the following 
example provided by Glennan:
“When Franz speaks to Sisi, the utterance is composed of words, the words of 
phonemes, and so on down to the physical motions of the air produced by Franz’s 
vocal tract, which, in turn, create vibrations within Sisi’s ear. Franz’s ability to com-
municate in this manner depends on various parts of his vocal system—his mouth, 
his teeth, his diaphragm, his vocal cords, etc.” (Ibid, pp. 184–185).
In this example, the event of Franz speaking to Sisi, or Franz causing Sisi to hear 
him, relies on the mechanism where Franz’s vocal system causes the surrounding air 
to move, subsequently leading to vibrations within Sisi’s ear. Moreover, the causal 
power of Franz’s vocal system further depends on the causal power of its components 
(e.g., mouth, teeth, diaphragm), and the causal powers of these components, in turn, 
depend on the causal power of their components at lower levels, and so on. Below 
(Fig. 1) is a demonstration of mechanistic levels where higher-level mechanisms 
reduce to lower ones.
The question then arises: when and how does this reduction process reach its end-
point, or when and how does the hierarchy bottom out? The engagement between 
the metaphysics of mechanisms and philosophy of physics becomes inevitable at 
this point when addressing the bottoming-out problem, because both monism and 
dualism need to explicate the ontology for fundamental reality to tackle this issue. 
In response, Glennan (2017) proposes the concept of “fundamental mechanism.” He 
says, “[l]et us call a mechanism (that is, a set of entities engaging in activities and 
interactions) that does not depend upon other mechanisms, a fundamental (or basic) 
1 3
Page 5 of 23 32


=== PAGE 6 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
mechanism” (p.185, italics original). Furthermore, he thinks what constitute funda -
mental mechanisms are going to be decided by physics. He writes, “[…] physical 
theory will, at any given time, have identified some set of entities and activities as the 
most fundamental known, and that such a set of entities and activities might turn out 
to constitute a genuine ontologically fundamental level” (p.187). According to him, 
entities within the fundamental mechanisms are going to possess the fundamental 
causal properties, and fundamental mechanisms will be the places where higher-level 
mechanisms bottom out.
Dualists offer a similar response. When addressing the question of where the 
causal power bottoms out, Krickel ( 2018) inclines to believe that “there is activity 
causation at the fundamental level but that we have to accept this as a brute fact about 
nature that is not grounded in anything more fundamental” (p.87). This leads her 
to hold a position similar to Glennan’s and to accept the existence of fundamental 
mechanisms. However, the fundamental mechanism here is understood within a dual-
ist framework, which means it consists of fundamental entities and activities.
The problem with Glennan and Krickel lies in their consideration of entities with 
intrinsic identity and properties as parts of their fundamental ontology. Several prom-
inent philosophers of physics have argued against the existence of such entities or 
objects at the fundamental level. In other words, they find an object-based ontol -
ogy of fundamental physics problematic, and this position is supported by meta -
physical implications found in major theories of modern physics, including quantum 
mechanics (QM), quantum field theory (QFT), and the general theory of relativity 
(GTR) (see Esfeld & Lam, 2011). One major criticism of the existence of fundamen-
tal physical objects is pointed out by French and Redhead ( 1988), who argue that 
an object-based ontology of quantum mechanics would lead to underdetermination 
regarding the individuality of quantum particles. The argument is later discussed in a 
series of works by French and Ladyman (e.g., French & Ladyman, 2003, and French 
Fig. 1 A schematic of mechanistic levels. (adapted from Povich & Craver, 2017, p. 187)
 
1 3
32 Page 6 of 23


=== PAGE 7 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
& Ladyman, 2011), which motivated them to develop Ontic Structural Realism (see 
more below).
Given that prominent metaphysical accounts of physics believe that no objects 
or entities exist at the fundamental level, object-based metaphysics of mechanism 
faces a serious challenge in explaining where higher-level mechanisms bottom out 5. 
This problem significantly undermines the object-based metaphysics of mechanism 
and motivates us to develop a metaphysical theory of mechanisms from the bot -
tom up, which must be informed by the metaphysics of physics. As indicated at the 
beginning of the paper, Ontic Structural Realism (OSR) is a metaphysical theory 
of physics that has received much sympathy from many philosophers of physics, 
with its advocate arguing that it offers an ontology “best befitting of modern phys -
ics” (McKenzie, 2017, p.1). In this paper, I will propose and flesh out a structural 
metaphysics of mechanisms based on OSR. However, before doing that, I would like 
to further strengthen the motivation for my account, firstly by responding to a push-
back from Glennan in his co-authored paper ( 2014), and then by demonstrating that 
the bottoming-out problem is not just a matter of philosophical concerns, but it also 
relates to scientific practices.
4 Strengthening the motivation
I shall strengthen the motivation for a structuralist account of mechanisms by consid-
ering how to respond to two questions.
4.1 Is there a ‘fundamental classical level’ where higher-level mechanisms 
bottom out?
Kuhlmann and Glennan (2014) defend mechanical explanation in light of the appar-
ent incompatibility between QM and the new mechanical philosophy by appealing 
to the phenomenon of decoherence. Specifically, a quantum system’s wave function 
is typically expressed as a linear combination of wave functions representing differ -
ent states, implying that the system is often in a superposition state, where it exists 
as a linear combination of different possible states. Interactions between different 
quantum systems can result in interference effects. The phenomenon of decoherence 
refers to the interaction of a quantum system with its macroscopic environment, lead-
ing to entanglement with the environment and causing the superposition and interfer-
ence to disappear locally. In other words, decoherence results in the quantum system 
losing some of its ‘quantumness’, exhibiting behaviors that is approximately classi -
cal and deterministic. Kuhlmann and Glennan argue that decoherence leads to the 
emergence of a so-called “fundamental classical level”, which consists of entities or 
objects behaving classically, that can be used to ground the mechanistic explanation 
of higher-level phenomena.
5  See Kuhlman & Glennan ( 2014) for a presentation of the incompatibility between QM and mechanist 
ontology, and also Kuhlman (2018) for a discussion on physics and mechanism.
1 3
Page 7 of 23 32


=== PAGE 8 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
Some might interpret their claim metaphysically and think that classical objects 
really exist, which undermines the motivation for the structuralist account of the 
mechanism that I am going to develop. However, it is important to note that the 
‘quantumness’ is not eliminated entirely in decoherence, and the resulting behavior 
can be described as classical only for practical purposes. Hence, it is worth emphasiz-
ing that decoherence says nothing about metaphysics; that is, it says nothing about 
what QM tells us exists in the world, and it is compatible with multiple interpreta -
tions of QM that give rise to different ontologies (See e.g., Maudlin, 2019).
Kuhlmann and Glennan explicitly admit this point in their paper (p.352) and 
emphasize that they are defending an epistemic claim about why we might legiti -
mately use mechanical explanations in the macroscopic world. While we might agree 
with their defense here, the metaphysical issues about mechanisms in the light of fun-
damental physics are still unsolved. As Cordovil (2023) nicely puts it, “even though 
decoherence can give an approximate explanation of why the ‘classic level’ seems 
to be different from the ‘quantum level,’ it does not solve the problem of how to 
bridge the two realms since, in the end, everything is part of QM’s domain” (p.186)6. 
Therefore, developing a metaphysical theory of mechanisms that is compatible with 
fundamental physics remains a pressing task.
4.2 Is the bottoming-out problem purely philosophical (instead of practical)?
A structuralist metaphysics of mechanism can be further motivated by considering 
scientific practice. Doing so can also address the worries that potentially come from 
new mechanists who focus on practical issues regarding scientific explanation. In 
fact, a considerable number of new mechanists, unlike Glennan and Krickel, do not 
aim to defend a ‘global’ metaphysics of mechanisms applicable to all levels includ -
ing the fundamental level of physics. Instead, they are only concerned with the local 
reduction of mechanisms in certain domains. For them, mechanisms bottom out at 
the levels that “are accepted as relatively fundamental or taken to be unproblematic 
for the purposes of a given scientist, research group, or field,” and “the description 
of lower-level mechanisms would be irrelevant to their interest” (Machamer et al., 
2000, p.13). Since fundamental physics is rarely involved in the discussions of mech-
anisms in sciences concerned with macroscopic phenomena, they would consider 
the incompatibility between the metaphysics of mechanisms and the metaphysics of 
physics to be an inadequately motivated problem.
However, it turns out that at least in certain research domains of special sciences, 
fundamental physics is indispensable for the explanation of phenomena. Hence, in 
these fields it is necessary for the metaphysics of mechanisms to be compatible with 
that of fundamental physics 7. Quantum biology is such an example, which utilizes 
6  Cordovil (2023) proposes a solution to this problem by treating classical objects as ontologically emer-
gent. He makes sense of the emergence by appealing to Santos (2015)’s relational ontology. I don’t have 
space here to evaluate his proposal, but just to note that Santos’s relational ontology, as I will discuss 
more below, is friendly to structuralism. Cordovil’s writing seems to also indicate this point.
7  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out that Kuhlman and Glennan do not maintain that 
decoherence provides a single fundamental classical level and think that classicality (and with it the 
possibility of classical mechanisms) emerges as a local/piecemeal matter. In this sense, Kuhlman and 
1 3
32 Page 8 of 23


=== PAGE 9 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
quantum theory to explain biological phenomena beyond the reach of classical phys-
ics. Quantum properties like superposition, coherence, and entanglement are increas-
ingly recognized as vital in understanding diverse biological processes, including 
photosynthesis, magnetoreception, olfaction, enzyme catalysis, respiration, and neu-
rotransmission (Marais et al., 2018).
Consider the case of light-harvesting in photosynthesis. Photosynthetic organisms 
convert sunlight into energy via antenna systems, absorbing photon energy as elec -
tronic excitation. This excitation energy travels to the reaction center, where it is 
converted to chemical energy through charge separation (Lambert et al., 2013). The 
energy transport mechanism used to be thought as a classical ‘hopping’ mechanisms 
through which the excitation energy randomly moved from one chlorophyll to the 
next neighboring chlorophyll step by step. However, as early as the 1930s, Franck 
and Teller (1938) proposed a quantum-coherent mechanism for the transmission of 
the excitation energy, characterized by wave-like properties that enable simultaneous 
propagation through multiple pathways. Initially met with skepticism, the quantum-
coherent model gained credibility when quantum ‘beats’ were observed in 2007 dur-
ing photosynthetic processes in distinct bacterial species (Engel et al., 2007; Lee et 
al., 2007). Subsequent studies by the Engel and Scholes groups confirmed signifi -
cant quantum-coherent energy transfer at physiological temperatures in bacteria and 
marine algae (Panitchayangkoon et al., 2010; Collini et al., 2010).
According to new mechanists, explaining photosynthesis requires us to break it 
down into several mechanisms at a lower level. One of these lower-level mechanisms 
is going to involve the movement of the excited electron from its original location 
to the reaction center. Since the travel of the exciton is a quantum phenomenon, the 
metaphysical picture behind it must be in alignment with the metaphysics of quantum 
mechanics. As noted above, structuralist accounts of quantum mechanics posit that 
there is no fundamental object possessing intrinsic properties and identity, which is 
in contradiction with object-based metaphysical theories. The failure of object-based 
metaphysics at this lower level would further impact its legitimacy in the upper level. 
New mechanists argue that higher-level mechanisms are reducible to lower-level 
mechanisms. However, if we consider that higher-level mechanisms are composed 
of entities understood by monists and dualists, then these higher-level mechanisms 
cannot be reduced to lower-level mechanisms that involve no such entities.
The above discussion about quantum biology shows that the bottoming-out prob-
lem is not merely a philosophical issue but is closely related to scientific practices, 
further challenging the object-based metaphysics of mechanisms. I argue that the 
best solution to the problem here is to develop a metaphysics of mechanisms that is 
physics-informed and applicable to the special sciences. In the following, I flesh out 
such an account based on OSR, starting with an introduction to OSR.
Glennan are on board with the idea that certain kinds of biological phenomena may be explicable by 
appealing to quantum mechanical effects. I believe that this strengthens the motivation to the introduction 
into the philosophy of biology arena of a philosophical stance adopted with respect to QM, namely, OSR.
1 3
Page 9 of 23 32


=== PAGE 10 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
5 Ontic structural realism
One of the motivations behind OSR is to address the metaphysical implications 
of modern physics (especially quantum physics). As briefly mentioned earlier, an 
object-based metaphysics faces fundamental underdetermination regarding the indi -
viduality of physical objects in quantum mechanics. 8 OSR overcomes this under -
determination by advocating an ontological shift from objects to structures, arguing 
that all that exist in the fundamental level are structures that are represented by math-
ematical equations of fundamental theories of physics (see Ladyman 1998; French & 
Ladyman, 2003, 2011; French, 2006, 2014, 2019; Ladyman & Ross, 2007). 9 It has 
also been argued that OSR is supported by various features of quantum mechanics, 
quantum field theory, and the general theory of relativity (Esfeld, 2004; Esfeld & 
Lam, 2008, 2012).
Ontic structural realists clarify the stance of OSR by comparing it to dispositional-
ism. According to the ‘standard’ form of dispositionalism (Vetter, 2014), what exist 
at the fundamental level of physics are physical objects with dispositions. Dispo -
sitions are intrinsically possessed by objects and are understood as properties that 
are associated with causal powers, e.g., the negative charge of an electron. Disposi -
tions necessarily manifest themselves when the corresponding stimuli are present. 
Dispositionalists hold that the causal or modal force ‘sit’ in dispositional properties 
possessed by objects, which ground the truth of counterfactual statements regard -
ing causation (Mumford, 1998; Hüttemann and Kaiser, 2013, 2018).10 Consider 
a scenario in which an electron is under the influence of an electromagnetic field. 
Dispositionalists would argue that there exists an electron as a physical object and 
it intrinsically possesses dispositional properties, e.g., its negative charge, and the 
acceleration of the electron is the manifestation state of the disposition when it is sub-
jected to an electromagnetic field (the stimulus condition). The modality is rooted in 
the disposition. Maxwell’s laws, which describe how electrons move in this scenario, 
arise from or depend in some way on this disposition. And it is the disposition that 
renders the following counterfactual statement true: if an electron were to fall under 
the influence of an electromagnetic field, it would experience an appropriate force 
and associated acceleration.
French (2014) argues that OSR can be derived by ‘reverse-engineering disposition-
alism’ (p.264). While dispositionalists argue that objects are ontologically primitive, 
and laws depend on the dispositions of these objects, structuralists propose that laws 
8  Simply put, there are two perspectives regarding the nature of these objects. One perspective considers 
them as individuals, each with well-defined identity conditions. The other perspective views them as 
non-individuals (see more on French & Krause, 2006). For the anti-realist, this poses a challenge to the 
realist because the realist cannot clarify the metaphysical status of the objects central to their ontology, 
given that both perspectives are equally valid.
9 According to French ( 2014), structures are what, in particular, are embodied in the relevant laws and 
symmetries, together with the concrete representations of the latter, in fundamental physics.
10  I am aware that there are many new developments in dispostionalism (e.g., Synthese topical collection 
on New Foundations of Dispositionalism, Mumford, 2009, Austin, 2017, Anjum & Mumford, 2018). I am 
referring to this form of dispositionalism here for the sake of illustrating OSR, following French ( 2014, 
p.239).
1 3
32 Page 10 of 23


=== PAGE 11 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
themselves, which should be understood as features of structures, are ontologically 
primitive. In this view, objects asymmetrically depend on these structures. Structur -
alists shift the bearer of modal power from objects to structures by considering the 
laws themselves to be inherently modal. In the above example, what exist primitively 
are Maxwell’s law or the structure(s) captured by Maxwell’s law that possess modal 
power, and the electron asymmetrically depends on the structure. And it is the struc-
tures themselves that ground the truth of the corresponding counterfactual (French, 
2014, Chap. 10).
In sum, there are two major differences between dispositionalism and OSR. 
Whereas the former takes physical objects to exist primitively, the latter believes 
structures are ontologically fundamental. Second, dispositionalists hold that modality 
resides in the dispositions of objects, but structuralists believe that the modal force is 
possessed by structures themselves.
Furthermore, objects in OSR are ‘reconceptualized’. A frequently discussed chal-
lenge to OSR is to say that it is inconceivable that there are relations but no relata 
(Ladyman, 2007/2023; Ladyman & Ross, 2007). However, this objection has no 
force against OSR because there are still relata according to OSR. What structural -
ists insist is that relata here should not be interpreted in an ontologically robust way. 
Instead, relata (objects) asymmetrically depend on relations (structures).
French (2010, 2014) distinguishes two forms of asymmetrical dependency: the 
first one states that the identity of objects depends on the relations of the structure, 
which then yields a form of contextual (as opposed to intrinsic) identity of entities. 
This supports a ‘thin’ notion of entities that can be understood to exist derivatively 
and depend on structures, holding that objects have identities that are given con -
textually by structures (Ladyman, 2007; Saunders, 2003). Another option is to say 
that ‘the very constitution (or essence)’ of objects is dependent on the relations of 
the structure. In this case, objects have no metaphysical status at all but only serve 
as merely ‘heuristic devices’ that allow us to “construct, articulate, or appropriately 
represent the relevant structure” (French, 2019, p.26). 11I will not take sides between 
these two views because each of them has its own strengths and weaknesses, and 
ultimately, whichever stance is more correct will not affect my argument in this paper. 
The minimal stance I adopt in this paper is to reject the ‘thick’ notion of objects, and 
I remain agnostic about how we ‘reconceptualize’ objects.
To recap, OSR argues that at the fundamental level of reality, what exists are inher-
ently modal structures, and there are no objects that possess intrinsic identity and 
properties. In the next section, I propose a structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms 
based on OSR.
11  It should be noted that eliminativist OSR still allows the usage of the concept of objects for pragmatic 
purposes, as French ( 2014) points out, “the elimination is with respect to our fundamental ontology—to 
suggest that tables, chairs, people, particles, whatever should be eliminated from that ontology is not to 
suggest that we may not speak of such things, or pragmatically negotiate our way around them, or what -
ever.” (p.166, note2).
1 3
Page 11 of 23 32


=== PAGE 12 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
6 Structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms
My structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms claims that the metaphysical underpin -
nings of mechanisms are structures. I argue that only structures exist primitively, and 
entities should be reconceptualized along the lines indicated above, that is, as either 
‘thin’ objects whose identities are contextually given by the relevant mechanisms 
or simply as heuristic devices that enable us to construct, articulate, or represent the 
relevant mechanisms.
Structuralists have clarified their position through a comparison with disposition-
alism, and a similar strategy can also be applied to clarify the stance of my structural 
metaphysics of mechanisms. Glennan argues that mechanisms describe the causal 
framework of the world. He (2017) states, “[a] statement of the form ‘Event c causes 
event’ will be true just in case there exists a mechanism by which c contributes to 
the production of e” (p. 156). Glennan’s monism adopts a theory of causation that 
is essentially a form of dispositionalism 12. He argues that the causal production in 
mechanisms should be best understood as “[i]nteractions occur in virtue of the causal 
powers of individual entities involved in the interactions” (p.188, my italics). When 
referring to causal power, he means ‘capacities or dispositions not yet manifested’ (p. 
32). This entails that he commits to a metaphysical picture in which what exists fun-
damentally are entities with intrinsic dispositions, and causation is the manifestation 
of these entities’ dispositions.
A structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms can be derived by inverting the onto -
logical order in Glennan’s view. Within a structuralist metaphysics of mechanisms, 
mechanistic statements pick up structures that are ontologically primitive.  Causal 
power should be shifted from objects to structures, which means that structures 
are inherently causal. Entities here are not ontologically primitive but secondary to 
structures.
An important question that needs to be addressed is how to understand the meta -
physical nature of the mechanistic structures. I believe that a good way to answer this 
question is to compare mechanistic structures with the notion of ‘activity’ proposed 
by dualism. Recall that dualism posits that activities are one of the basic units of the 
world in addition to entities. According to dualists, activities are, from a metaphysical 
point of view, inherently causal occurrents. Occurrents, as an ontological category in 
contrast to constituents, extend in time and have different temporal parts. We can find 
many similarities between the notions of activity and structure; in particular, both 
are active and dynamic relations (cf. Glennan, 2017, p. 51), which are inherently 
causal and act as the ‘seat’ of causal power. Thus, I argue that we can give activities 
a structuralist reading to accommodate mechanisms within structuralism by viewing 
activities as structures that are ontologically primary. In other words, I contend that 
mechanistic structures are activities understood in structuralist terms, which means 
that mechanistic structures are also inherently causal occurrents.
A further comparison with dualism will help clarify my position. In fact, a structur-
alist metaphysics can be derived from the dualist account by simply reinterpreting the 
12  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out that it is debatable whether Glennan adopts disposi-
tionalism, but this account is worth exploring here for the sake of illustrating my view.
1 3
32 Page 12 of 23


=== PAGE 13 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
ontological status of entities. Dualists support an ontologically thick notion of enti -
ties, considering them to possess intrinsic identity and properties and to exist primi -
tively. However, structuralists reject this thick notion of entities and views entities as 
merely ‘nodes’ of structures. As mentioned earlier, there are two different approaches 
to this re-conceptualization within OSR, in which entities are reinterpreted as either 
‘thin’ objects, whose identities are contextually determined by the relevant mecha -
nisms, or as ‘heuristic devices’ that enable us to construct, articulate, or represent the 
relevant mechanisms. As alluded above, I commit to the rejection of an ontologically 
thick notion of entities but do not hold a specific stance on how to reconceptualize 
entities, and my account is compatible with both approaches to reconceptualization. 
Accordingly, while dualists believe that entities and activities symmetrically depend 
on each other, structures are considered to be more fundamental within the structur -
alist metaphysics of mechanisms, and entities asymmetrically depend on structures.
Krickel (2018) characterizes mechanisms as Entity-involving Occurrents (EIOs). 
As a dualist, she argues that mechanisms are metaphysically composed of entities 
and activities, which should be understood as actualized occurrents. Importantly, 
she emphasizes that entities and activities (occurrents) have a strong relationship 
of interdependence in the sense that “there are no entities that […] are not engaged 
in at least one occurrent […] Similarly, occurrents do not exist free-floating without 
any entity that engages in them.” Put differently, she holds that “an entity necessarily 
participates in an occurrent, and occurrents necessarily involve at least one entity” (p. 
79). EIOs are therefore spatiotemporally extended. Consider a moving car. An EIO 
can be the car moving from t 1 to t 2. For Krickel, a car that does not engage in any 
activities cannot exist, which implies that we must always understand the existence 
of the car in temporal terms. Similarly, she thinks that no activities can occur without 
being dependent on entities, meaning that we must always understand activities in 
spatial terms.
Structuralists can accept this metaphysical picture with some adjustments, that is, 
by deflating the metaphysical status of entities and inflating the metaphysical status 
of activities. In a structuralist metaphysics, entities need to be understood as being 
asymmetrically dependent on the activities. In my view, Dualists have been mistaken 
in assuming that there are two kinds of existences, one as entities, and the other as 
activities– they want the ontological category of entities to account for the fact that 
activities are not free-floating and spatially extended, and the ontological category 
of activities to accounts for the fact that mechanisms are dynamic and “do things”, 
and are thus temporally extended (Machamer et al., 2000; see also Kaiser, 2017, 
p.123). However, a structuralist metaphysics can capture the spatiotemporal features 
of mechanisms by only committing to the existence of activities understood in struc-
turalist terms, which are spatiotemporally extended 13. Structuralists can accept that 
the activities (occurrents) always involve entities (thus are not free-floating), but only 
in the sense that entities are reconceptualized as merely conceptual or ontologically 
13  I have been using different labels here, including ‘mechanistic structures,’ ‘causal occurrents,’ and 
‘activities understood in structuralist terms.’ For me, they all refer to the same ‘thing,’ which might also be 
expressed as inherently causal/modal dynamical structures. Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pushing 
me to clarify this.
1 3
Page 13 of 23 32


=== PAGE 14 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
‘thin’. Hence, I believe the phrase “entity-involving Occurrents (eIO)”, where the 
lowercase ‘e’ highlights the rejection of the ‘thick’ notion of entities, best summarizes 
the metaphysical nature of mechanisms in my account.
However, since objects play foundational roles in the actual practices of biology 
and other special sciences, one might worry whether objects can be appropriately 
accommodated in my structuralist account. In response, I shall first emphasize that 
the main aim of this paper is to show that the recent ‘mechanism turn’ in the philoso-
phy of science discussion is compatible with OSR, and I take it to be a further task 
to provide a fully-fledged metaphysics of objects in the special sciences within the 
framework of OSR, which will have to be addressed in future work14. Nevertheless, I 
shall elaborate further in the following section on why the indispensability of objects 
in the special sciences does not constitute a reductio ad absurdum to OSR’s advocacy 
of the ontological shift away from objects. My discussion will consider the existing 
attempts by structuralists to accommodate objects in special sciences and suggest 
potential routes for further development.
7 Object in special sciences
Structuralists have already done a lot of work on how objects in the special sci -
ences should be metaphysically reinterpreted along the lines of OSR. Perhaps the 
most discussed approach is the one presented in the seminal book by Ladyman and 
Ross (2007, Chap. 4), where L&R make sense of the existence of such objects as 
viruses in terms of the account of real patterns inspired by Dennett’s work ( 1991) 
(See also Ladyman and Lorenzetti forthcoming; See Ladyman, 2017, 2007/2023 for 
summary). They argue that existence should be explicated in terms of real patterns or 
‘to be is to be a real pattern’. According to them, real patterns are ‘those that indis -
pensably figure in projectable generalizations that allow us to predict and explain the 
behavior of the world’ (Ladyman, 2017, p.157). For example, they suggest that ‘a 
wave on the beach is a real pattern to a surfer, or a lifeguard, because it is taken as the 
basis for prediction and explanation’ (Ladyman, 2023, p.49). Waves are ephemeral 
and fuzzy real patterns, and in general, real patterns are more or less definite and 
durable, such as viruses and similar putative objects in biology. L&R’s account can 
thus provide a metaphysic for objects described in mechanisms– they exist as local -
ized real patterns.
However, it should also be noted that L&R’s account of objects in special sciences 
is not the only option on the table. Wallace ( 2012, 2022, 2024) defends a different 
account of real patterns, interpreting them in a pragmatist way15. In addition, Steven 
French (2011, 2013, 2014, Chap. 12) has also attempted to extend OSR to biology, 
14  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for highlighting this point and suggesting potential ways to respond 
to the aforementioned worry.
15  Wallace’s discussion primarily focuses on physics. He argues that mathematized physical theories suc-
cessfully represent the reality of the objective world (thus, he supports a kind of structural realism). How-
ever, mathematized theories can be redescribed in terms of objects. Such redescriptions, or, in his own 
term, ‘predicate precification’ of a theory, are useful for our thinking and understanding. For him, objects 
do not correspond to anything in the underlying reality of the world.
1 3
32 Page 14 of 23


=== PAGE 15 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
where he (2016) argues for an eliminativism of biological objects. However, French 
(2014) does not deny the usefulness of the concept of objects and, therefore, does 
not object to their use in scientific practice and everyday life. For him, objects exist 
conceptually as heuristic devices.
Moreover, I argue that OSR can benefit from aligning more closely with the so-
called processual ontology, which has recently come to the fore through the discus -
sion of Dupré and others (e.g., Dupré & Nicholson 2018; Dupré, 2021). This account 
also argues against object ontology and advocates for a processual ontology accord -
ing to which all that exists are processes. Dupré & Nicholson (2018) defend their 
account by invoking several empirical motivations in biology, including ecological 
interdependence. They argue that the fact that biological entities, ranging from mol -
ecules to cells, organisms, and ecosystems, exist interdependently and interconnect -
edly motivates an ontological shift from discrete objects to dynamic processes in 
biology. Furthermore, they hold that ‘objects’ in general should be more appropri -
ately understood as ‘temporarily stable nexuses’ that can be abstracted from ‘the flux 
of dynamic biological processes’ (Dupré & O’Malley, 2007, p. 842). Reconciling 
OSR and processual ontology is a complex task that deserves more thorough treat -
ment, which will be deferred to future work. But the preliminary remark I can at least 
make is that these empirical motivations for the ontological shift away from objects, 
as listed in processual ontology, should certainly open up more room for a biology-
based OSR, with objects retained, at least heuristically, as the afore-mentioned stable 
nexuses. In any case, I hope what I have presented so far has indicated serval poten-
tial ways for accommodating objects in OSR.
8 Systems biology and mechanism 2.0
This section presents an additional benefit of the structuralist metaphysics of mech -
anisms, namely, that structuralism can be very naturally applied to some fields of 
biology, serving as the relevant metaphysical framework. The fields I am referring 
to are those discussed in the literature of the so-called mechanism 2.0, which calls 
for expanding the mechanistic explanation framework and extending the concept of 
mechanisms. Mechanism 2.0 mostly focuses on systems biology, where the mecha -
nisms involved are nonlinear, dynamic, and described quantitatively, with mathe -
matical models playing indispensable roles in explanation (Brigandt, 2013; Levy & 
Bechtel, 2013, 2016; Fang, 2021). This is in contrast to mechanism 1.0, which mostly 
concerns fields such as cell biology and molecular biology, where mechanisms are 
linear and non-dynamic. I will show in the following how structuralism is a perfect 
fit for the metaphysics of mechanism 2.0 in systems biology and deserves serious 
attention from philosophers interested in this topic16.
Levy and Bechtel (2016), in their seminal paper advancing mechanism 2.0, point 
out that there are many examples of mechanisms, especially from systems biology, 
16  Outside of mechanical explanation, I also think structuralism is a suitable ontology for dynamical expla-
nation (e.g., Meyer, 2020). Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for drawing my attention to the close link 
between structuralism and dynamical systems.
1 3
Page 15 of 23 32


=== PAGE 16 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
where the components involved are not discrete entities but change continuously and 
have no clear boundaries. They also comment on the dualist position developed in 
Kaiser and Krickel, stating that they find it unclear whether the notion of biological 
objects can be retained in the examples they have looked at. They have also sug -
gested ‘to view Mechanism 2.0 in the context of process ontology’ (p.14), though do 
not further elaborated on this point.
In light of this, Fang ( 2021) proposes a new concept of mechanism, arguing that 
mechanisms should be defined as “dynamic causal systems that involve various com-
ponents interacting, typically nonlinearly, with one another to produce a phenomenon 
of interest” (p.796). Fang raises serval examples of mechanisms describing causal 
structures with no clearly identified entities, which create a very sympathetic context 
for structuralism. One of such examples comes from neuroscience where scientists 
have identified a mechanism whose dynamic character are best captured with cer -
tain quantitative tools. Moreover, the relevant mechanisms can be decomposed into 
several sub-mechanisms where the components are not clearly identifiable entities 
but rather quantities representing things like ‘changes in blood flow’ and ‘changes 
in blood volume’. These are obviously not entities understood in the object-based 
metaphysics of mechanisms and may be more appropriately characterized as activi -
ties. Whereas an object-oriented metaphysics of mechanisms is inapplicable in this 
case, I argue that the metaphysics here can be well articulated through a structural -
ist account. Structuralism allows us to read ontology directly off the mathematical 
models, and hence according to which dynamic causal processes are metaphysically 
underpinned by structures, with entities being reconceptualized accordingly.
Let us look at another example in systems biology in more detail, which concerns 
active matter composed of cytoskeletal components, such as filaments and molecular 
motors. Active matter refers to a category of materials or systems made up of indi -
vidual constituents capable of converting energy into directed motion or mechanical 
work, resulting in emergent properties and dynamic behaviors at larger scales (Das 
et al., 2020). Filaments are thread-like structures made of proteins, serving as the 
primary building blocks of the cytoskeleton, a dynamic and adaptable cellular struc-
ture (Fletcher & Mullins, 2010). The molecular motor refers to a specialized protein 
molecule that moves along filaments (Schliwa & Woehlke, 2003). The interaction 
of a large number of molecular motors and filaments at high density leads to the 
self-assembly of complex and intricate configurations, giving rise to the emergence 
of new properties and collective behaviors at larger time and length scales 17. These 
configurations play essential roles in mechanisms related to cell motility, muscle con-
traction, and cell division, among others (Needleman & Dogic, 2017; Popkin, 2016; 
Das et al., 2020)18.
Biophysicists have developed quantitative theories aiming at modeling filament-
motor mixtures. One prominent theory is the active gel theory (Joanny et al., 2007; 
17  ‘Emergence’ is a complex notion in philosophy. There are different understandings of emergence, such 
as strong emergence, weak emergence, epistemic emergence, ontic emergence, etc. My discussion here 
leaves these possibilities open. What matters is that on all these accounts ‘emergent’ properties can only be 
ascribed to the whole system, not its constitunts.
18  See Sanchez et al. (2012) for a picture of an active filament-molecular motor network viewed on a large 
scale (p.431).
1 3
32 Page 16 of 23


=== PAGE 17 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
Jülicher et al., 2007; Joanny & Prost, 2009), where scientists employ a coarse-grained 
continuum model and treat the filament-motor mixture as a viscoelastic gel. It should 
be emphasized that the model does not focus on the microscopic molecular level, 
describing the dynamics of individual motors and filaments. Instead, it operates on 
larger time and length scales, modelling the emerging system as a whole and describ-
ing the system’s properties using macroscopic variables.
It is important to note that the subject of the model constructed by biophysicists 
does not conform to the traditional notions of entities as understood by monists and 
dualists. Consider any mechanism that involves the filament-motor mixture, for 
instance, in cell crawling. (Ananthakrishnan & Ehrlicher, 2007). An object-oriented 
metaphysics of mechanisms is going to face difficulties in elucidating the meta -
physics here. A mechanist can say there are activities going on here, but they would 
struggle to identify a stable object with clear boundaries. However, structuralism 
can accommodate this case by saying all that exists here is an active and temporally 
extended occurrent that is inherently causal, whose causal features are captured by 
the corresponding equations.
Some might still want to defend an object-oriented metaphysics here by arguing 
that we can find a way to decompose the system into discrete objects, namely, fila -
ments and motors, so what is really going on here metaphysically is a story of objects 
and their activities 19. Burnston ( 2021) has recently argued that we can decompose 
dynamic, complex systems with emergent behaviors and properties into discrete 
parts. But the price of doing so is that we must abandon an atomistic reading of parts 
that possess intrinsic properties, but instead, think that the properties of parts depend 
on the context in which they are embodied, and they acquire properties through inter-
action with other parts. In a similar vein, Santos ( 2015, 2020; 2023) has developed 
the so-called Dynamic Relational Ontology, according to which the identity and 
properties of an object in an integrated system depend on the relations it is involved 
in, and he also shows how his account is compatible with mechanistic explanation.
My responses to this objection are twofold. Firstly, we should note that the parts 
of a system and the dynamic system per se are on different levels. If ontic emergence 
happens in this case, then the dynamic system is something that is over and above 
the individual parts. In that case, the metaphysical underpinning of the system is best 
understood as causal occurrents. Mathematical equations, instead of the language of 
objects, are the means we use to describe them.
Nevertheless, since I am open about whether there exists ontic emergence in this 
paper, we should also consider the possibility that the thesis of ontic reductionism is 
true, in which case the higher-level system is metaphysically reducible and identical 
with its lower-level parts. I argue that even in that case, Santos’s ontology is more of 
a friend to structuralism than to object-oriented metaphysics. According to Santos’s 
ontology, objects do not possess intrinsic properties and identity; instead, he believes 
that objects’ properties and identity are contextually determined by relations. This 
is directly contradictory to what object-oriented metaphysics says. Although dual -
ists think objects symmetrically depend on activities, they still believe that objects 
possess intrinsic properties and identity! Santos’ understanding of objects is there -
19  Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pressing me to consider this objection.
1 3
Page 17 of 23 32


=== PAGE 18 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
fore closer to how structuralists understand objects. Though Santos (2015) explicitly 
claims that he does not ‘subscribe to ontological structural realism in either its elimi-
native or moderate versions’ (p.440, note 17), I think that this may be due to a mis -
reading of OSR, as the reasons he rejects OSR are that he thinks ‘no relatum exists 
without being related to something else, and no relation instantiates without relating 
some relata’ (Ibid). However, as alluded above, structuralists can well agree on this 
point in the sense that they are not denying there are relata, but just claiming that such 
relate are not constituted by ontologically thick objects. In any case, if Santos and his 
supporters are dissatisfied with the radicalness of eliminative versions of structural -
ism, the moderate structuralism (Esfeld & Lam, 2011), which argues that relata and 
relation symmetrically depend on each other, is something for them. But I think their 
notion of an object is also very close to the ‘thin’ notion of an object that is defended 
by Ladyman and others, which says there are still objects but whose properties and 
identity are given contextually by structural relations. Thus, I think that Santos’s 
position can potentially be accommodated within structuralism.
9 Conclusion
Due to the dominance of new mechanical philosophy within the discussions of spe -
cial sciences (especially life sciences), a successful defense of minimal metaphysics 
of mechanisms should significantly contribute to the shift towards minimal meta -
physics in the metaphysics of science debate. I provide such a defense in this paper 
by reconciling the metaphysics of mechanisms with OSR and proposing a structural-
ist account of mechanisms. In my account, the ontological commitments for mecha -
nisms are only confined to structures. It ‘contains no assumption that does not do any 
work in explaining scientific practice’ (Hüttemann, 2021, p.11), and should therefore 
be embraced by minimal metaphysicians.
In this paper, I highlight the tension between existing metaphysical accounts of 
mechanisms and leading metaphysical theories of physics by presenting the bottom-
ing-out problem. This problem motivates the development of a physics-informed 
metaphysics of mechanisms. I further strengthen the motivation by contesting claims 
regarding the existence of a fundamental classical level and showing that fundamental 
physics is indispensable in some fields of special sciences, such as quantum biology.
In light of this, I elaborate on a structuralist account of mechanisms by arguing that 
the metaphysical underpinnings of mechanism are structures that should be under -
stood as inherently causal occurrents. Entities asymmetrically depend on structures 
and should be reconceptualized accordingly. Additionally, I discuss the potential 
ways for my account to offer a metaphysics of entities or objects in mechanisms by 
referring to existing attempts of structuralists and suggesting a potential alignment 
between OSR and processual ontology. Finally, I demonstrate how my view can natu-
rally serve as the metaphysics for Mechanism 2.0 and be applied to systems biology.
However, the questions regarding which metaphysical view of objects structural -
ists should adopt and how OSR and processual philosophy can be reconciled in biol-
ogy still deserve further exploration. I hope this paper can serve as a starting point 
1 3
32 Page 18 of 23


=== PAGE 19 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
that paves the way for further research, ultimately leading to the development of a 
fully-fledged structuralist reading of biology.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to Wei Fang and Stefan Bernhardt-Radu for reading my paper and 
providing valuable feedback. Special thanks to Nanxin Wei for guiding me to the example of active matter 
discussed in the paper. I would like to thank the audiences at the following events where I presented the 
paper: The British Society for the Philosophy of Science 2023 Annual Conference, The 21st (Chinese) 
National Academic Conference of Philosophy of Science, The 2023 Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Philoso-
phy of Science Association, Workshop on The Philosophy of Biophysics at Bristol, Philosophy of Science 
Around the World 2023, University of Leeds Philosophy Post-Graduate Seminar, University of Leeds His-
tory and Philosophy of Science Work-in-Progress Seminar. Among the audience, I extend special thanks 
to Kal Kalewold, Phyllis Illari, Jonathon Hricko, Liyang Tan, Margarida Hermida, and Kenneth Aizawa 
for their helpful comments. I would also like to thank the two anonymous reviewers whose comments 
have significantly enhanced the quality of the paper. Finally, I would like to express profound gratitude 
to Juha Saatsi and Steven French, for their inspirations, discussions, and support throughout the multiple 
revisions of the paper. Without them, this paper would not have been possible. I received funds from the 
China Scholarship Council-University of Leeds Scholarship for PhD students.
Statements and Declarations
The research leading to these results received funding from the China Scholarship Council-University of 
Leeds Scholarship for PhD students. The authors have no other relevant financial or non-financial interests 
to disclose.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use 
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ananthakrishnan, R., & Ehrlicher, A. (2007). The forces behind cell movement. International Journal 
of Biological Sciences, 3(5), 303–317. https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.3.303PMID: 17589565; PMCID: 
PMC1893118.
Anjum, R. L., & Mumford, S. (2018). Dispositionalism: A dynamic theory of Causation. Everything flows: 
Towards a Processual Philosophy of Biology. Oxford University Press.
Austin, C. J. (2017). Evo-devo: A science of dispositions. European Journal for Philosophy of Science , 
7(2), 373–389.
Beni, M. D. (2016). Structural realist account of the self. Synthese, 193(12), 3727–3740.
Brigandt, I. (2013). Systems Biology and the integration of mechanistic explanation and Mathematical 
Explanation. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C, 44(4), 477–492.
Burnston, D. C. (2021). Getting over atomism: Functional decomposition in complex neural systems. Brit-
ish Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 72(3), 743–772.
Cartwright, N. (1994). Nature’ s Capacities and Their Measurement. Oxford University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1093/0198235070.001.0001.
Cartwright, N. (1999). The Dappled World: A study of the boundaries of Science . Cambridge University 
Press.
1 3
Page 19 of 23 32


=== PAGE 20 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
Collini, E., Wong, C. Y ., Wilk, K. E., Curmi, P. M. G., Brumer, P., & Scholes, G. D. (2010). Coherently 
wired light-harvesting in photosynthetic marine algae at ambient temperature. Nature, 463, 644–647. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08811.
Cordovil, J. L. (2023). Fundamental Physics and (New-)Mechanistic Ontologies. In João L. Cordovil, Gil 
Santos & Davide Vecchi (Eds.), New Mechanism Explanation, Emergence and Reduction. Springer. 
pp. 179–189.
Das, M., Christoph, F. S., & Michael, M. (2020). Introduction to active matter. Soft Matter , 16(31), 
7185–7190.
Dennett, D. (1991). Real patterns. The Journal of Philosophy, 88(1), 27–51.
Dupré, J., & Nicholson, D. (2018). A manifesto for a processual philosophy of biology. In D. J. Nicholson 
& J. Dupré (Eds.), Everything flows: Towards a processual philosophy of biology. Oxford University 
Press.
Dupré, J. (2021). The Metaphysics of Biology. Cambridge University Press.
Dupré, J., & O’Malley, M. A. (2007). Metagenomics and biological ontology. Studies in history and phi-
losophy of Science Part C: Studies in history and philosophy of. Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 
38(4), 834–846.
Engel, G. S., Calhoun, T. R., Read, E. L., Ahn, T. K., Mancal, T., Cheng, Y . C., Blankenship, R. E., & 
Fleming, G. R. (2007). Evidence for wavelike energy transfer through quantum coherence in photo-
synthetic systems. Nature, 446, 782–786. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05678.
Esfeld, M. (2004). Quantum entanglement and a metaphysics of relations. Studies in History and Philoso-
phy of Modern Physics, 35, 601–617.
Esfeld, M., & Lam, V . (2008). Moderate structural realism about space-time. Synthese, 160, 27–46.
Esfeld, M., & Lam, V . (2011). Ontic structural realism as a Metaphysics of objects. In A. Bokulich, & P. 
Bokulich (Eds.), Scientific structuralism (pp. 143–159). Springer Science + Business Media.
Fang, W. (2021). Toward mechanism 2.1: A dynamic Causal Approach. Philosophy of Science , 88(5), 
796–809.
Fletcher, D., & Mullins, R. (2010). Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton. Nature, 463, 485–492. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature08908.
Franck, J., & Teller, E. (1938). Migration and photochemical action of excitation energy in crystals. Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics, 6, 861–872. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1750182.
French, S. (2006). Structure as a weapon of the realist. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 106(2), 
167–185.
French, S. (2010). The interdependence of structure, objects, and dependence. Synthese, 175(S1), 89–109.
French, S. (2013). Eschewing Entities: Outlining a Biology Based Form of Structural Realism. In V . Kara-
kostas & D. Dieks (Eds.), EPSA11 Perspectives and Foundational Problems in Philosophy of Science 
(pp. 30). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-01306-030.
French, S. (2014). The structure of the World: Metaphysics and representation. Oxford University Press.
French, S. (2019). Defending eliminative structuralism and a whole lot more. Studies in History and Phi-
losophy of Science Part A, 74, 22–29.
French, S. (2016). Eliminating objects across the sciences. In Thomas, Pradeu, & A. Guay (Eds.), Individu-
als across the sciences. Oxford University Press.
French, S. (2022). ‘Andreas Hüttemann’s A Minimal Metaphysics for Scientific Practice’. BJPS Review of 
Books, 2022. www.thebsps.org/reviewofbooks/french-on-huttemann/.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2006). Identity in physics. Oxford University Press.
French, S., & Ladyman, J. (2003). Remodeling structural realism: Quantum physics and the metaphysics 
of structure. Synthese, 136(1), 31–56.
French, S., & Ladyman, J. (2011). In defense of ontic structural realism. In A. Bokulich, & P. Bokulich 
(Eds.), Scientific structuralism (pp. 25–42). Springer Science + Business Media.
French, S., & Redhead, M. (1988). Quantum physics and the identity of indiscernibles. British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science, 39(2), 233–246.
Glennan, S. (1996). Mechanisms and the nature of causation. Erkenntnis, 44(1), 49–71.
Glennan, S. (2010). Mechanisms, causes, and the layered model of the World. Philosophy and Phenom-
enological Research, 81(2), 362–381.
Glennan, S. (2011). Singular and general causal relations: A mechanist perspective. In P. McKay, F. Illari, 
Russo, & J. Williamson (Eds.), Causality in the sciences. Oxford University Press.
Glennan, S. (2017). The New Mechanical Philosophy. Oxford University Press.
Glennan, S., Illari, P., & Weber, E. (2022). Six theses on mechanisms and mechanistic science. Journal 
for General Philosophy of Science / Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie, 53(2), 143–161.
1 3
32 Page 20 of 23


=== PAGE 21 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
Hüttemann, A. (2021). ). A minimal metaphysics for scientific practice. Cambridge University Press.
Hüttemann, A., & Kaiser, M. I. (2018). Potentiality in Biology. In K. Engelhardt & M. Quante (Eds.), 
Handbook of Potentiality, 401–428.
Illari, P., & Williamson, J. (2013). In defence of activities. Journal for General Philosophy of Science / 
Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie, 44(1), 69–83.
Joanny, J. F., & Prost, J. (2009). Active gels as a description of the actin-myosin cytoskeleton. HFSP 
J.;3(2):94–104. doi: 10.2976/1.3054712. Epub 2009 Jan 6. PMID: 19794818; PMCID: PMC2707794.
Joanny, J. F., et al. (2007). Hydrodynamic theory for multi-component active polar gels. New Journal of 
Physics, 9, 422. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/9/11/422.
Jülicher, K., Kruse, J., Prost, J., & Joanny, J. F. (2007). Active behavior of the Cytoskeleton. Physics 
Reports, 449(1–3), 3–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2007.02.018.
Kaiser, M. I. (2017). The components and boundaries of mechanisms. In S. Glennan, & P. Illari (Eds.), The 
Routledge Handbook of mechanisms and Mechanical Philosophy. Routledge.
Kaiser, M. I., & Hüttemann, A. (2013). Disposition. In W. Dubitzky, O. Wolkenhauer, K.-H. Cho & H. 
Yokota (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Systems Biology, V ol. X, 594–597.
Kaiser, M. I., & Krickel, B. (2017). The Metaphysics of Constitutive mechanistic phenomena. British 
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 68(3).
Krickel, B. (2018). The Mechanical World: The metaphysical commitments of the new mechanistic 
Approach. Springer.
Kuhlmann, M., & Glennan, S. (2014). On the relation between Quantum Mechanical and neo-mechanistic 
ontologies and explanatory strategies. European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 4(3), 337–359.
Kuhlmann, M. Mechanisms in physics. S. Glennan, & P. Illari (Eds.), (Eds.), the Routledge Handbook of 
mechanisms and Mechanical Philosophy. Routledge.
Ladyman, J. (2007). James Ladyman: On the identity and diversity of objects in a structure. Aris-
totelian Society Supplementary Volume , 81(1), 23–43. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:
oso/9780199363209.003.0008.
Ladyman, J. (2017). An apology for naturalized metaphysics. In H. Matthew, Slater, & Z. Yudell (Eds.), 
Metaphysics and the philosophy of Science: New essays. Oxford University Press.
Ladyman, J., & Lorenzetti, L. (forthcoming) (Eds.). Effective ontic structural realism. British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science.
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics Naturalized. Oxford University Press.
Ladyman, J. (2007/2023). Structural realism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
phy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Lam, V ., & Esfeld, M. (2012). The Structural Metaphysics of Quantum Theory and General Relativity. 
Journal for General Philosophy of Science / Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie , 43(2), 
243–258.
Lambert, N., Chen, Y . N., Cheng, Y . C., et al. (2013). Quantum biology. Nature Physics, 9, 10–18. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nphys2474.
Lee, H., Cheng, Y . C., & Fleming, G. R. (2007). Coherence dynamics in photosynthesis: protein protection 
of excitonic coherence. Science, 316(5830), 1462–1465. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1142188 
PMID: 17556580.
Levy, A., & Bechtel, W. (2013). Abstraction and the Organization of mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 
80(2), 241–261.
Levy, A., & Bechtel, W. (2016). Towards mechanism 2.0: Expanding the scope of mechanistic explanation. 
PhilSci-Archive.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science , 
67(1), 1–25.
Marais, A., et al. (2018). The future of quantum biology. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface , 15, 
20180640. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2018.0640.
Maudlin, T. (2019). Philosophy of physics: Quantum Theory. Princeton University Press.
McKenzie, K. (2017). Ontic structural realism. Philosophy Compass, 12(4), e12399.
Meyer, R. (2020). Dynamical causes. Biology and Philosophy, 35(5), 1–21.
Mumford, S. (1998). Dispositions. Oxford University Press.
Mumford, S. (2009). Causal Powers and Capacities. In H. Beebee, C. Hitchcock & P. Menzies (Eds.), The 
Oxford Handbook of Causation.
Needleman, D., & Dogic, Z. (2017). Active matter at the interface between materials science and cell biol-
ogy. Nature Reviews Materials, 2, 17048. https://doi.org/10.1038/natrevmats.2017.48.
1 3
Page 21 of 23 32


=== PAGE 22 ===

Synthese _#####################_ (2024) 204:32
Panitchayangkoon, G., et al. (2010). Long-lived quantum coherence in photosynthetic complexes at physi-
ological temperature. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 107, 12766–12770. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005484107.
Popkin, G. (2016). The physics of life. Nature, 529, 16–18. https://doi.org/10.1038/529016a.
Povich, M., & Craver, C. F. (2017). Mechanistic levels, reduction, and Emergence. In S. Glennan, & P. M. 
Illari (Eds.), The Routledge Handbook of mechanisms and Mechanical Philosophy  (pp. 185–197). 
Routledge.
Sanchez, T., Chen, D., DeCamp, S., et al. (2012). Spontaneous motion in hierarchically assembled active 
matter. Nature, 491, 431–434. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11591.
Santos, G. (2015). Ontological emergence: How is that possible? Towards a New Relational Ontology. 
Foundations of Science, 20(4), 429–446.
Santos, G. (2020). Integrated-structure emergence and its mechanistic explanation. Synthese, 198(9), 
8687–8711.
Santos, G. (2023). Emergence, Downward Causation, and Interlevel Integrative Explanations. In João L. 
Cordovil, Gil Santos & Davide Vecchi (Eds.), New Mechanism Explanation, Emergence and Reduc-
tion. Springer. pp. 235–265.
Saunders, S. (2003). Physics and Leibniz’s principles. In K. Brading, & E. Castellani (Eds.), Symmetries in 
physics: Philosophical reflections (pp. 289–307). Cambridge University Press.
Schliwa, M., & Woehlke, G. (2003). Molecular motors. Nature, 422, 759–765. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature01601.
Vetter, B. (2014). Dispositions without conditionals. Mind, 123(489), 129–156.
Wallace, D. (2012). The Emergent Multiverse: Quantum Theory according to the Everett Interpretation . 
Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2022). Stating structural realism: Mathematics-first approaches to physics and metaphysics. 
Philosophical Perspectives, 36(1), 345–378.
Wallace, D. (2024). Real Patterns in Physics and Beyond. [Preprint] URL: https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/
id/eprint/23307 (accessed 2024-05-04).
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
1 3
32 Page 22 of 23
