=== PAGE 1 ===

Effective Ontic Structural Realism
James Ladyman∗ Lorenzo Lorenzetti†
Forthcoming in The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science ‡
Abstract
Three accounts of effective realism (ER) have been advanced in this
journal to solve three problems for scientific realism: Fraser and Vickers
([forthcoming]) develop a version of ER about non-relativistic quantum me-
chanics that they argue is compatible with all the main realist versions
(‘interpretations’) of quantum mechanics avoiding the problem of underde-
termination among them; Williams ([2019]) and Fraser ([2020 b]) propose
ER about quantum field theory as a response to the problems facing realist
interpretations; Robertson and Wilson ([forthcoming]) propose ER to deal
with the dubious ontological status of the entities belonging to superseded
theories. This paper argues for the unification of these proposals based on
realism about modal structure and the idea of scale relativity of ontology
developed by ontic structural realists. This solves problems some or all the
accounts of ER face, especially that of making explicit in what way they are
realist. Furthermore, we respond to a recent critique that has been raised
against the ontic structural realist account of quantum mechanics that we
employ.
Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 The Effective Ontology of Quantum Mechanics 4
2.1 On Fraser and Vickers’ effective realism about quantum mechanics . 4
2.2 On Egg’s challenge to structural realist quantum mechanics . . . . . 10
3 Effective Realism and Quantum Field Theories 13
∗Department of Philosophy, University of Bristol. Email: james.ladyman@bristol.ac.uk
†Department of Philosophy, University of Bristol. Email: lorenzo.lorenzetti@bristol.ac.uk
‡This is the accepted author manuscript (AAM).
1


=== PAGE 2 ===

4 The Effective Ontology of Old Theories 16
5 Conclusion 19
1 Introduction
Effective realism (ER) is a form of scientific realism about effective theories, which
have a limited range and domain of applicability. An effective ontology is the on-
tology of an effective theory. Three accounts of ER have been advanced to solve
problems for scientific realism raised in recent literature: Egg ([2021]) and Fraser
and Vickers ([forthcoming]) develop a version of ER about non-relativistic quan-
tum mechanics that they argue is compatible with all the main different versions
(‘interpretations’) of quantum mechanics avoiding the problem of underdetermi-
nation among them; Williams ([2019]) and Fraser ([2020 b]) propose ER about
quantum field theory as a response to the problems facing realist interpretations;
and Robertson and Wilson ([forthcoming]) propose ER to deal with the dubious
ontological status of the entities belonging to superseded theories, defending the
possibility of retaining in our ontology ‘theoretical relicts’, that is the ontological
posits of old and superseded scientific theories, via an effective ontology account.
This paper connects effective realism to ontic structural realism (OSR) because
some of the key features of the latter seem to have been forgotten in the most
recent literature, and in particular OSR can unify the above forms of ER – and
their different kinds of effective ontologies – with the theses of realism about modal
structure and the scale relativity of ontology. Indeed, although it goes unremarked
in the literature on ER, the idea of effective ontology is explicitly invoked by
Ladyman and Ross, and their collaborators, in their programme to provide a
unified realism that addresses both quantum physics, and the problem of theory
change and theoretical relicts for scientific realism. Their OSR involves realism
about modal structure, combined with the theses of scale-relativity and the theory
of real patterns (Ladyman and Ross [2007], Ladyman [2011], [2015], [2017], [2018],
Berenstain and Ladyman [2012]). 1 OSR treats the entities of superseded theories
and the entities of the special sciences, which are often the same things, as part
1An important terminological point should be noted. The combination of scale relativity of
ontology and the theory of real patterns, developed in the context of realism about modal struc-
ture and the rejection of self-subsistent individuals, is called by Ladyman and Ross ‘Rainforest
Realism’ and is applied to the ontology of special sciences. The term ‘Ontic Structural Realism’
is sometimes taken as a view restricted to realism about modal structure within fundamental
physics, and also understood in other ways (see Ladyman [2020]). Here, by ‘OSR’ we denote
the general framework proposed by Ladyman and Ross ([2007]), and Ladyman ([2017]) which
comprises a core commitment to modal structures both within physics and special sciences, and
we understand Rainforest Realism as part of the OSR programme. Ladyman’s and Ross’s ER
about the special sciences contrasts with French’s eliminativist form of OSR (cf. French [2014]).
2


=== PAGE 3 ===

of effective ontology vindicated by the theory of real patterns. 2 Taking effective
entities as scale-relative real patterns in the modal structure of the world is clearly
a realist position, and OSR thus provides a metaphysics for ER and clarifies it.
Some but not all of the authors discussed in what follows already make commit-
ment to modal structure explicit, and doing so addresses problems that otherwise
face their accounts, especially that of making clear in what way they are realist.
Furthermore, some but not all of the authors discussed in what follows make a
commitment to the scale relativity of ontology explicit, and doing so addresses
problems that otherwise face their accounts, and in particular, it provides the ba-
sis for a reply to Saatsi’s ([2022]) criticism of ER. To be more specific: (i) realism
about modal structure can be linked to Fraser and Vickers’ scientific realist ac-
count of quantum mechanics and to the debate on realism within quantum field
theories; (ii) the scale-relativity of ontology is explicit in ER applied to quantum
field theories, and implicitly assumed by Robertson and Wilson in their account of
theoretical relicts in terms of ER, and it can also be shown to solve the problem of
the ontology of quantum mechanics raised by Saatsi; finally (iii) the notion of real
patterns can be linked to all the debates addressed here. Connecting OSR with
these debates is a very natural and profitable move that fills a gap in the discussion
in the recent literature. Furthermore, in relation to the debate on the ontology
of quantum mechanics as discussed by Fraser and Vickers, we respond to Egg’s
([2019]) challenge that structural realism cannot provide an adequate ontology and
a realist account of quantum mechanics. Overall, by linking the complex litera-
ture on OSR with the emerging literature on ER, this paper shows that structural
realism should not be neglected in this context, and provides a starting point for
further lines of research.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 focuses on ER as applied
to quantum mechanics. In particular, Section 2.1 shows how OSR can underpin
this form of ER, also responding to Saasti’s challenge. Section 2.2 then specifically
addresses an objection by Egg ([2019]) to the account we defend about quantum
mechanics. Section 3 focuses on ER about quantum field theories and shows how
consideration of OSR advances the debate. Section 4 shows how accounting for
the ontology of a superseded theory by regarding it as effective is improved by
reframing ER in terms of OSR.
2By ‘special sciences’ we include also quantum mechanics as discussed by the mentioned
authors since it is not the most fundamental physics. Indeed, arguably every theory in physics
is currently effective since none of them apply in every domain (with the possible exception of
thermodynamics).
3


=== PAGE 4 ===

2 The Effective Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
2.1 On Fraser and Vickers’ effective realism about quantum
mechanics
Quantum mechanics is a challenge for scientific realism.3 Several different versions
of quantum mechanics have been proposed to solve the notorious measurement
problem, and they share the same empirical consequences at least in respect of
the current experimental evidence. 4 The standard realist options are dynamical
collapse theories, Bohmian mechanics and Everettian quantum mechanics. These
versions of quantum mechanics say very different things about how the world is.
Hence the issue of underdetermination. One option for the realist advocated by
Callender ([2020]) among others is to appeal to extra-empirical features in favour
of a particular version.
On the other hand, philosophers such as Egg ([2021]) and Fraser and Vick-
ers ([forthcoming]) have recently advanced another strategy. According to this
approach, we should be realists only about specific aspects of quantum mechan-
ics. More precisely, we should treat quantum mechanics as an effective theory
that is correct only about particular regimes and domains, for which it provides
an effective ontology. They do not take quantum mechanics to tell us about the
fundamental nature of the world, but just about certain non-fundamental features.
Egg ([2021]) argues that we can explicate this form of ER by appealing to
so-called ‘textbook quantum mechanics’, that is, the kind of quantum theory we
find in textbooks, which is neutral with respect to the realist versions of quantum
mechanics mentioned above. However, Fraser and Vickers ([forthcoming]) convinc-
ingly argue that it is vague what should count as textbook quantum mechanics,
and that appealing to this kind of ‘theory’ would eventually lead us to adopt a
specific interpretation of quantum theory, as “the measurement problem arguably
shows that attempts to precisify what is meant by textbook quantum mechanics
turn out to be either inconsistent or incoherent” (Fraser and Vickers [forthcoming],
p. 14). 5
Fraser and Vickers point out that different versions of quantum mechanics,
despite being different in many respects, share certain commitments, and they
3See for instance the debate between Hoefer ([2020]) and Callender ([2020]), and the essays
in Saatsi and French ([2020]).
4Collapse models make different predictions in principle to standard quantum mechanics,
but standard formulations of Bohm theory agree with it completely. Note though that any claim
of empirical equivalence is restricted to the domain of the theory which is much more limited
than that of quantum physics in general, hence Wallace ([unpublished b]) argues that there is no
real underdetermination. The present paper accepts the underdetermination for the purposes of
engaging with the literature that presupposes it.
5Also Callender ([2020]) criticises the appeal to textbook quantum mechanics.
4


=== PAGE 5 ===

argue that scientific realists should restrict their realist commitments to those
common aspects. One of their key claims is that there is: 6
a powerful sense in which we can associate non-trivial physical content
with the wave function without committing ourselves to a particular
interpretation. [...] we can take the decoherent branches of the wave
function to represent ‘possible’ outcomes for quantum observables on
all three interpretations. [...] Our suggestion then is that we can under-
stand statements about the wave function as encoding claims about the
physically possible states and evolutions of a quantum system while re-
maining open to different, more precise, analyses of the nature of these
‘possibilities’ provided by particular ontic interpretations. (Fraser and
Vickers [forthcoming], pp. 20-21)
This is the kind of commitment they recommend if we want to be realists
about quantum mechanics without endorsing a specific version. In this way, one
can be neutral about claims on which different versions disagree, and yet assign
some physical meaning to claims made in terms of the wave function. Another
commitment shared by all versions that we should therefore similarly endorse stems
from the theory of quantum decoherence and from the fact that for each observer,
thanks to decoherence, it is an objective fact which branch is effectively selected.
That is, decoherence brings about an effective collapse of the wave function, and
this mechanism is shared by all versions of quantum mechanics, and we can thus
be realists about this as well. Fraser and Vickers argue that, by focusing on
the common commitments that are shared by all the main versions of quantum
mechanics, we can arrive at a set of statements about which we can be realists, so
building a form of ER about quantum mechanics.
However, the metaphysics of this view is not specified. Indeed, Fraser and Vick-
ers consider (Section 3.4) the objection that to assign genuine physical meaning to
those statements we need to provide a metaphysics, and grant that their account
does not do this. As they point out, Egg ([2021]) puts forward an ontology. In
particular, Egg proposes a functionalist ontology for ER:
Questions about the ontology of effective theories must be answered
in functional terms. They cannot be answered by any reference to the
nature of their theoretical posits, insofar as that would require knowl-
edge about how these posits emerge from a fundamental theory, which
is just what the effective theory does not provide. Instead, the posits
of an effective theory are characterized by what they do (effectively),
rather than by what they are (fundamentally). (Egg [2021], p. 7)
6On this point they closely follow Rosaler ([2016]).
5


=== PAGE 6 ===

For instance, the spin quantity performs some explanatory work in quantum
mechanics taken as an effective theory, and all quantum theories agree on the key
behaviour of spin systems. That is, they all agree to say that quantum systems
instantiate spin properties that perform certain roles. The realist should therefore
be committed to those features, without having to step into the debate concerning
which quantum theory is the right one, i.e. we should simply be realists about
spin as that property of systems that play the thus-and-so role as required by all
versions of quantum mechanics.7 In this sense, we should treat quantum mechanics
as an effective theory providing an effective ontology.
However, some issues can be raised concerning this proposal. First, remember
that we are trying to define an account which can provide a metaphysical under-
pinning for Fraser and Vickers’ effective realism. Even though Egg’s proposal is
prima facie supposed to provide such an account – via functionalism – it is very
difficult to see in practice how we could use this framework to supply Fraser and
Vickers’ realism with an adequate ontology. Recall the quote we mentioned above,
where they argue that scientific realists should be committed to physically possible
states as described by wavefunctions. The question is how can a functionalist ac-
count of the kind sketched by Egg provide an ontology for such claims. Secondly,
as stressed by Fraser and Vickers ([forthcoming]) too, Saatsi ([2022]) has recently
raised an important objection to Egg’s account of effective ontology. Saatsi argues
that, on a general level, Egg’s ontological account is too permissive and can po-
tentially allow for the reification of inconsistent entities, thereby undermining the
proposal.8 Saatsi takes for instance Newtonian gravitation as a counterexample to
Egg’s form of effective realism. He claims that, given that Newtonian gravitational
forces play a role in Newtonian gravitation, and this can be considered an effective
theory which is correct in a certain regime, an effective realist like Egg should be
committed to gravitational forces. However, Saatsi continues, General Relativ-
ity tells us that gravity is not a force and being realists about both Newtonian
gravitational forces and general relativistic gravitation would lead us to accept
inconsistent ontological elements in our theory. Because of this general problem
with Egg’s account, Fraser and Vickers ([forthcoming]) discard that account as
unsuitable to provide an adequate ontology for their view.
Hence, although Fraser and Vicker’s recent proposal for an effective scientific
realist account of quantum mechanics looks promising, it lacks a clear account of
the metaphysical consequences of this form of realism, given the failure of Egg’s
proposal of an effective ontology for effective realism. However, given that the topic
is scientific realism, the need for a clear account concerning ontology is arguably
7Here Egg appeals to textbook quantum mechanics to define the role of spin, and we have
stressed how referring to this allegedly neutral theory can be problematic. However, we set this
problem aside, since we are just interested here in describing his functionalist effective ontology.
8See also (Ruetsche [2018]) on a related critique to effective ontologies.
6


=== PAGE 7 ===

very pressing. Without a metaphysics, it is not clear that their account is really a
form of scientific realism, as opposed to a position along the lines of van Fraasen’s
constructive empiricism, according to which accepting a theory involves believing
in its empirical adequacy, as well as being pragmatically committed to its ontology
for the purposes of scientific practice, but does not require genuine ontological
commitment to unobservables.
Ontic structural realism provides a metaphysical picture that can supplement
Fraser and Vickers’ account. In particular, it is based on realism about modal
structure, which clarifies the ontology we should be committed to and links it with
a developed account of scientific realism that is highly coherent with the realism
endorsed by Fraser and Vickers. Indeed, as granted by Fraser and Vickers, their
account also lacks a clear metaphysical underpinning. Furthermore, and crucially,
OSR avoids the issues faced by Egg’s effective realist account, since it provides a
more refined account of effective ontology.
Structural realism, in its ontic form defended by Ladyman and Ross ([2007]), is
a scientific realist position that is committed to the existence of modal or nomolog-
ical structures in the world: “Ontic Structural Realism (OSR) is the view that the
world has an objective modal structure that is ontologically fundamental, in the
sense of not supervening on the intrinsic properties of a set of individuals.” (Lady-
man and Ross [2007], p. 130). 9 This picture fits particularly well with Fraser and
Vickers’ realist account. Consider Berenstain’s and Ladyman’s ([2012], p. 153)
claim that “If theoretical claims about electrons are to be taken literally as refer-
ring to unobservable entities bearing certain properties, then so too should claims
about laws, causes, and other modalities.”. In this case, Fraser and Vickers argue
that we should be committed to the claims shared by all the interpretations about
the possible branches quantum states can embed. If we further ask about the
metaphysical implications of such a scientifically realist commitment, embracing
structural realism is a natural strategy: those modal claims should commit us to
objective modal structures in the world that are represented by the mathematical
formalism of branching structures. OSR is an ideal option for an effective realist
and commitment to modal structure can be shared by all interpretations.
Notably, it fits within Everettian quantum mechanics: prima facie, one could
be puzzled by the claim that a theory like Everettian quantum mechanics, a the-
ory in which modality is usually interpreted epistemically, should be committed
to ontic modality, however, there is a sense in which also Everettian quantum
9It is important to stress that ‘fundamental’ does not mean here ‘belonging to the fundamen-
tal ontological level’. Ladyman and Ross ([2007], Sect. 1.6) make clear they are not committed
to the existence of a fundamental ontological level and take the ontology of physics as on a par
with the ontology of special sciences (see Ladyman [2017], p. 151). The modal structures to
which OSR is committed are instead fundamental in the sense of not being reducible to objects
and their properties
7


=== PAGE 8 ===

mechanics embeds non-epistemic modality. As Wallace ([2010], p. 62-70) puts it:
“Decoherence allows us to extract from the unitary dynamics a space of histories
(strings of projectors onto decoherence-preferred states) and to assign probabil-
ities to each history in a consistent way [...] Worlds are mutually dynamically
isolated structures instantiated within the quantum state, which are structurally
and dynamically ‘quasiclassical’.”. Thus, the quantum state embeds an objec-
tive structure of branches representing possible histories. 10 And, crucially for our
purposes, all interpretations agree on those possibilities.
There are several reasons to prefer structural realism over Egg’s proposal and
in general to adopt OSR in this context. First, OSR fits very naturally with the
modal claims at the centre of Fraser and Vickers’ approach to quantum mechanics
and provides a clearer metaphysics for effective realism than Egg’s functionalist
ontology. Second, adopting OSR makes sure that ER is genuinely realism. OSR
requires that scientific realists should be committed to modal features of the world
as they are described by the structure of theories and their scale-relative ontol-
ogy. In this way, structural realism is a more refined kind of scientific realism that
fits very nicely with Fraser and Vickers’ account. Third, Fraser and Vickers are
already implicitly committed to central tenets of OSR, as they are scientific real-
ists but quietist about fundamental ontology, and they are committed to realism
about objective modal claims: “Our suggestion then is that we can understand
statements about the wave function as encoding claims about the physically pos-
sible states and evolutions of a quantum system while remaining open to different,
more precise, analyses of the nature of these ‘possibilities’ provided by particular
ontic interpretations” (Fraser and Vickers [forthcoming], p. 20). Finally, the last
but crucial reason to adopt OSR in this context is that it provides an approach
to effective ontology for quantum mechanics that avoids the challenge raised by
Saatsi against Egg as argued below.
As discussed above, Fraser and Vickers discard Egg’s effective account on the
grounds that it falls prey to Saatsi’s objection and thus is not a good candidate to
be a general ontological framework for effective ontology. However, OSR provides
an account of effective ontology that can address and avoid the challenge in terms
of a scale-relative metaphysical picture based on the notion of real patterns. We
present each notion in turn.
We have seen how OSR is committed to the existence of objective modal struc-
tures in the world. This kind of general commitment is suitable to account for
the kind of modal claims endorsed by Fraser and Vickers, but it is hard to make
sense of the existence of objects like viruses or even the existence of forces if our
ontology is just spelt out in those terms. To make more precise the ontology of
OSR, Ladyman and Ross ([2007]) employ the notion of real patterns, which is
10See (Ladyman and Ross [2007], p. 180) on the same topic in more detail.
8


=== PAGE 9 ===

an inherently modal concept inspired by the work of Dennett ([1991]), and claim
that:11
To be is to be a real pattern, and a pattern is real iff: (i) it is projectible
under at least one physically possible perspective; and (ii) it encodes
information about at least one structure of events or entities S where
that encoding is more efficient, in information-theoretic terms, than the
bit-map encoding of S, and where for at least one of the physically pos-
sible perspectives under which the pattern is projectible, there exists
an aspect of S that cannot be tracked unless the encoding is recovered
from the perspective in question. (Ladyman and Ross [2007], p. 226)
Thus entities earn their keep by being real patterns, and the real patterns
account explains how we can make things out of the modal structure posited by
OSR. The real patterns ontology is then naturally combined within standard OSR
with a scale-relative view of ontology:
Scale relativity of ontology is the [...] hypothesis that claims about
what (really, mind-independently) exists should be relativized to (real,
mind-independent) scales at which nature is measurable. (Ladyman
and Ross [2007], p. 200)
According to this position, what exists should be indexed to the particular
domain that is considered, because there are scales at which theories and their
associated ontologies are not effective. In this sense, objects like mountains do not
exist at the quantum scale, but exist at the macroscopic scale. If entities exist
by virtue of being real patterns, and real patterns are carved out of specific scale-
relative and domain-relative structures, then existence is relativized to the scale
or domain considered. In this sense, the ontology of structural realism is clearly
always effective ontology. Consider now how this makes OSR immune to Saatsi’s
challenge. As applied to gravitation, this view entails that being realist about
Newtonian gravitational forces and about General Relativity’s gravitation does
11It should be stressed that the definition of real patterns quoted here is the one originally
provided by Ross ([2004]) and not the refined version developed by Ladyman and Ross ([2007]).
We employ this version here because it is simpler and fulfils our goals. The improved version
of the definition is: “To be is to be a real pattern; and a pattern x → y is real iff (i) it is
projectable; and (ii) it has a model that carries information about at least one pattern P in
an encoding that has logical depth less than the bit-map encoding of P, and where P is not
projectible by a physically possible device computing information about another real pattern of
lower logical depth than x → y.” (p. 233), where ‘logical depth’ is “a normalized quantitative
index of the execution time required to generate the model of the real pattern in question [by a
computer program] not itself computable as the output of a significantly more concise program”
(Ladyman and Ross [2007], p. 220).
9


=== PAGE 10 ===

not pose any threat of inconsistency. Newtonian gravity and General Relativity
describe reality at different scales and they have different ontological implications
at each scale. In this sense, the ontology of each theory does not rival the ontology
of the other, and including both kinds of gravitation in our general ontology does
not entail any inconsistency.
Summing up, OSR provides a suitable ontology for Fraser and Vickers’ effective
realism about quantum mechanics, making their account more precise and avoid-
ing the issues that undermine Egg’s account of effective ontology. More than this,
as we have argued, Fraser and Vickers’ own account can be deemed as a struc-
tural realist view, and thus we argue that the best current view about ER within
quantum mechanics is easily accommodated within the structural realist frame-
work. Overall, this improves the current debate on scientific realism concerning
quantum mechanics by bridging it with the literature on structural realism. 12
Having addressed this topic allows us also to address some of the more recent
objections that have been raised against the original structural realist account of
quantum mechanics. The next section reviews the critique by Egg ([2019]) and, in
light of the present discussion, defends structural realism from his objections.
2.2 On Egg’s challenge to structural realist quantum mechanics
We have shown how OSR is an ideal framework for an effective realist reading
of quantum mechanics, and accommodates recent such accounts. However, Egg
([2019]) has raised an extensive critique of the structural realist approach to quan-
tum mechanics. He argues that structural realism does not have the resources to
provide a realist-enough view of quantum mechanics, and cannot be regarded as
a viable position concerning the ontology of quantum mechanics. If Egg is correct
this would undermine the arguments of the previous section, as structural real-
ism would not be able to provide the required metaphysical underpinning for an
effective realist account of quantum theory. This section defends OSR from this
challenge.
The target of Egg’s critique is the structural realist view that we can provide
a realist account of quantum mechanics while remaining neutral concerning the
measurement problem and thus the choice between different versions of quantum
mechanics. This is basically the kind of strategy pursued by Egg ([2021]) himself
and by Fraser and Vickers ([forthcoming]), which we have defended in Section 2.1,
but his focus is on the specific way in which Ladyman and Ross ([2007]) implement
the approach. The core of his objection is that “the dissolution of the measurement
problem proposed by Ladyman and Ross undermines some specific commitments
12Note that the main goal of this section is to show how OSR can accommodate and improve
the ER approach to quantum mechanics developed by Fraser and Vickers, and of course it does
not provide an exhaustive structural realist picture of non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
10


=== PAGE 11 ===

that should be part of any position deserving to be called realism (even only a
partial one).” (Egg [2019], p. 62).
He begins by pointing out that Ladyman and Ross ([2007]) sympathize with
Bohr’s approach to quantum mechanics, but also believe that such a view is com-
patible with a form of scientific realism, and can be made explicit by structural
realism. In this way they propose to be realist about quantum mechanics with-
out being committed to any solution to the measurement problem. However, Egg
stresses that the notion of measurement is problematically vague, which is the
reason why the Bohrian interpretation of quantum mechanics is usually deemed as
not viable. He grants that in some situations it is clear that the notion of measure-
ment applies, but, he asks: “what about ambiguous cases, for example, a device
that displays a measurement outcome which is not (even indirectly) observed by
anyone?” (Egg [2019], p. 66). He then considers how this problem can be solved,
and highlights how Ladyman and Ross opt for a verificationist approach to the
issue, which considers
[...] any question about unobserved measurements as a pseudo-question:
Such events (by definition) do not make any difference to what we ob-
serve, hence we should not suppose that there are any matters of fact
concerning them. However, this is hard to square with realism, under-
stood as a stance that refuses to limit reality to what we can observe,
or worse still, to what we actually do observe. (Egg [2019], p. 66)
Having raised this issue, Egg concedes that OSR is not a standard form of sci-
entific realism, but a structuralist one, which is therefore committed to objective
modal structures. He thus admits that structuralists do not share the same onto-
logical commitments as standard scientific realists, and therefore that they could
respond that non-structural features of quantum mechanics are outside the scope
of realism. However, even granting this, he argues that a deeper issue lingers, i.e.
the structural realist approach conflicts with aspects of realism that even structural
realists like Ladyman and Ross endorse.
According to Egg, this stems from the anthropocentric reading of the notion
of measurement in approaches to quantum mechanics such as Bohr’s. Even if
structural realists are just minimally ontologically committed to objective modality
as represented in Bohr’s rule, there would be situations in which OSR would not
deliver a realist reading, but in which a realist reading seems uncontroversial, such
as situations in which measurement occurs but there are no observers to register
them. In Egg’s words:
In order to satisfy OSR’s demand, the regularities need to be invested
with modal force, which enables us to answer questions about counter-
factual situations. Among such questions are those about what would
11


=== PAGE 12 ===

have happened if we had not been around to observe the phenomena
in question, and an explanation would hardly be deemed satisfactory if
it postulated regularities that only obtain if some observer is present.
But this is precisely what the Born rule does, if it is interpreted as a
modally charged law but not supplemented by a non-anthropocentric
account of “measurement”. (Egg [2019], p. 66-7)
As a result, he claims OSR does not provide an adequate realist view of quan-
tum mechanics, and cannot satisfy the desiderata for one. If this is right, OSR
cannot be put on par with the accounts by Egg ([2021]) and Fraser and Vickers
([forthcoming]), and the proposal of the last section fails.
To respond to this objection, we argue that OSR can incorporate a kind of
verificationist stance to quantum measurements, while also avoiding the charge of
anthropocentrism. It can do this by adopting an account like the one defended in
the previous section. Indeed, structural realism is not committed to any specific
notion of measurement, and can instead be combined with an approach to quan-
tum mechanics like the one proposed by Fraser and Vickers, to build a structuralist
effective modal ontology based on that. In particular, concerning the specific chal-
lenge raised by Egg ([2019]), structural realism can adopt an approach based on
decoherence and the effective collapse of the wavefunction, and employ objective
modal structures and real patterns to build an adequate effective ontology. By ap-
pealing to decoherence, we avoid the need for an allegedly anthropocentric notion of
measurement in the first place, while sticking with a verificationist approach which
is also scientifically realist in a structuralist way. Summing up, Egg’s challenge is
based on the misguided opinion that an anthropocentric notion of measurement
is mandatory for the structural realist, but the account developed in Section 2.1
demonstrates that this is not the case.
Note that adopting this strategy is not in contrast with Ladyman’s and Ross’
(2007) version of OSR, or with their defence of Bohr’s approach, even though the
latter is sometimes associated with an anthropocentric account of measurement.
The structural realist view adopted here invokes decoherence, which Schlosshauer
and Camilleri ([unpublished], [2017]) use to vindicate and make sense of the
quantum-classical cut invoked by Bohr. So understood neither Bohr’s nor La-
dyman’s and Ross’ views are anthropocentric. 13
13Naturally, if one disagrees with the arguments by Schlosshauer and Camilleri, one is free to
take our response as incompatible with the Bohrian approach and as contrasting with it. Nothing
substantial about our response hinges on this.
12


=== PAGE 13 ===

3 Effective Realism and Quantum Field Theories
It is clear that quantum field theories and the Standard Model of particle physics
present specific problems for scientific realism (see Ruetsche [2011]). This section
considers ER in this context as proposed by Fraser ([2018], [2020 a], [2020b]) and
Williams ([2019]) to develop a scientific realist account in the context of theories
that are effective because there are intrinsic limits to their applications. We explain
how bringing OSR into this discussion helps, especially by making clear how these
views can qualify as realist, and by making explicit the notion of scale-relativity. 14
The effective nature of quantum field theories is stressed by Wallace ([unpub-
lished]) in his account of the emergence of particles in terms of quantum field
theory and the way that cut-offs are introduced to renormalize the calculations
of scattering amplitudes. 15 Perturbative quantum field theories and effective field
theories are incredibly successful empirical theories but they only apply at certain
energy scales. Fraser ([2020 b]) points out that while they clearly satisfy the em-
pirical criteria for scientific realism because they made some of the most accurate
predictions in history, as well as novel predictions, there is no agreed characterisa-
tion of their physical content. Furthermore, many perturbative calculations seem
ad hoc and renormalisation involves length-scale cut-offs that could be made dif-
ferently. However, renormalisation group methods can be used to show that the
results are independent of exactly how the cut-offs are made. Furthermore, the
behaviour and nature of entities in particle physics is independent of the details
of the structure of the physics at the length scales beyond current quantum field
theories.
In the context of quantum field theories, as before, effective ontology is the
ontology of an effective theory which has a limited range and domain of appli-
cability, and ER is the form of scientific realism which is just committed to the
entities and phenomena described by such theories. The ‘Effective Realism’ of
Williams and the ‘Renormalisation Group Realism’ of Fraser are effective realist
accounts which are intended as forms of selective realism. Selective realism is the
defence of realism on the basis of criteria for picking out, in advance, the parts of
the theories liable to be retained after otherwise radical theory change. However,
it is important that this form of ER does not involve require a complete inter-
pretation and ontology that is expected to survive theory change, just the claim
that the theory will remain effective in its domain after future theory change (see
below). This is surely so, although of course what is understood as the domain
of the theory may change to some or indeed a considerable extent. Interestingly,
in the case of perturbative quantum field theories it is built into the models that
14Ruetsche ([2011]) also criticises OSR but not in the form that we defend here. Dougherty
([forthcoming]) criticises other forms of ER and proposes his own involving scale-relative realism.
15See also (Wallace [2021]).
13


=== PAGE 14 ===

they only apply within certain scales.
However, at this point, an issue arises for these views, as Ruetsche ([2018],
[2020]) points out. That is, ER so characterised does not seem different to accept-
ing the empirical adequacy of the theories as well as pragmatic commitments to
their ontology.16 ER, as proposed by them, is vulnerable to the charge that it is
compatible with structuralist empiricism and other forms of antirealism, because
it does not amount to more than talking and reasoning as if entities are real for
the purposes of scientific practice in some domain. For it to qualify as a form of
realism we need to make clear the realist commitments of the account.
We argue that combining these views with OSR can dissolve the problem and
hence improve this form of ER. The explicit commitment to realism about modal
structure is the core component of OSR that makes it distinct from van Fraassen’s
structural empiricism and a scientific realist metaphysics. Furthermore, from the
perspective of the OSR of Ladyman and Ross, the kind of realism prompted by
quantum field theories and proposed by Fraser, Williams and Dougherty, is not
special to quantum field theories but rather is an example of the scale relativity of
ontology that they regard as ubiquitous and which is naturally embedded within
OSR’s ER.17
To see how OSR can improve ER about quantum field theories, let’s start
by looking more closely at how the charge pointed out above affects for instance
Williams’ account.18 The ER he develops departs from standard versions of scien-
tific realism. Instead of being committed to the whole theory of quantum fields at
all scales, we just focus on certain limited domains, and consider the theory in its
effective form. The realist is then allowed to use renormalisation group analysis
to pick out those elements of the theory that are invariant under renormalisation
groups flow, and to be committed to those. In particular, the renormalisation
group analysis shows that certain quantities have their values independently of
the exact choices made and so that they are ‘robust’. Williams uses Wimsatt’s
definition of robust here: “accessible (detectable, measurable, derivable, definable,
producible, or the like) in a variety of independent ways” (Wimsatt [2007] p. 95).
These quantities are preserved by renormalisation group coarse-graining transfor-
16Fraser ([2020b], p. 290) explicitly mentions OSR while saying that “There are certainly
frameworks on the table that the effective field theory realist might turn to in order to clarify
their position” but does not elaborate. This is a point in favour of the worth of the present
discussion.
17It should be noted again however that French, Ladyman and Ross do not understand struc-
tural realism as a form of selective realism, departing from the authors quoted above in this
respect. Nonetheless, the present account of ER can frame Williams, Fraser and Dougherty’s
accounts, since these accounts can be classified as forms of effective realism, regardless of their
relationship with the notion of selective realism. We thus stress that ER should be distinguished
from selective realism. For more on this topic see (Ladyman [2021]).
18Fraser ([2020b]) follows a very similar strategy.
14


=== PAGE 15 ===

mations and encode the long-distance structure of quantum field theory models.
As such, we should be ‘effectively’ committed to them.
Now, our point is that it is difficult to see how where exactly this account and
a non-realist position such as e.g. van Fraassen’s ([2006], [2008]) empiricist struc-
turalism differ, since antirealists including van Fraassen allow that those accepting
a theory can be pragmatically committed to the ontology of a theory, and that this
has a role in the application and development of the theory. Since Williams’ (and
Fraser’s) account are compatible with a view like this, it seems that his form of
ER is realist in letter but not in spirit. To obtain a genuinely realist position, this
approach to ER must be combined with some kind of realist metaphysics. This
is basically the same point raised earlier in Section 2 about Fraser and Vicker’s
account of quantum mechanics, and is granted by some of the authors working
on this debate as well, as mentioned. As such, just as in Section 2, we contend
that bringing OSR into the picture – and in particular a metaphysics of modal
structures and a scale-relative picture of ontology – can solve the problem.
As explained in Section 2, the present form of OSR involves scale relativity of
ontology in general. Thus, the status of effective field theories is not special at all
within this picture. Just as we can be realist about the modal structures that are
represented in non-relativistic quantum mechanics models as described in Fraser
and Vickers ([forthcoming]), we can be realist about the modal structures identified
by renormalisation group techniques in quantum field theories. In this sense, ER
applied to quantum field theories can easily become clearly a form of realism by
granting that the elements of the theory that are invariant under renormalisation
groups flow actually represent modal structures in the world, and those structures
are to what we are ontologically committed. Realism about modal structure thus
allows us to make ER about quantum field theories a genuine form of scientific re-
alism. This structuralist version of ER about quantum field theories vindicates the
general claim that ontology is scale-dependent and this accommodates the remark
often made by the authors working on quantum field theory that the structures
revealed by the renormalisation group techniques are essentially scale-dependent.
These structures fit the criteria for real patterns since they capture projectible
features of the world as discussed by Ladyman ([2015], p. 203-4): “The crite-
rion of ontological commitment is as follows: real patterns (genuine individuals)
must figure in projectable generalizations/causal laws that allow us to predict and
explain the behaviour of the world.”
Employing the OSR package of realism about modal structure, real patterns,
and scale-relativity of ontology, thus provides a metaphysics to go with the ER for
quantum field theories recently proposed.
15


=== PAGE 16 ===

4 The Effective Ontology of Old Theories
So far we have discussed the topic of effective ontology within the context of
quantum physics, and have shown how OSR moves both the debate about realism
about quantum mechanics, and the debate about realism about quantum field
theories and the Standard Model forward. This section focuses on a different
context in which effective realism has been discussed and argues that the same
structural realist approach to effective ontology is applicable to and advances this
debate as well.
The issue is the problematic ontological status of the entities of superseded
theories that were once held to be true. The scientific realist must say whether we
should keep them in our ontology given that they were once considered to be real,
and, if so, how they should be understood. Robertson and Wilson ([forthcoming])
have recently argued against the common view that the entities of superseded
theories (that they call ‘theoretical relicts’) should simply be eliminated, and pro-
vided an effective realist account of them. They argue that we can retain them,
provided that we can appropriately restrict the old theory to which they belong
to a domain in which it holds, and if we can show that those entities still play a
relevant explanatory role in currently accepted explanations. As they put it, these
effective and non-fundamental entities “earn their keep through playing a role in
our best explanations” (Robertson and Wilson [forthcoming], p. 22). They thus
consider those entities to be emergent, and on a par with the entities posited by
special sciences. One example is space (as opposed to spacetime), which can be
recovered and therefore considered as an entity of the same kind of higher-level
items like viruses or gasses. It should be highlighted that by pursuing this strategy
they are following OSR’s idea that “entities that are now regarded as emergent are
also often the entities of past theories” (Ladyman [2018], p. 102) (this statement
is quoted by Robertson and Wilson).
Crucially, they argue that their framework is better than Egg’s account con-
cerning effective ontology. Recall Saatsi’s objection that if we liberally include in
our ontology any entity that plays a role in some explanation then we can end
up with inconsistent ontological commitments, e.g. by being realists about both
Newtonian gravitational forces and General-relativity gravitation. Robertson and
Wilson’s account avoids the problem, as they stress, since the domain-restriction
step removes the inconsistency: the theories are made to agree as the old theory
is now restricted in a way that makes it true only in a limited domain. Therefore,
when we reify the entities of the restricted old theory they do not conflict with the
entities of the new theory, because they exist as effective and higher-level entities:
On this approach, Galilean spacetime (for example) is no longer un-
derstood as merely a useful fiction; we understand Galilean spacetime
16


=== PAGE 17 ===

as a description of spacetime structure at a ‘classical’ level of abstrac-
tion. Likewise, Newtonian gravity and general relativity characterize
different structural features of gravitation located at different levels of
abstraction. (Robertson and Wilson [forthcoming], p. 25)
OSR’s ER offers an equivalent ontological account of theoretical relicts and
Robertson and Wilson’s proposal can thus be easily embedded within the struc-
tural realist framework. Structural realism is motivated in part by the problem of
reconciling scientific realism with the history of changes in the ontology of science.
Furthermore, OSR implements structural realism with an ontological account of
higher-level entities and entities of superseded theories in terms of real patterns
that perfectly fits in the present context and naturally accommodates Robertson
and Wilson’s proposal. As pointed out, Robertson and Wilson explicitly refer to
OSR and Ladyman’s work, and making clear the full connection between their
account and OSR fills a gap in their discussion. We also argue that OSR improves
on their proposal by replacing reference to levels of abstraction with the notion of
scale relativity.
To see how OSR fits into the picture let us first consider the topic of theory
change, which is the starting point of the whole discussion about theoretical re-
licts. Briefly put, structural realism avoids the problem of theory change against
scientific realism by arguing that even in cases of radical ontological discontinuity
more than the empirical content of the abandoned theories is retained. For ex-
ample, the theory of phlogiston has been discarded by modern science, but that
theory did correctly capture the modal structure of the world by identifying that
the processes of ordinary combustion, calcination of metals and respiration are all
instances of the same kind of process, and there is a reciprocal kind of process
exemplified by the smelting of ore using charcoal. Thus, instead of claiming that
the phlogiston theory was completely wrong about reality, and concluding that
scientific realism is undermined by the falsification of the theory, we can say that
the theory was right about certain aspects of reality:
We can say that phlogiston theory identified a number of real patterns
in nature and that it correctly described aspects of the causal/nomological
structure of the world as expressed in the unification of reactions into
phlogistication and dephlogistication. (Ladyman [2011], p. 100)
Scientific realists should not simply be realists about the entities posited by
theories, but should be ontologically committed to the causal/nomological struc-
ture represented by theory – as explained in the previous sections – which is likely
to be retained within some domain or to some degree of accuracy even on rad-
ical theory change. In this sense, scientific realists should not be committed to
17


=== PAGE 18 ===

entities as ontological posits understood independently from the structure of the
theories.19 This leads us to the connection between OSR and effective realism
about theoretical relicts.
OSR delivers a metaphysical picture that accommodates in its ontology those
elements described by old theories that play a relevant explanatory role and can
be classified as modal structures or real patterns, thereby delivering an effective
ontology. This effective ontology is scale-relative, as illustrated in Section 2, and
this idea can serve instead of that of ‘levels of abstraction’ described by Roberson
and Wilson (more on this below), and is importantly tied with the explanatory
power of the entities at stake that we want to retain (another key feature in
Robertson and Wilson’s account) via the criteria for real patterns. Furthermore,
just like Robertson and Wilson’s framework, OSR provides a unified picture of old
theories’ entities and special sciences’ entities, in this case via the notion of real
patterns. Indeed, the real patterns ontology can account both for elements like
Newtonian forces and for entities like viruses, provided that the entities of special
sciences are projectible and explanatory useful. Moreover, OSR has the additional
advantage of placing its account of theoretical relicts within a clear and broader
strategy accounting for theory change as related to scientific realism and effective
realism, as in the example about phlogiston. Finally, OSR accommodates all the
features of Robertson and Wilson’s account and thus can account for Saatsi’s
challenge against effective ontologies too, as also independently argued in Section
2.1. We thus claim that Robertson and Wilson’s proposal is perfectly accounted
for by OSR and can be embedded within it.
But we also argue for the stronger thesis that OSR delivers an account of ef-
fective realism that satisfies all the desiderata of Robertson and Wilson’s account
while also improving it. The main point concerns the notion of levels of abstrac-
tion employed by Robertson and Wilson, for instance in the quote above. We
contend that such a notion can muddy the waters, and appealing to the concept
of scale relativity improves the view. Recall for instance their claim that “New-
tonian gravity and general relativity characterize different structural features of
gravitation located at different levels of abstraction.”. Employing the notion of
‘abstraction’ in this context is not the best way to explain the relationship be-
tween the theories. Rather, saying that Newtonian gravity and general relativity
describe reality at different energy scales is more appropriate. Mathematically,
the Poisson equation of Newtonian gravitation is the low-energy limit of General
relativity’s gravitation and Einstein constructed it to be so. In this sense, it is bet-
ter to think of Newtonian gravity as defined at a different energy scale to General
Relativity and to claim that each theory is correct about reality at that scale. If
we link this scale-relative approach to theories with the structural realist’s account
19See also (Ladyman [2020], Sect. 2) for more discussion of scientific realism and OSR.
18


=== PAGE 19 ===

of real patterns and scale-relative ontology presented in Section 2, we can claim
that Newtonian gravitational forces and General Relativity’s gravitation both ex-
ist at different scales. This is the way in which OSR can reformulate the kind of
emergent ontology proposed by Robertson and Wilson and embed it in a more
precise framework.
5 Conclusion
This paper shows how OSR provides a framework for effective realism that links
this form of scientific realism with a metaphysical picture, and readily addresses
three different topics recently linked to ER, showing how three accounts that
seemed to be disconnected from each other can be brought under the umbrella
of structural realism to provide a comprehensive account of effective ontologies
unifying three separate debates in the literature.
In particular, concerning quantum mechanics, OSR provides an ontological
view that neatly fits with effective realist readings of quantum theories such as
the one proposed by Fraser and Vickers, while avoiding challenges like Saatsi’s.
Moreover, Egg’s ([2019]) objection against structural realist quantum mechanics
can be rebutted. Concerning quantum field theories, OSR provides a realist meta-
physics and can account for the effective realist accounts developed in this area.
Concerning the ontology of old theories which were once regarded to be true,
OSR can readily account for Robertson and Wilson’s proposal and reformulate it
in structuralist terms. Using OSR’s view of modal structures, real patterns and
scale-relative ontology, structural realism can also improve the account and re-
place emergent entities and levels of abstraction with scale-relative real patterns.
Structural realism should thus be brought back into the debate to develop further
these fruitful lines of research.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the anonymous referees for their helpful comments on the paper.
Lorenzo Lorenzetti was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council
via the South, West and Wales Doctoral Training Partnership.
James Ladyman
Department of Philosophy
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom
james.ladyman@bristol.ac.uk
Lorenzo Lorenzetti
19


=== PAGE 20 ===

Department of Philosophy
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom
lorenzo.lorenzetti@bristol.ac.uk
References
Berenstain, N. and Ladyman, J. [2012]: Ontic structural realism and modality,
in E. Landry and D. Rickles, eds, ‘Structural Realism: Structure, Object, and
Causality’, Springer.
Callender, C. [2020]: Can we quarantine the quantum blight?, in S. French and
J. Saatsi, eds, ‘Scientific Realism and the Quantum’, Oxford University Press.
Dennett, D. C. [1991]: ‘Real patterns’, The journal of Philosophy 88(1), 27–51.
Dougherty, J. [forthcoming]: ‘Effective and selective realisms’, British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science .
Egg, M. [2019]: ‘Dissolving the measurement problem is not an option for the
realist’, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics 66, 62–68.
Egg, M. [2021]: ‘Quantum ontology without speculation’, European Journal for
Philosophy of Science 11(1), 1–26.
Fraassen, B. C. V. [2008]: Scientific Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective ,
Oxford, GB: Oxford University Press UK.
Fraser, J. D. [2018]: ‘Renormalization and the formulation of scientific realism’,
Philosophy of Science 85(5), 1164–1175.
Fraser, J. D. [2020a]: ‘The real problem with perturbative quantum field theory’,
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 71(2), 391–413.
Fraser, J. D. [2020b]: Toward a realist view of quantum field theory, in S. French
and J. Saatsi, eds, ‘Scientific Realism and the Quantum’, Oxford University
Press.
Fraser, J. D. and Vickers, P. [forthcoming]: ‘Knowledge of the quantum domain:
An overlap strategy’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science .
French, S. [2014]: The structure of the world: Metaphysics and representation ,
Oxford University Press, USA.
20


=== PAGE 21 ===

Hoefer, C. [2020]: Scientific realism without the quantum, in S. French and
J. Saatsi, eds, ‘Scientific Realism and the Quantum’, Oxford University Press.
Ladyman, J. [2011]: ‘Structural realism versus standard scientific realism: The
case of phlogiston and dephlogisticated air’, Synthese 180(2), 87–101.
Ladyman, J. [2015]: Are There Individuals in Physics, and If So, What Are They?,
in A. Guay and T. Pradeu, eds, ‘Individuals Across the Sciences’, Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Ladyman, J. [2017]: An apology for naturalized metaphysics, in M. Slater and
Z. Yudell, eds, ‘Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Science’, Oxford University
Press.
Ladyman, J. [2018]: ‘Scientific realism again’, Spontaneous Generations 9(1), 99–
107.
Ladyman, J. [2020]: Structural Realism, in E. N. Zalta, ed., ‘The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy’, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, available
at <plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2020/entries/structural-realism/>.
Ladyman, J. [2021]: Structure not Selection, in ‘Contemporary Scientific Realism:
The Challenge from the History of Science’, Oxford University Press.
Ladyman, J. and Ross, D. [2007]: Every Thing Must Go , Oxford University Press.
Robertson, K. and Wilson, A. [forthcoming]: ‘Theoretical relicts: Progress, reduc-
tion, and autonomy’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science .
Rosaler, J. [2016]: ‘Interpretation neutrality in the classical domain of quantum
theory’, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics 53, 54–72.
Ross, D. [2004]: Rainforest realism: A dennettian theory of existence, in D. Ross,
A. Brooks and D. Thompson, eds, ‘Dennett’s Philosophy: A Comprehensive
Assessment’, MIT Press, pp. 147–168.
Ruetsche, L. [2011]: Interpreting Quantum Theories: The Art of the Possible ,
Oxford University Press UK, Oxford, GB.
Ruetsche, L. [2018]: ‘Renormalization group realism: The ascent of pessimism’,
Philosophy of Science 85(5), 1176–1189.
Ruetsche, L. [2020]: Perturbing realism, in S. French and J. Saatsi, eds, ‘Scientific
Realism and the Quantum’, Oxford University Press.
21


=== PAGE 22 ===

Saatsi, J. [2022]: ‘(in)effective realism?’, European Journal for Philosophy of Sci-
ence 12(2), 1–16.
Saatsi, J. and French, S. [2020]: Scientific Realism and the Quantum , Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Schlosshauer, M. and Camilleri, K. [2017]: ‘Bohr and the problem of the quantum-
to-classical transition’, Niels Bohr and the philosophy of physics: Twenty-first-
century perspectives pp. 223–233.
Schlosshauer, M. and Camilleri, K. [unpublished]: The quantum-to-classical tran-
sition: Bohr’s doctrine of classical concepts, emergent classicality, and decoher-
ence, available at <arxiv.org/abs/0804.1609>.
van Fraassen, B. C. [2006]: ‘Structure: Its shadow and substance’, British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science 57(2), 275–307.
Wallace, D. [2010]: Decoherence and Ontology, in S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent
and D. Wallace, eds, ‘Many Worlds?’, Oxford University Press, pp. 53–72.
Wallace, D. [2021]: The quantum theory of fields, in E. Knox and A. Wilson, eds,
‘The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Physics’, Routledge, pp. 275–295.
Wallace, D. [unpublished a]: Emergence of particles from bosonic quantum field
theory, available at <arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0112149>.
Wallace, D. [unpublished b]: The sky is blue, and other reasons quan-
tum mechanics is not underdetermined by evidence, available at
<https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.00568>.
Williams, P. [2019]: ‘Scientific realism made effective’, British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 70(1), 209–237.
Wimsatt, W. C. [2007]: Re-engineering philosophy for limited beings: Piecewise
approximations to reality, Harvard University Press.
22
