--- Page 1 ---

et with 
Peiri.!P 
KEPCHER 


--- Page 3 ---

Living with Darwin 


--- Page 4 ---

PHILOSOPHY IN ACTION 
Small Books about Big Ideas 
WALTER SINNOTT-ARMSTRONG, 
SERIES EDITOR 
This new series publishes short, accessible, lively, and original 
books by prominent contemporary philosophers. Using the 
powerful tools of philosophical reasoning, the authors take 
on our most pressing and difficult questions—from the com- 
plex personal choices faced by ordinary individuals in their 
everyday lives to the major social controversies that define 
our time. They ultimately show the essential role that philo- 
sophy can play in making us think, and think again, about our 
most fundamental assumptions. 


--- Page 5 ---

LIVING WITH DARWIN 
Evolution, Design, and the Future of Faith 
PHILIP KITCHER 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


--- Page 6 ---

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further 
Oxford University’s objective of excellence 
in research, scholarship, and education. 
Oxford New York 
Auckland CapeTown DaresSalaam HongKong Karachi 
KualaLumpur Madrid Melbourne MexicoCity Nairobi 
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
With offices in 
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile CzechRepublic France Greece 
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 
Copyright © 2007 by Andrew Kitcher 
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016 
Wwww.oup.com 
First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 2009 
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Kitcher, Philip, 1947— 
Living with Darwin : evolution, design, and the future of faith / Philip Kitcher. 
p. cm. — (Philosophy in action) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-19-538434-5 (pbk.) 
1. Evolution (Biology) 2. Intelligent design (Teleology) 
3. Religion and science. I. Title. 
QH366.2.K58 2007 
576.8—dc22 
2006049819 
Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper 


--- Page 7 ---

For Steffi, and in 
memory of David 


--- Page 8 ---

ao re wt pray Aes a 
Pains esun Sys fom Mr ive 
- : ee ae = J Pe 4 
Oe a nich Eres ya ‘in ene 
oa sy lembelinit aay etd, Od : 
ce eel, Tas pe. ee oe ee 2 | — -. 
Sa Bee at aie cate 2 al) eo hy ee ea 2 
eee) wail fons! mie, «mierets,  _ 
<a, Ci GR PA a IA ain AE 
trary Togas a eases tes 
TAka Fig =O iq ‘=m 
LAs (®t len (ids, bag, Gs Pee |) ao) tre Luan 
_ = Che, ght © eco i. | 
Datudee Midagrewe: wt — pater 46f paee, a 
CP os f> (ee agad - 
7) ae « . 


--- Page 9 ---

ONE 
TWO 
THREE 
FOUR 
FIVE 
CONTENTS 
Preface ix 
Disinterring Darwin 1 
Goodbye to Genesis 25 
Oneulteci of Lites. 43 
At the Mercy of Chance? 
A Mess of Pottage 117 
Notes 167 
Index 187 
73 


--- Page 10 ---

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/livingwithdarwin0000kitc_n8y9 


--- Page 11 ---

PREFACE 
It began with an issue of TV Guide. In 1979, shortly after the 
birth of our elder son, Andrew, I was searching for some 
entertainment sufficiently undemanding to soothe two new 
parents, when my eye fell on a glossy inset, advertising a free 
book that would set its readers straight on the crucial question 
of “origins.” Intrigued, I filled out the attached form, and, in 
due course, received my own copy of a creationist classic, 
The Remarkable Birth of Planet Earth, whose author, Henry 
Morris, was then the head of the Institute for Creation 
Research. 
During the 1970s, I had become increasingly interested in 
philosophical aspects of the life sciences, and, by the time I 
read Morris’ slim volume, I had already studied a significant 
amount of evolutionary biology. To my chagrin, however, I 
discovered that there were objections to Darwinism to which 
I couldn’t immediately formulate a convincing answer. Worse 


--- Page 12 ---

x Preface 
still, I knew that many of my friends, with dimmer memories 
of high school or college science, would be even less well 
equipped to respond to creationist rhetoric. I imagined them, 
frustrated and tongue-tied, as they tried to convince their local 
school boards that evolution belonged in the curriculum, and 
belonged without any balance from “creation science.” I re- 
solved to write something that would help. 
About eighteen months later, at a lunch with two friends, 
Harry and Betty Stanton, who had begun a new publishing 
venture, Bradford Books, I found myself buoyed by their 
enthusiasm—and promised to write a book defending Darwin 
against the creationist challenge. With enormous help from 
Patricia Kitcher, coauthor of the book’s final chapter and 
virtually a coauthor of the whole, Abusing Science was quickly 
written and quickly published. It joined other defenses by Niles 
Eldredge, Douglas Futuyma, and Michael Ruse, and I like to think 
our combined efforts did something to provide the American 
public with a more adequate account of the credentials of evo- 
lutionary theory and the shortcomings of “creation science.” 
During the early 1980s, as there were periodic agitations 
by zealous creationists, I returned to the fray, engaging in 
public debates, either one-on-one or with allies (including, 
on a memorable occasion, the redoubtable Kenneth Miller). 
Gradually, however, the books, the articles, the debates, and, 
perhaps most importantly, a coordinated system of support 
for science teachers had an impact on evangelical creationism. 
By the late 1980s, it appeared that the movement had run out 
of steam. 
We had scotch’d the snake, not killed it. A decade later, there 
were rumblings of a new form of opposition to Darwin, “intel- 
ligent design theory.” At first, they seemed minor variations on 


--- Page 13 ---

Preface xi 
old themes, but, by the early years of the twenty-first century, 
it was plain that the new packaging had convinced a very large 
number of American citizens—including their president. 
Friends began to suggest, gently, that I might take up the cud- 
gels again. 
As I pondered their urgings, I began to realize that | wanted 
to write a rather different book from the one I had published in 
1982. Not only did I want to respond to the fallacious argu- 
ments of the spokesmen for intelligent design, but I also hoped 
to make clear the structure of the powerful case for Darwinian 
evolutionary theory, to formulate it in a way that people with 
no great training in science, history, or philosophy could appre- 
ciate. Beyond that, I also aimed to respond to the concerns of 
the thoughtful people who are beguiled by the advertisements 
for intelligent design, to expose just what it is that is threaten- 
ing about Darwinism, and to point to the deeper issues that 
underlie this recurrent conflict. So I have written in the con- 
viction that we shall not escape the cycle of controversy until 
it is completely clear what lies at the bottom ofit all. 
Over a quarter of a century, I have acquired many debts. To 
my great regret, I can no longer thank my friend and mentor, 
Stephen Jay Gould, tireless defender of Darwin, who extended 
his hospitality when I wrote Abusing Science, and who sup- 
ported, criticized, and encouraged many of my subsequent 
writings. From Steve, from Dick Lewontin, and from the late Ernst 
Mayr, I have learned much about evolution and about 
Darwinian ideas. While I was preparing to debate creationists 
in the 1980s, I received staunch support and instruction from Philip 
Riegle, Bob Schadewald, and especially Malcolm Kottler. For the 
work of Stanley Weinberg, founder of the Committees of 
Correspondence, and that of Eugenie Scott, director of the 


--- Page 14 ---

xii Preface 
National Center for Science Education, I, like so many others 
who have worked on behalf of the public understanding of 
evolutionary theory, can only express profound admiration 
and gratitude. 
After I wrote a draft of the present book, I circulated it 
among a significant number of friends, who, with amazing 
speed, provided me with detailed and informative comments 
that have greatly improved it. On evolutionary issues, I have 
been enlightened enormously by the insights and questions of 
Jerry Coyne, Dick Lewontin, and Bill Loomis. Marty Chalfie, 
Stuart Firestein, Darcy Kelley, and Bob Pollack have helped me 
with a wide range of biological questions. Dave Walker has 
aided me on matters of geology, while David Helfand and Erick 
Weinberg have given me the perspectives from astrophysics 
and physics. My fellow philosophers have been most generous 
with advice and suggestions. I am grateful to David Albert, 
John Dupré, Jim Lennox, Isaac Levi, Chris Peacocke, Joseph 
Raz, Alex Rosenberg, Elliott Sober, and Michael Weisberg. 
With respect to the religious issues, I have gained much 
from the comments of Stephen Grover, Martha Nussbaum, 
Allan Silver, and, especially, Wayne Proudfoot. Kent Green- 
awalt has shared with me his enormous expertise about con- 
stitutional issues and the relations between church and state. 
David Cohen, Stephanie Lewis, Clyde and Cynthia Rettig, 
Michael Rothschild, Jim Shapiro, and Jonathan Weiner have 
all helped me clarify my ideas and make them more accessible. 
That all these immensely talented and very busy people 
provided me with such a wealth of good advice says much 
about their generosity—and perhaps something about the 
seriousness with which many educated people take the task 
of informing a broader public. 


--- Page 15 ---

Preface xiii 
After the manuscript was accepted, Peter Ohlin, the 
philosophy editor for Oxford University Press, suggested that 
it might appear in a new series edited by Walter Sinnott- 
Armstrong. In consequence, the final version has benefited 
from Walter's extensive and constructive comments. I am 
grateful to him, and to Peter for his judicious advice and 
strong support. I would also like to thank Robert Miller 
and Latha Menon of Oxford University Press for some help- 
ful suggestions. I am also grateful to Paula Cooper for her 
thorough and sensitive editing of my prose. 
Three other readers who advised me deserve special thanks. 
As in 1981, Patricia Kitcher offered a fund of wise counsel and 
good suggestions. In Abusing Science, our sons, Andrew and 
Charles, figured only as illustrations of some basic genetics— 
although Andrew, then two, made an unforgettable point 
about academic overinvolvement one evening, when, a pile 
of scribbled pages before him, he announced that he would 
come to dinner once he had “finished his chapter.” Now a 
medical student, Andrew has given me the benefit ofa detailed 
biological knowledge far greater than my own. Charles, who, 
as he leaves law school, has published his own ideas about 
how courts should respond to curricular challenges, has given 
me equally valuable advice from a legal and social perspec- 
tive.' It has really been a family effort. 
A final memory. In the spring of 2001, I gave a lecture at 
Columbia on relations between science and religion. One of 
the most distinguished American philosophers of recent years, 
David Lewis, attended, and he and Steffi Lewis stayed for the 
dinner that followed. David and I talked that evening about a 
number of issues I raised in my lecture, topics to which we 
returned in several phone conversations in the succeeding 


--- Page 16 ---

xiv Preface 
months. But I never saw David again. His death, in September 
2001, deprived the philosophical world of a towering intellect. 
I lost a good friend, half of a wonderful couple, who have 
cheered, supported, and enlightened Pat and me for over 
30 years. This book is dedicated to David and Steffi in great 
admiration and appreciation. 


--- Page 17 ---

Living with Darwin 


--- Page 18 ---

The Sea of Faith 
Was once, too, at the full, and round earth’s shore 
Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furl'd. 
But now I only hear 
Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar, 
Retreating, to the breath 
Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear 
And naked shingles of the world. 
Ah, love, let us be true 
To one another! for the world, which seems 
To lie before us like a land of dreams, 
So various, so beautiful, so new, 
Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light, 
Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain; 
And we are here as on a darkling plain 
Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight, 
Where ignorant armies clash by night. 
Matthew Arnold, Dover Beach 
Philosophy alone can boast (and perhaps it is no more than the 
boast of philosophy) that her gentle hand is able to eradicate from 
the human mind the latent and deadly principle of fanaticism. 
Edward Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 


--- Page 19 ---

Chapter One 
DISINTERRING DARWIN 
In 1882, when Charles Darwin died, his family planned to 
bury him in the churchyard of the village of Down in Kent, 
where, in his retreat from the bustle of scientific debate, he 
had spent the last 40 years of his life. Their private plans were 
overridden by a public campaign, orchestrated by those who 
had championed Darwin’s ideas, and it was decided quickly 
that he should be interred in Westminster Abbey, among 
the other luminaries of British science. Whatever doubts they 
may have harbored, leading figures of the church declared 
their satisfaction that “properly understood,” the evolutionary 
ideas that had seemed so inflammatory in the 1860s, were 
perfectly compatible with Christian doctrine. Darwin’s own 
agnosticism, well concealed by his cautious attempts to avoid 
alienating potential readers—as well as to ensure that the reli- 
gious sensibilities ofhis wife Emma (née Wedgwood ) were not 
offended by his expression of his ideas—went unmentioned. 
Instead, the many tributes from the pulpit heralded him as 
an old-fashioned Deist, perhaps even as an interpreter of God’s 


--- Page 20 ---

2 Living with Darwin 
Book of Nature. As one of the eulogies put it, “This man, on 
whom years of bigotry and ignorance poured out their scorn, 
has been called a materialist. I do not see in all his writings one 
trace of materialism. I read in every line the healthy, noble, 
well-balanced wonder of a spirit profoundly reverent, kindled 
into deepest admiration for the works of God.” With words 
like these, Darwin was laid in his place of honor beneath the 
monument to Newton. It seemed as though the church had 
made its peace with him. 
Peace would not last, of course. Almost exactly a century 
after Darwin was acclaimedasa “spirit profoundly reverent,” his 
detractors petitioned in American courts to protect innocent 
schoolchildren from the corrosive influence of his theory. In 
many parts of the world, Scandinavia, Australia, Korea, the 
Netherlands, the years since 1882 have been punctuated by 
periodic attempts to disinter Darwin, to repudiate the soothing 
rhetoric that accompanied his burial, and to expose him as a 
ruthless enemy of right religion. Nowhere have these efforts 
been more strenuous than in the United States, where de- 
fenders of evangelical Christianity have campaigned in the 
1920s, in the 1970s and 1980s, and again today, to remove his ideas 
from science classrooms or to “balance” them with theories 
more friendly to faith. Current discussions renew many of the 
arguments that were traded in the Tennessee courtroom 
where, in the summer of 1925, John Scopes was arraigned for 
teaching the “monkey theory.” These arguments were joined with 
less flair in 1982, when Darwinism was again called to the bar 
in neighboring Arkansas. Through all these episodes, leaders of 
the anti-evolutionary movement have been consistently clear 
that Darwin has hada dreadful influence on subsequent culture. 


--- Page 21 ---

Disinterring Darwin 3 
“Evolution is the root of atheism, of communism, Nazism, 
behaviorism, racism, economic imperialism, militarism, liber- 
tinism, anarchism, and all manner of anti-Christian systems 
of belief and practice.” Initially, when the question “which 
nineteenth-century thinker has had the most damaging effect 
on twentieth-century thought and practice?” is posed, it seems 
that there are several good candidates—Nietzsche, perhaps, 
with his declaration of the death of God, or Marx, who 
famously characterized religion as the opium of the people. 
Evangelical Christians are perfectly sincere, however, when 
they answer that it is Darwin, chosen by the Anglican church 
to lie beneath the great, and, in his unorthodox way, devout 
Newton, who is the real culprit. 
From the perspective of almost the entire community 
of natural scientists world-wide, this continued resistance 
to Darwin is absurd. Biologists confidently proclaim that 
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection is as well 
established as any of the major theories in contemporary science, 
as the atomic chemistry that schoolchildren learn or the 
molecular genetics that is emerging from a great scientific 
revolution still in process. Perhaps with a modest amount of 
overstatement, they echo Theodosius Dobzhansky’s famous 
line, “Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of 
evolution.” Religious scientists, often endorsing the ecumeni- 
cal attitudes that accompanied Darwin’s burial, express regret 
that their more militant fellow believers conjure an opposition 
that does not exist. Yet the issue will not go away. Detailed 
replies elaborated in one generation may inaugurate a period 
of calm, while resentment of Darwin and the establishment 
that defends him smolders sullenly. But the antipathy to 


--- Page 22 ---

4 Living with Darwin 
Darwinian evolution runs so deep that sooner or later the 
responses will be forgotten, ignored, or evaded, and the con- 
troversy will erupt anew. 
Why is this? The question has two parts. First, how can the 
allegedly massive evidence in favor of Darwin’s central claims 
be overlooked? How, if facts reflect what confident scientists 
say, is even the illusion of a serious debate created? Darwin's 
detractors cling to the belief that the “massive evidence” is 
overblown, and that the enthronement of Darwinism among 
the genuinely established sciences is the triumph of atheistic 
materialism. They believe that this atheistic materialism has 
cunningly co-opted religious scientists who don’t even realize 
they have been tricked. Like all comprehensive scientific the- 
ories, evolutionary theory has unresolved questions that 
challenge biologists. In order to address these challenges and 
those of Darwinism’s detractors, a clear presentation of the 
evidential situation, a delineation of the grounds on which 
Darwinism rests, of the problems it faces and to which its 
opponents point, and an appraisal of the merits of potentially 
opposing viewpoints must be provided. 
The second part of the question concerns the source of the 
vehement opposition. Why is it that this particular piece of sci- 
ence provokes such passions, requires such continual scrutiny, 
demands such constant reenactment of old battles? Again, 
those who would disinter Darwin have a favorite explanation. 
The sepulcher in Westminster is a screen and the enthusiasm 
for Darwin’s “reverence” a whitewash. From the militant evan- 
gelical perspective, foolish Anglican churchmen were caught 
up in popular enthusiasm, and signed on to “life without God.” 
They thought, of course, that they were only eliminating 
God from any direct role in the long history of life on our 


--- Page 23 ---

Disinterring Darwin 5 
planet, operating in the venerable tradition that saw the 
Creator's action as remote, as a wise institution of initial con- 
ditions from which the universe, and life within it, could unfold 
by well-designed natural processes. In fact, however, they 
were accepting “life without God” in a far more dangerous 
sense, blindly overlooking the subversive implications of this 
particular conception of life’s history, the denial of all pur- 
pose, all providence, and all spirituality. The second issue, 
then, revolves around the implications of Darwinism. How does 
it affect our understanding of ourselves, our place in the uni- 
verse, our religious beliefs and aspirations? 
In what follows, I hope to address both issues. 
I write at a time when opposition to Darwin has a new face. 
Intelligent design, it is claimed, is not a religious perspective at 
all, but a genuine scientific alternative to Darwinian orthodoxy, 
something that could be taught alongside evolutionary theory 
in the high-school biology curriculum without raising any 
anxieties about teaching religion, and that could even provide 
schoolchildren with an “exciting event” on their “educational 
journey.’* Those who support this proposal, and who wish to 
see it enacted as law, can be divided, for my purposes, into two 
main groups. There are the architects of intelligent design 
theory, the “intelligent design-ers” as I shall call them, and the 
citizens whose support they enlist. In appraising the ideas and 
advertisements of the intelligent design-ers, I do not mean to 
criticize the sincere and worried people who rally to their 
cause. Only in the final chapter of this essay shall I consider the 
sources of their concern. 


--- Page 24 ---

6 Living with Darwin 
Advertising intelligent design as independent of religious 
doctrine is accurate in one important sense. To claim that 
some kinds of organisms are products of intelligent design 
does not logically entail any conclusion about the existence of 
a deity, let alone any specific articles of Christian faith. From 
a legal perspective, however, what matters is whether there 
might be genuinely nonreligious reasons for advancing a 
proposed law. If nobody would support the law except on the 
basis of religious beliefs, then, in the pertinent sense, the law 
cannot be independent of religion.’ On this score, there are 
ample reasons for worrying about measures intended to 
introduce intelligent design into the biology curriculum. 
In the first place, the style of argument that permeates 
claims of intelligent design traces back to William Paley’s 
Natural Theology—required reading for Cambridge under- 
graduates when Darwin was a student and explicitly intended 
as a response to the “atheistic” arguments of David Hume’s 
posthumous Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion.° Second, 
studies of explicitly Christian writings about Darwinism have 
shown that as the fortunes of “scientific creationism”—the 
favored alternative of the 1970s and the 1980s—have waned, 
references to “creation science” have given way to citations of 
“intelligent design” without other perturbations of the prose.’ 
Third, as the recent trial in Dover, Pennsylvania made clear, the 
support for teaching intelligent design in the local high school 
came from religious people who felt the need to campaign for 
an alternative to Darwinism that accorded with their faith. 
Finally, in the wake of the rebuke administered by the voters 
in the local elections, who replaced the members of the 
Dover School Board who had agitated for the inclusion of intel- 
ligent design in the curriculum, Pat Robertson himself issued 


--- Page 25 ---

Disinterring Darwin 7 
a warning that this apparent repudiation of God would under- 
mine any appeal to the Deity should some catastrophe strike the 
community. 
Although there are grounds for suspicion, I shall treat 
intelligent design as its leaders characterize it, as a hypothesis 
put forward to identify and account for certain natural phe- 
nomena. The sociological fact that the hypothesis is welcomed 
by a significant number of Christians, and by some religious 
people of other faiths, does not make it an intrinsically reli- 
gious doctrine. A proposal about the natural world need have 
no specifically religious content to be more compatible with 
particular religious ideas than its equally naturalistic rivals. 
When Galileo made his case for the motion of the earth around 
the sun, and his opponents argued that the earth is at rest, the 
alternative hypotheses concerned natural processes; neverthe- 
less some Catholics, committed to a literal interpretation of 
the biblical passage in which Joshua successfully commanded the 
sun to stand still,* believed that the earth-centered account 
was more sympathetic to the articles of their faith. 
The core of intelligent design, understood as a rival to cur- 
rent ideas in biology and the earth sciences,’ consists of two 
major claims. The negative thesis is that some aspects of life 
and its history cannot be understood in terms of natural 
selection, conceived as Darwinian orthodoxy supposes. The 
positive thesis is that these aspects of life must be understood 
as effects of an alternative causal agency, one that is properly 
characterized as “intelligent.” (It is simplest to refer to this 
alternative agency as “Intelligence,” so long as we don't engage 
in illegitimate personification—Intelligence is simply some 
causal power that deserves to be thought of as, in some sense, 
intelligent.) You could easily expand these two claims to a 


--- Page 26 ---

8 Living with Darwin 
bigger package, adding the explicit identification that Intel- 
ligence is a creative deity, a providential creative deity, or even 
the God of the Christian scriptures. Outside the biology class- 
room, the expansion is permissible. Inside, it is not. The goal of 
the current movement to install intelligent design as an alter- 
native to Darwinian evolution, is to reform the curriculum 
so that the two-part hypothesis is explained by the biology 
teacher, something that can be done without suspicion of 
religious indoctrination. It is, of course, a convenient fact that 
the local preacher can add elements of the larger package when 
he instructs the uncorrupted youth on Sundays. 
Because the advocates of the intelligent design theory also insist 
on the further claim that the two-part hypothesis is genuinely 
> 
scientific—the “status claim,” as I shall call it—they invite a 
strategy for response. It would appear that their legal argu- 
ments could be undercut easily by rebutting the status claim, 
by showing that their favored two-part hypothesis isn’t 
science. My own approach will proceed differently. I shall view 
intelligent design as “dead science,” a doctrine that once had 
its day in scientific inquiry and discussion, but that has rightly 
been discarded. 
Itis easy to understand why many scientists (and the journalists 
to whom they give interviews) find the “not science” strategy 
attractive. After all, it is a quick way of dismissing the oppo- 
sition, one that shortcuts the tedious work of analyzing the 
proliferating texts the opponents produce. But I think it can 
only succeed when the central issues are blurred. If the sub- 
stance of the charge is that intelligent design is not science 
because it is religion, then the acquitting response should be, 
first, that the position can be formulated without making any 
religious claim (intelligent design is the two-part thesis just 


--- Page 27 ---

Disinterring Darwin 9 
distinguished). Second, for much of the history of inquiry 
great scientists have advanced specifically religious hypotheses 
and theories. On the other hand, if we suppose that the two-part 
thesis doesn’t have the characteristics required of “genuine 
science,” then it is appropriate to ask just what these charac- 
teristics are. True, the architects of intelligent design don’t 
spend a great deal of time performing experiments—but then 
neither do many astronomers, theoretical physicists, oceano- 
graphers, or students of animal behavior. Science has room 
for field observers, mathematical modelers, as well as experiment- 
alists. Social criteria for genuine science, such as publishing 
articles in “peer-reviewed journals,” are easy to mimic. Any 
group that aspires to the title can institute the pertinent 
procedures. Hence those procedures no longer function to 
distinguish science from everything else. So, what is left? 
Many scientists believe that there is a magic formula, an 
incantation they can utter to dispel the claims of intelligent 
design. Indeed, intoning the mantra “science is testable,” in the 
public press or even in the courtroom can produce striking 
effects. This, however, is only because of an overly simple 
understanding of testability. When the proponent of intelligent 
design points to some collection of natural phenomena, 
declaring that these could not be products of Darwinian 
natural selection but must instead be the effects ofa rival causal 
agent, Intelligence, it isn’t directly obvious how to test the 
hypothesis advanced. Unfortunately, that is the nature of 
the core hypotheses of many important scientific theories. The 
same could have been said for the hypothesis that chemical 
reactions involve the breaking and forming of bonds between 
molecules, or for the hypothesis that the genetic material is 
DNA (or, in the case of some viruses, RNA), or any number 


--- Page 28 ---

10 Living with Darwin 
of sweeping assertions about things remote from everyday 
observation, when those hypotheses were first introduced. 
When such core hypotheses are tested, they are supplemented 
with other principles that explain the relationship between 
the core hypothesis and the processes to which we can gain 
observational access. To test the hypothesis that the genetic 
material is DNA, the pioneering molecular biologists of 
the 1940s needed a host of assumptions about just what was 
being transferred into the modified bacteria on which they 
performed their experiments. And it took several years’ of 
ingenious laboratory work to show that those assumptions 
were justified. Thanks to their pioneering efforts, their suc- 
cessors were equipped with refined methods of detecting the 
observationally remote entities that figure in the hypotheses 
of molecular biology. More generally, the development of ways 
of detecting things that we cannot immediately see or handle 
is part of the creative work of science, work that expands our 
conception of what is observable. At many stages in the his- 
tory of science, inquirers conceive of promising hypotheses 
that are hard to connect with observational or experimental 
findings. They and their successors must work to formulate 
auxiliary assumptions that will make the needed connections, 
assumptions that are often controversial, and that must be 
probed for their own soundness.'® 
Invocation of the magic formula thus faces a dilemma. If 
core hypotheses, taken in isolation, must be subjected to a 
requirement of testability to be taken seriously, then the great- 
est ideas in contemporary science will crumble along with 
intelligent design. If, on the other hand, all that is required is 
to supplement a core hypothesis with some auxiliary principles 
that allow for testing, then the spell fails to exorcise anything. 


--- Page 29 ---

Disinterring Darwin 11 
Unless it is shown that intelligent design, unlike the core 
principles of atomic chemistry and molecular genetics, cannot 
be equipped with auxiliary principles that allow it to be tested, 
then the charge of untestability will not stick. Moreover, 
demonstrating that intelligent design is not equipped with 
auxiliary principles requires detailed study of what the intel- 
ligent design-ers propose—that is, coming to terms with their 
confident positive claims that the operation of Intelligence can 
be detected in the history of life. In fact, when we do the 
detailed work of scrutinizing their claims, we shall discover 
why it is so tempting to dismiss them as “not doing science.” 
It turns out to be difficult to connect the central theses of 
intelligent design with the observable evidence we have by 
deploying any principles that can be independently justified. 
But any right to dismissal cannot be assumed at the outset— 
instead, it must be earned.” 
Fans of the mantra of testability will surely protest that 
my response to the friends of intelligent design is a cheat— 
and I sympathize with them. Simply crying “Foul!” however 
shouldn’t convince a good referee. We must explain which 
rule of proper science has been broken, and how it has been 
broken. But pinpointing this explanation leads into thickets of 
philosophy from which no clear resolution has yet emerged. 
For the past half century, philosophers have tried and failed to 
produce a precise account of the distinction between science and 
pseudoscience. We cannot seem to articulate that essential line 
of demarcation. 
There is, however, a deeper problem with the strategy 
of dismissing intelligent design as “not science.” Intelligent 
design has deep roots in the history of cosmology, and of the 
earth and life sciences. Generations of brilliant and devout 


--- Page 30 ---

12 Living with Darwin 
investigators firmly believed that their researches were supple- 
ments to the word of the Creator as revealed in sacred scripture, 
that they were disclosing that word by deciphering the Book 
of Nature. From Newton’s speculations about the meaning 
of his “system of the world” to the country parsons who wrote 
about the fauna and flora in the parish precincts, there is 
a large body of work in “natural philosophy’—what we 
call “science,” although the term was not then used in this 
sense—directed by the hypothesis of intelligent design, not 
in the modest two-part version, but in a theologically far richer 
package. If intelligent design is no longer science, it once was, 
and many scientific achievements we acknowledge build upon 
work that it inspired. Indeed, the status of intelligent design as 
a piece of mid-nineteenth-century science is confirmed by the 
many references in the Origin to “the theory of independent 
creation.” ” 
Appreciation of the historical entanglement of science and 
religious doctrine should, I believe, incline us to the strategy 
I proposed above for responding to intelligent design. There is 
no place for intelligent design in the biology classroom because 
it is discarded science, dead science. From the perspective of 
reasonable educational policy, dead science only belongs in the 
curriculum in cases where a review of it is valuable for under- 
standing live science. We study classical Newtonian mechanics 
because doing so is a necessary prelude to understand even 
the rudiments of quantum mechanics and relativity theory. 
The mere absence of a pedagogical need, however, provides 
no legal basis for exclusion. To show that intelligent design 
doesn’t belong in the biology classroom would require argu- 
ing that the sole motivation for introducing this particular 
piece of dead science is a religious one." 


--- Page 31 ---

Disinterring Darwin 13 
If some oddly motivated group were to campaign for 
teaching alchemy alongside modern chemistry, or the theory that 
heat is a “subtle fluid” in conjunction with thermodynamics, 
the right counter would not be to declare that these doctrines 
are intrinsically religious, or are pseudosciences. Instead we 
would explain that, although they once figured in science and 
were actively pursued by learned people, we have since dis- 
covered that they are incorrect, and that, if they belong in the 
curriculum, it should be in the history of science course, not 
in the chemistry or physics class. 
Pursue the fantasy a little further, and imagine that the 
earnest activists disagree with the judgment that their pet 
theories are dead science. How would we try to persuade 
them? Surely we would do so by showing them the evidence 
that originally led to the rejection of alchemy and of “subtle 
fluid” ideas about heat. That wouldn’t be enough, however. 
If our interlocutors were astute, they would remind us that 
hypotheses once abandoned can make a comeback. After 
all, Copernicus revived ancient views of the motion of the 
earth, and nineteenth-century physicists resurrected the doc- 
trine, periodically fashionable since the dawn of science, that 
heat is the motion of the minute parts of matter. So we also 
would need to show how the further development of the 
sciences, after the activists’ favorite ideas were given up, has 
reinforced that original judgment, how the evidence in favor 
of the orthodoxy that triumphed has continued to increase, 
how the issue looks from the perspective of the present. 
Ifan appropriate response to advocates of discarded theories 
involves adjudicating an old debate from the vantage point 
of newer, even up-to-the-minute knowledge, can we manage 
without the history entirely? Would it be enough to ignore the 


--- Page 32 ---

14 Living with Darwin 
considerations that initially led to discarding pre-Darwinian 
ideas, and simply explain how things now look? I think not. There 
should be no suspicion that the original decision was unreason- 
able, that it’s just a fluke that things have gone well fora theory 
that gained an undeserved victory. Darwin’s defenders don’t 
suppose that previous attempts to reevaluate evolutionary ideas 
were wrongly dismissed, that it’s only now, when scientific 
orthodoxy has a plausible tale to tell, that the orthodox can 
afford to come clean. 
Hence, if we meet the challenge to Darwinian ideas, it will 
be necessary to understand how the central ideas of Darwinian 
evolutionary theory came to be accepted, and how they have fared 
in light of an increasing body of knowledge about the details 
of life on our planet. We need a historical perspective that 
leads us from the period during which the ideas espoused by 
the intelligent design-ers were widely accepted, through the 
episodes in which they were discarded in favor of Darwinian 
principles, to our present situation. We need, in short, to 
understand why intelligent design and other alternatives to 
Darwinism died, and why, despite the energetic efforts of the 
resurrection men, they have stayed dead. 
Recertifying the demise of the allegedly live alternatives to 
Darwinism is more complicated than I have so far made it 
appear, because current opposition to Darwin involves three 
different debates. As we shall see, the most sophisticated of 
Darwin’s detractors profit by intertwining them. “Darwinism” 
is not a monolithic whole, and one of the ideas that anti- 
Darwinians attack is by no means original with Darwin. If 


--- Page 33 ---

Disinterring Darwin 15 
the biology curriculum is to be made thoroughly safe for 
Christianity, as the most vocal would-be reformers (but by no 
means all Christians) understand their religion, then there are 
three major principles that must be banned, or for which 
“balancing” rivals must be found. 
The first of these principles is the idea of an ancient earth, 
a planet on which life has existed for almost four billion years 
and that has been populated at different periods by a large 
number of different kinds of organisms, the overwhelming 
majority of which are now extinct. Many of the animals and 
plants we know, including the birds and the flowers in our 
gardens, the wild counterparts of the living things we have 
domesticated, and our own species, are very recent arrivals in 
the history of life. Taken by itself, this first thesis leaves open the 
possibility that the history of life is one in which creation 
occurs in successive stages. 
That possibility is explicitly denied by the second major 
principle, one that, unlike the first, was proposed and defended 
by Darwin. There is just one tree of life. All the living things 
that have ever existed on our planet are linked by processes of 
“descent with modification,” so that even the organisms that 
seem least similar—an eagle and a seaweed, say—are derived 
from a common ancestor that lived at some point in the 
remote past."* 
The last important idea, also central to Darwin’s thought, con- 
cerns the causal processes that have given rise to the diversity 
of life. The principal agent of evolution, the chief cause of the 
modified descendants is natural selection. For any kind of 
organism, there will be variation in the descendants produced 
in each generation. Some of these variants will better enable 
organisms to survive the challenges of the environment, to 


--- Page 34 ---

16 Living with Darwin 
mature, and to produce offspring. If the new characteristics 
that underlie their success are heritable, their descendants 
will enjoy the same good fortune, and the characteristics will 
spread. So, over a sequence of generations, a trait that was once 
rare may become prevalent.” 
It's important to distinguish these three principles, 
because there are more or less ambitious ways of attacking 
“Darwinism.” The most sweeping is to deny all three, to 
advance an alternative view according to which the earth is 
relatively young and has been populated, from the beginn- 
ing, by the major kinds of plants and animals, including 
human beings, all created distinctly. Because this denial would 
allow for the narrative of Genesis to stand as the literal truth 
about the history of life, I shall refer to the position as “Genesis 
creationism.” 
A more modest conception, one that concedes that parts 
of the Bible’s first book need not be read literally, would accept 
the ancient age of the earth but challenge the relatedness of 
all living things and the power of natural selection, at least in 
the most important events in the history of life. This kind of 
opposition to Darwin might well allow that plenty of orga- 
nisms are related to one another by descent with modification, 
and that natural selection does sometimes, even normally, 
play a role in such processes. But it would insist on moments 
in the history of life where something else, something dis- 
tinctly different happens, where new forms are created. In 
effect, the opponent supposes that there are breaks in the 
tree of life, alleged evolutionary transitions involving creative 
activity that generates something entirely novel—perhaps, 
for example, when multicellular organisms are produced, or 
when land-dwelling animals emerge, or when human beings 


--- Page 35 ---

Disinterring Darwin 17 
originate. Since the fundamental idea is that the major novelties 
in the history of life are the products of creation, I'll call this 
approach “novelty creationism.” 
Contemporary versions of Darwinism conceive of life as 
having a single origin, from which living things split into 
distinct forms, called species, in events of speciation. These 
are the moments where the tree of life branches, sometimes 
identified when naturalists perceive differences they take to 
be significant, sometimes viewed in terms of interruptions 
of free interbreeding among the descendants of organisms 
who had previously mated quite happily with one another.'® 
Novelty creationists today typically allow that there are (many) 
cases in which a species splits into two new ones, confining 
their attention to those changes that strike them as really 
significant. 
Darwin thought in terms of a graceful tree of life, with 
relatively few branches. His modern descendants conceive of 
something bushier, a dense tree with large numbers of stubby 
branches representing dead ends, life’s many failures. At a 
minimum, Novelty Creationism envisages the “broken tree of 
life,” in which the gaps are bridged by some new act of crea- 
tion (or, to speak unofficially, by the hand of the Creator). This 
vision can easily glide into that of a “garden of life,” a scenario 
in which, while the earth is old, there are many separate acts of 
creation, many different, variously broken, trees. Orit can even 
become that of the “shrubbery oflife,” where, not so very long 
ago, a number of separate plantings were made at much the 
same time—a view that can endorse the narrative accuracy 
of Genesis. 
Finally, the least ambitious of the challenges to 
“Darwinism” adopts both the thesis of an ancient earth and 


--- Page 36 ---

18 Living with Darwin 
the thesis of the relatedness of all living things, the single 
bushy tree of life, while denying that natural selection has the 
power to bring about the major transitions in the history of 
life. Proponents of this idea point to the same episodes in life’s 
history that serve their novelty creationist brethren as points 
of departure, the episodes in which something genuinely new 
seems to happen, something so complex that it couldn’t, so the 
story goes, be the product of a blind and clumsy process like 
natural selection. Unlike novelty creationists, they allow that the 
complex forms that emerge are descendants of significantly 
less complex ancestors, denying only that natural selection 
could have been responsible for the change. In a sense, there is 
still room for something like “creative activity” but the products 
of that activity are new traits, organs, or structures in the 
descendants of ancestors who lacked such characteristics, 
rather than newly created whole organisms. This is the core of 
the official position of leading champions of intelligent design, 
and I shall call it “anti-selectionism.””” 
Marching under the banner of anti-selectionism gives one 
an air of respectability, because anti-selectionism has been 
vigorously championed by prominent evolutionary biologists 
in the past and is explored by some contemporary scientists 
whose (nontraditional) proposals engage the serious attention 
of their theoretically inclined colleagues. To wonder if a pro- 
posed cause is adequate to produce particular effects shouldn't 
earn excommunication from the scientific community. Indeed, 
if Darwin’s detractors were merely to ask for some brief class- 
room discussion of currently unsolved problems in applying 
natural selection to the history of life, or even a simplified 
presentation of some alternative ideas about the origins of 
natural variations, thoughtful scientists and educators might 


--- Page 37 ---

Disinterring Darwin 19 
welcome the suggestion. In general, and not simply in the case 
of evolutionary theory, it might be sound educational policy to 
identify places where there is further scientific work to be 
done. That is very different from taking seriously the thought 
that currently unsolved problems are doomed to remain 
unsolvable, and that there is a serious possibility that the entire 
framework of Darwinism should be discarded. The obvious 
and uncontroversial ways of presenting alternatives, or sup- 
plements, to natural selection would not do what Darwin’s 
opponents want though, for they would make no mention of 
either intelligence or design. 
So, while anti-selectionism might be central to the intelli- 
gent design movement," at least in its conversations with the 
hitherto unconverted, it doesn’t offer much to the faithful, for 
whom Darwin is still the bogeyman. What is necessary is a 
distinctive way of addressing those evolutionary transitions 
that so far nobody has explained by appealing to natural 
selection—a causal agency at work that genuinely deserves 
the label “Intelligence.” This agency bestows on descendants 
traits, organs, and structures that were lacking in their ancestors. 
Merely applying some other natural process that comple- 
ments, or substitutes for, natural selection in the problematic 
instances won't yield a rival vision that will be friendlier to faith 
than the current Darwinian orthodoxy. What many troubled 
Christians would like is some indication of planning, purpose, 
design, at work in the history of life, a providential hand that 
reaches in and produces the truly important changes. 
As the case for intelligent design is elaborated, therefore, the 
position slides away from bare anti-selectionism toward the 
religiously more evocative position of novelty creationism. 
Instead of simply supposing that the great transitions in 


--- Page 38 ---

20 Living with Darwin 
evolution—like the conquest of land, or the arrival of Homo 
sapiens—require something more than (or different from) 
Darwinian natural selection, there’s a tendency not to see 
these as evolutionary transitions at all, but as episodes in which 
a genuinely creative Intelligence is active. The label, “intelli- 
gent design,” is a brilliant cover for the oscillating target that 
so frustrates the scientists who rise to Darwin’s defense, 
inspiring them to charge that intelligent design is not science. 
Although the label can stand for those special moments 
where the Creator’s hand reaches in, it can also be divested 
of religious content, explained as merely a commitment to 
anti-selectionism. 
In differentiating various positions for Darwin’s detrac- 
tors, I aim to bring clarity to a debate too often confused 
by their oscillations. There are three types of positions to 
be considered: first, anti-selectionism, that only opposes the 
sufficiency of natural selection to produce the major transi- 
tions in the history of life; second, novelty creationism, that 
takes some alleged transitions to be episodes in which organ- 
isms with new complex forms are created; and third, Genesis 
creationism, that hopes to make biology and geology safe for 
the literal truth of the Genesis narrative. Intelligent design 
presses toward novelty creationism when it can, retreating to 
anti-selectionism when the accusations of mixing religion 
with science roll in. 
For many of those who want an alternative to Darwin, 
however, novelty creationism is not enough. They would 
remain shocked by a science curriculum that implied that any 
(nonpoetic) part of the Bible cannot be taken as literal truth." 
If they clearly understood what the intelligent design move- 
ment would achieve, were it successful, these people would 


--- Page 39 ---

Disinterring Darwin 21 
only be partly satisfied. Nevertheless, they might welcome the 
erosion of Darwinism in hopes that it could eventually lead 
to the triumph of Genesis creationism. 
At different stages in the history of inquiry, each of the three 
positions had its day as part of scientific orthodoxy. Eighteenth- 
century discussions of the earth and its history typically took 
it for granted that the natural processes that had occurred 
would conform to the history related in the early chapters 
of Genesis. Only at the end of the century were there nascent 
suspicions that biblical chronology might be radically mis- 
taken. In the first decades of the nineteenth century, however, 
those doubts multiplied, and by the early 1830s the claim that 
human beings had been present on earth ever since the dawn of 
life had become indefensible. 
For the next decades, something like novelty creationism 
held sway, as the prevalent view maintained that the history of 
life on earth was a sequence of periods in which new life forms 
were first specially created, flourished for a while, and then 
went extinct. The culmination of the sequence was the most 
recent creation in which our own species was generated. In 
1859, the publication of the Origin of Species began the vigor- 
ous debate in which novelty creationism was overthrown, 
and by the early 1870s, in the English-speaking world as well 
as in Germany and Russia, most researchers had accepted 
Darwin’s conception ofa single tree of life in which organisms 
are linked by processes of descent with modification. 
Natural selection, however, remained controversial. With- 
out a developed account of the mechanism of inheritance, it 
was quite unclear whether selection could give rise to signi- 
ficantly modified descendants. There were worries that the 
timescale for the history of life was too short for the observed 


--- Page 40 ---

22 Living with Darwin 
diversity to evolve under natural selection, as well as per- 
plexities about the power of selection to produce various 
types of traits and structures. Eventually, in the 1920s and 
the 1930s, biologists would produce the “modern synthesis,” 
integrating Darwin’s ideas about selection with the new gen- 
etics descending from Mendel’s neglected work. Between 1870 
and 1920, however, anti-selectionism was widely accepted, as 
biologists struggled to identify alternative mechanisms that 
would propel evolutionary change. 
Around 1830, 1870, and 1930, respectively, Genesis cre- 
ationism, novelty creationism, and anti-selectionism were 
discarded, consigned to the large vault of dead science. Are 
any of them ripe for resurrection? No. But the efforts of the 
resurrection men demand a rewrite of the obituaries, one 
that will expose clearly what happened and why the original 
verdicts have been sustained by the subsequent course of 
inquiry, or, in the case of anti-selectionism, why current worries 
about the power of natural selection hold no comfort for ideas 
of intelligent design. I shall try to show how contemporary 
evolutionary biology has come to its prevailing orthodoxies, 
and why there are no reasons to amend them in ways that 
would be welcomed by those who wish to disinter Darwin. 
Yet the zeal of the resurrection men, and of the citizens who 
support them, also needs explanation. What threat, what real 
danger, does the acceptance of Darwinism pose? Even after 
a review of the evidence has shown that we are stuck with 
Darwin, we still need to decide whether or not his “profoundly 
reverent spirit” leaves central religious doctrines and cherished 


--- Page 41 ---

Disinterring Darwin 23 
beliefs about ourselves unperturbed—whether, in short, that 
memorial in the Abbey undermines the institution and the 
values the site represents, whether, in the interests of accurate 
representation, Darwin really should be disinterred. 
In the closing chapter of this essay, I shall argue that the 
thoughtful and concerned people who welcome the proposals 
of the intelligent design-ers have seen something important, 
that they fear, quite understandably, that they cannot live with 
Darwin. I shall try to show how evolutionary ideas combine 
with other bodies of knowledge to yield serious consequences 
for the future of faith-—and how also a brusque strategy of 
dismissing superstition cannot be adequate. In the end, even 
after we have seen all the failures of the resurrection men, 
we cannot be content either with the well-intentioned accom- 
modations of Darwin’s Anglican eulogists or with the militant 
campaign to replace religion by erecting statues of the Sage of 
Down in every public square. 


--- Page 42 ---

\rannwil snactage age x Thiks: Se nM 
spmivopatywbhacyrapetaahetiewns! were. at perl 
PP areonpiae WELZ ED hey ‘u-iybenanpent btw 
digg ear re Woh eee | si Sa Mey Aone ood re © 
sesenenrer eaves eater ras ich ava Hpi race ; 
~ SMengeSircagls dial oy aye ie natepileal « srbcwbg incarpbaly 
chataget aatater ee tei ye ug antes Aringpar TD: 
Me Pye 1 arte Wy antl oe leeticonibepe anh eC Ae 
rae the fiers ni! aay epo) bejea' fii (etd oni A wT acinar. 
AP onteshi err) aieder 7} siul! try by apogee Teas react Ane y 
Pvealotiita? betas 18 “Aaa bo 1S ang staan, 
Wie WIM thes, OF Ac -ERNonly ro hail ilaw & wars (bet ~ 
wu Ag ti @! Mariel ey tho? Whe of ice Bitar >) ety 
ots, a ey 
a, 
Vo) ae Baa! £7 DS FO Gera Re i A By) “pererhe ; 
Hon tice, Opi nected aim Bienen wha tel 
hehe, deve scaptiee 4 Omar pac iver er 
(www td De wales Tis teen demregiend aipdly att Duvet, eoredly es eels ddan tee hin "podemially 
eee eet ae ied aD Sedalia deat 
x ua 


--- Page 43 ---

Chapter Two 
GOODBYE TO GENESIS 
Like several other texts from the ancient Near East, the Bible 
recalls a great flood, in which virtually all of the living creatures 
of the earth were destroyed. In chapters 7 and 8 of Genesis, 
we are told that it rained for 40 days and 40 nights, that the 
fountains of the deep were opened, that the waters covered the 
tops of the mountains, that every living thing upon the face of 
the ground, “man and animals and creeping things,” perished 
in the deluge, and that the only survivors were the inhabitants 
of the ark that Noah had built and stocked. After 150 days the 
waters subsided, and, some months later, when the summit 
of Mount Ararat was uncovered, the ark finally came to rest 
upon it. Eventually the land became dry again, and Noah, his 
family, and his company of animals were able to emerge from 
their refuge. 
Although the seventeenth-century divine, Thomas Burnet, 
believed that this story was literally and strictly true, in all 
its details, he discerned in it puzzles that called for scientific 
explanation. Prominent among them was the issue of the 


--- Page 44 ---

26 Living with Darwin 
drying-up of the earth. Where did all the water go? How 
exactly was “the pond drained”? Burnet set himself the task 
of providing a convincing mechanical explanation, and, in 
1681, he presented his conclusions in a learned and often 
ingenious book, The Sacred Theory of the Earth. 
It is easy to smile indulgently at the earnest struggle to 
show the possibility of processes that Burnet believes must 
have occurred because sacred scripture reveals to him that 
they once took place, the detail lavished on the-resulting dif- 
ficulties, the intricate diagrams and calculations. Yet ‘it is a 
serious research project, one undertaken with integrity and 
honesty, and one fully representative of the early modern scientific 
temper. Most of the great figures who made the principal 
discoveries of the episode, or series of episodes, known as 
the “scientific revolution”’—Copernicus, Kepler, Boyle, and 
Newton, to cite just four examples—firmly believed that one 
important point of their work was to display the wisdom of 
the Creator, to “think God’s thoughts after Him.” They, like 
Burnet, believed in two routes to God, one through the scrip- 
tures, the revealed word, divinely inspired, and one through 
the Book of Nature, in which the discerning eye would see, and 
understand, divine providence at work. 
Although commentators from antiquity on had adopted 
nonliteral approaches to the scriptures, approaching sacred 
texts as sources of spiritual truths, many seventeenth-century 
thinkers, Burnet and Newton among them, were committed 
to literal interpretations. Perhaps the long, and bloody, con- 
flicts between Protestants and Catholics, centered on differ- 
ent interpretations of the same Bible, forced a new concern 
with principles for reading the scriptures. In any event, for 
the first time in the history of Christianity, an emphasis on 


--- Page 45 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 27 
literal interpretation became dominant, giving rise to the 
kind of problem that troubled Burnet. Truth cannot be in 
conflict with itself, so that the two books—the Book of 
Nature and the Word of God in the Bible—must be compatible 
with one another, even when the scriptures are read literally. 
It is thus a proper project for the reverent investigator to 
address those perplexing instances in which reconciliation 
appears difficult—to explain, for example, how the pond 
was drained. 
For more than a century after Burnet wrote, earth science 
and natural history would be dominated by the felt need for 
reconciliation with scripture. Country clergymen explored 
the landscape in the vicinity of their churches, describing the 
plants and animals they found, and offering their reflections 
on the subtle ways in which the Creator had adapted them to 
their way of life. So, for example, Gilbert White wrote in A 
Natural History of Selbourne, “To a thinking mind nothing is 
more wonderful than that early instinct which impresses 
young animals with the notion of the situation of their natural 
weapons, and of using them properly in their own defence, 
even before those weapons subsist or are formed. Thus a 
young cock will spar at his adversary before his spurs are 
grown; and a calf or lamb will push with their heads before 
their horns are sprouted.”* The “thinking mind” appreciates 
the wisdom of God in the creation. 
Harmony between the Bible, literally understood, and the 
embryonic studies of the earth and its inhabitants imposed 
constraints on those investigations. Some biblical scholars 
used the genealogies and chronologies of the Old Testament 
to calculate an age for the earth, usually assigned as six 
thousand or so years. Although it was difficult for eighteenth- 


--- Page 46 ---

28 Living with Darwin 
century thinkers to envisage how these estimates might come 
into conflict with evidence from the field, potential disagree- 
ment might be resolved by scrutinizing the specific assump- 
tions made in the calculations—after all, scripture does not 
explicitly declare an age for our planet. Two claims that flow more 
directly from the early chapters of Genesis are more difficult 
to evade. First, Genesis states that all major kinds of plants 
and animals, as well as human beings, were created at the 
beginning, and that all have lived on the earth continuously 
throughout its entire history. Second, the Bible says that there 
was once a great flood in which almost all living things were 
destroyed, and that all the organisms that have lived since are 
descendants of the small company that survived the flood. One 
of the surprises of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century 
investigations proved to be that these claims appeared incom- 
patible with the most obvious explanation of the rock strata. 
As more and more curious structures bearing an uncanny 
resemblance to shells, teeth, and bones were discovered, it 
became apparent that fossils were residues of organisms 
that had lived in the past. Recognizing the division of rocks 
into layers, geologists came to accept the principle of super- 
position, interpreting deeper levels as older than more 
superficial strata. In the early nineteenth century, the hydro- 
logist William Smith, who often served canal builders as a 
drainage consultant, began to correlate rock types across 
regions, relying first on criteria of chemical and structural 
similarity, and, for more refined connections, on the observed 
distinctness of the fossils associated with different strata. (It 
is important that Smith had a prior stratigraphical method to 
use to correlate the rocks, which he could deploy to demonstrate 
the principle that strata contain their own distinctive types 


--- Page 47 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 29 
of fossils. With that principle in place, he could then use these 
fossils as indices of identity and difference across a much 
wider range of strata.) Smith’s pioneering work in geological 
mapping inspired others to try to show how the rock layers 
in different regions related to one another—to produce, in the 
end, a scheme connecting and ordering the strata across the 
entire globe. Even in the relatively early stages in the 1820s, 
however, it was apparent that there was a consistent sequence 
of fossil types, from the deepest (oldest) to the most superficial 
(youngest), and the appreciation of the sequence prompted a 
revision of the biblical narrative of the history of life. 
Here is the obvious story with which the devout geologists 
of the early nineteenth century were confronted. Sedimenta- 
tion rates suggest that the age of the earth is much greater 
than hitherto supposed, for those rates would require vast 
stretches of time (at least hundreds of thousands of years) to 
lay down rocks to the depth observed. These strata were 
deposited sequentially, and the oldest almost always lie at the 
bottom. Most of the organisms they contain belong to species 
that have now vanished from the earth. The deepest rocks 
(more exactly, the deepest fossil-bearing rocks then known) 
contain residues of marine invertebrates, some of which, like 
mollusks, are very familiar, others of which, like the trilobites, 
are very different. Above them lie layers in which there are 
both marine invertebrates and some fish, with an increasing 
diversity of fish as you climb the rock column. Higher still 
are strata with marine invertebrates, fish, and amphibians. 
Ascending further, these kinds of organisms are joined by 
reptiles, including huge reptiles of kinds that no longer exist— 
some of the dinosaurs—and later, after the vanishing of the 
dinosaurs, by birds and mammals, both of which become 


--- Page 48 ---

30 Living with Darwin 
increasingly diverse as you approach the top. Near the surface, 
in the shallows of the rocks, there are finally traces of apes, and, 
eventually, of human beings. 
The plant record displays a similar, uniform, pattern. The 
earliest strata that bear plant remains contain residues of ferns, 
and, at higher levels, they are joined first by conifers, and later 
by deciduous trees and flowering plants. The picture, in both 
instances, is of a sequential history of life, one that belies the 
idea that all the major kinds of plants and animals have lived on 
the earth since the very beginning. 
So it is hardly surprising that Adam Sedgwick, the Reverend 
Adam Sedgwick, a man who would guide the geological 
apprenticeship of the young Charles Darwin, who would write 
a monstrously long (400-page), fiercely negative, review of 
a pre-Darwinian evolutionary treatise, who would be highly 
critical of Darwin’s Origin, who had fought hard against a his- 
tory of life at odds with Genesis, eventually had to give up. In 
1831, he delivered his presidential address to the Geological 
Society: 
Having been myself a believer, and, to the best of my power, 
a propagator of what I now regard as a philosophic heresy . . . I 
think it right, as one of my last acts before I quit this Chair, thus 
publicly to read my recantation. 
We ought, indeed, to have paused before we first adopted 
the diluvian theory, and referred all our old superficial gravel to 
the Mosaic Flood. For of man, and the works of his hands, we 
have not yet found a single trace among the remnants of a former 
world entombed in these ancient deposits. In classing together 
distant unknown formations under one name; in giving them a 
simultaneous origin, and in determining their date, not by the 


--- Page 49 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 31 
organic remains we had discovered, but by those we expected 
hypothetically hereafter to discover, in them; we have given one 
more example of the passion with which the mind fastens upon 
general conclusions, and of the readiness with which it leaves the 
consideration of unconnected truths.”! 
It was a funeral oration for the kind of geology that Burnet and 
his successors had practiced, a geology dedicated to harmony 
between nature and scripture. 
* * 
The problem is obvious. How do you explain this consistent 
ordering of fossil remains if not as what it seems to be, namely 
a sequence of episodes in the history of life showing very differ- 
ent organisms at different stages? How do you account for the 
fact that the remains of the kinds of organisms that now exist, 
the birds and trees and flowers and mammals we know—not 
to mention human beings—are found only in the most re- 
cent deposits? The Book of Nature appears forthright, and 
forthrightly incompatible with Genesis. 
Sedgwick’s reference to the “diluvian theory” and the 
“Mosaic Flood” points to the line of response he had tried, 
and that he had to “recant.” Even though Genesis begins with 
the roughly simultaneous creation of the flora and fauna of 
Eden, it does contain a story abouta later event that might have 
played havoc with the rock record. If almost all earth’s life 
drowned in a roiling flood, the ordering of the fossils might 
be an effect of the deluge. Perhaps we should return to—and 
extend—Burnet’s mechanics of the flood. 
Because the ordering of the strata is uniform across widely 
separated regions, it is important that there be some general 


--- Page 50 ---

32 Living with Darwin 
principles that account for the distribution of the fossils. It won't 
be enough simply to declare that the waters produced a chaotic 
mix. Instead, we need to understand why the birds are always 
found at the top and the fish appear originally near the bottom. 
At first sight, there seems to be an obvious answer. The 
fish live in water and were entombed early in the masses of 
loose sediment produced by the opening of the “fountains of 
the deep.” The birds, on the other hand, could escape by flying 
away, perching to rest on whatever pieces of land remained, 
until even the mountaintops were covered. Indeed, fans of 
“flood geology,” from the early nineteenth century to the 
“scientific creationists” of our own day, have suggested that 
understanding the environments in which plants and animals 
lived, and thus where they were when the flood waters hit, will 
make sense of the uniform pattern found in the rock column. 
Troubles immediately arise, however, when you descend from 
the general idea and consider the details. 
Specimens of the class that includes most contemporary 
fish are found in the fossil record from rocks whose age is 
estimated to be about 200 million years and upward into the 
present. Much deeper deposits contain the remains of types of 
fish that no longer exist, as well as fossils of sharks. By contrast, 
fossil whales, dolphins, seals, and porpoises are found only 
near the top of the rock column. Among the contemporary 
types of fish, preserved in the same strata, are species that 
inhabit the depths of the ocean, species that live near the ocean 
surface, species that live in lakes and rivers. So we can rule out 
the idea of a fine-grained sorting by location. Nor can it be 
supposed that the fish buried in the higher strata must have 
been especially lithe, and thus able to evade the sediments 
that hurtled through the waters, at least for a time. Not only 


--- Page 51 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 33 
are some of the remains found in recent deposits fossils of 
bottom-dwelling fish, but the fish in question are large and 
sedentary. Moreover, the contrast between sharks on the one 
hand, and dolphins on the other, is quite perplexing. Sharks 
and dolphins occupy similar environments, and have roughly 
equivalent capacities for moving speedily through the water. 
Yet plenty of sharks, but no dolphins, were buried at relatively 
early stages of the flood. 
The puzzles increase when we consider the birds. Some 
birds—ostriches and penguins, for example—are flightless, 
and would appear to be strong candidates for an early entomb- 
ment. Others live in marshy areas that would have been 
inundated quite early, and among these are kinds that lack the 
capacity to fly far. As the floodwaters rose, there would appar- 
ently have been increasing competition for resting places, 
and we might expect larger birds, with greater capacity for 
staying aloft and for defeating rivals, to be the last ones to go. The 
final potential perch would have been the ark itself, and we 
can only imagine the Hitchcockian scene in which Noah and his 
company found themselves. 
The fossil record of the birds shows none of the order flood 
geology leads us to expect, and, when we turn to the plants, 
there is further discomfort. Why do we find ferns in relatively 
ancient strata? Why are they joined first by the conifers and 
only later by deciduous trees and flowering plants? To take the 
principle of assortment by upward mobility seriously conjures 
a vision of the plants struggling uphill away from the rising 
floodwaters. An oak tree leads the way, as a pine labors behind, 
and an overweight fern puffs in the rear.” 
As Sedgwick reluctantly concluded, the detailed evidence 
from the rocks dooms the idea of explaining the distribution 


--- Page 52 ---

34 Living with Darwin 
of fossils by appeal to a universal flood. The regularities in the 
sequence, of which I have mentioned only a few of the most 
striking types, call out for explanation. Why are these kinds of 
fossils always found at deeper levels than those? Appreciation 
of the regularities, both in a gross form (ferns before conifers 
before deciduous trees) and in more refined ways (small three- 
toed horselike animals before horses), only exacerbates the 
difficulties for saving Genesis creationism. 
In fact, the invocation of Noah introduces further problems. 
Some living things were preserved by carrying them on the 
ark. How many, exactly, and which ones? If representatives 
of all modern species were included, the task of assembling 
them, leading them to their proper places on-the ark, and 
keeping them alive during the months afloat would have 
been immense. Predators and prey would have to be carefully 
separated. Very different environments would have to be 
provided for polar bears and camels. Noah and his seven 
human helpers would have had to be in constant motion from 
stall to stall, providing food and undertaking the Herculean 
task of cleansing the stables.” 
When you consider the occupants of the ark, it’s natural 
to focus on the animals most salient to us, the ones the Genesis 
narrative explicitly mentions. You forget that at least some 
plants and fungi would have to be carried along, too, that cacti 
and orchids, willows and mushrooms, would have to have 
appropriate environments and proper care. Even less salient 
are numerous microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, 
and other parasites, many of which are specific to particular 
plants, or animals, or humans. So, as we imagine Noah and his 
family pursuing their whirling round of chores, we have to 
suppose that they are harboring all sorts of infectious agents, 


--- Page 53 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 35 
that one of them has cholera, one diphtheria, several various 
respiratory infections, and so on—and that either one of the 
people, or maybe some dog or squirrel or bat among the 
company, is rabid. 
Once they arrive on Mount Ararat, can they finally rest? 
Not really. For, if they are to produce living creatures that will 
repopulate the earth, then they must be extremely careful to 
maintain the separation of predator from prey. It won't do for 
the intended grandmother of the future gazelles to disappear 
into the mouth of one of the ancestral cheetahs. The animals 
will have to be led carefully to points from which they can 
reach their intended destinations—so that the marsupials can 
make their way to Australia in the next five thousand years or 
so (probably a forced march for the more sedentary ones like 
koalas and wombats), the polar bears to the Arctic, the llamas 
to South America. The plants will have to be treated carefully 
to ensure that they reach regions in which they can grow and 
thrive. Apparently, the ark’s crew of eight—or less, if cholera, 
diphtheria, and other diseases have done their deadly work— 
will be in for significant traveling. 
There is an obvious way to decrease the workload for this 
overburdened band, to cleave more closely to the inventory 
provided in Genesis, supposing that the ark only contained 
representatives of particular “kinds,” and that, after the flood 
waters receded, there was a process of diversification within 
“kinds.” Noah didn’t need to line up pairs of all the species—it 
was enough to take pairs of the “dog kind,” the “cat kind,” the 
“deer kind,” the “snake kind,” and so forth. After the flood, the 
dog kind has diversified to give rise to wolves, coyotes, jackals, 
and foxes. The representative of the snake kind has been the 
source of hundreds of species of snakes. 


--- Page 54 ---

36 Living with Darwin 
To the extent that this idea cuts down on the necessary 
labor, it faces an obvious objection. Genesis creationism supposes 
that about five thousand years elapsed between Noah and the 
present. The process of diversification must thus be extremely 
rapid. Suppose it occurs through the splitting of kinds, and the 
descendant groups to which they give rise, so that every so 
often a group gives rise to two descendants, and that all the 
kinds and the groups they generate endure. So, in eight events 
of splitting, you could obtain just over five hundred species 
from an original “kind.”* The average rate at which splitting 
occurs is thus about once every 625 years. Although Darwin’s 
detractors complain that the diversity of life couldn't possibly 
be produced at the speed Darwinians suppose, they seem to 
envisage a rate of evolution (or “diversification within a kind”) 
extraordinarily faster than any biologist has. ever dreamed 
of—and to overlook the fact that none of this “diversification” 
has been recorded in human history. 
The only way to resurrect Genesis creationism is to con- 
sider these problems soberly and seriously, and to account 
for the ocean of anomalies, as Sedgwick once tried to respond 
to the new fossil evidence, and Burnet attempted to explain the 
mechanics of the flood. Until the hard work has been done, 
there is no reason whatsoever to question the verdict of the 
1820s. Devout geologists reluctantly said goodbye to Genesis. 
They were honest—and they were right. 
Genesis creationism lurks in the background of the creation- 
ist movement, occasionally surfacing in the writings of the 
scientific creationists of the 1970s and 1980s. But it is not visible 


--- Page 55 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 37 
in the public face of intelligent design, the movement that now 
attracts the vast majority of those who once supported intro- 
ducing “creation science” in their schools. There’s a lingering 
tendency to think of the Genesis narrative and the standard 
geological account of the history of the earth as alternative 
hypotheses about the past, deserving “balanced treatment,” a 
tendency made vivid by a double picture on the front page of the 
New York Times, depicting two distinct groups of visitors to the 
Grand Canyon, each of which offered radically different expla- 
nations of the natural wonders they saw.” If the problems cut 
as deep as I have suggested, how can the suggestion of genuine 
alternative views elicit any reaction other than laughter? 
Genesis creationism thrives on ignoring demands to work 
out systematic explanations that would address the flood of 
problems it confronts, a strategy that, as we shall see, per- 
vades the intelligent design movement. Instead of articulating 
positive doctrine, rewriting The Sacred History of the Earth, it 
seeks out phenomena for which no orthodox account has yet 
been given. Here, we are told, the allegedly uniform series 
of strata is inverted or displaced. There, we find evidence of 
human remains and dinosaur bones in the same deposits. 
Elsewhere, in the Grand Canyon perhaps, the layers are dis- 
turbed in a fashion that indicates some cataclysmic event. 
So rather than focusing on the mountain of instances that 
standard geology explains and that challenge any account 
compatible with Genesis, we’re invited to focus on a molehill 
of puzzles, as yet unsolved. The patient response, true to the 
integrity of Burnet, Sedgwick, and a host of geologists since, 
is to address the puzzles. Champions of orthodox geology 
would explain how, in some instances, the strata can be dis- 
placed, folded, or inverted. They would identify the mech- 


--- Page 56 ---

38 Living with Darwin 
anical forces at work and point to the traces of their action. 
They would examine the fossils that are meant to show that 
human beings and dinosaurs walked the earth together, and € 
uncover the misidentifications that “scientific creationists” 
have made. They would show how standard theories of depo- 
sition and the formation of strata allow for occasional events in 
which there are large modifications of the earth’s surface, and 
how the phenomena indicated provide no evidence fora univer- 
sal flood. That response has been elaborated by a significant 
number of responsible, and responsive, scientists, who have 
selflessly taken time from what they (reasonably) view as more 
important research to address the anti-Darwinian charges. 
Friends of Darwin should be grateful for these patient 
responses, but they should also protest the perceived need 
to answer whatever challenge creationists pose. Until Genesis 
creationists address the full range of the evidence of regular 
succession in the rock record, until they elaborate a detailed 
explanation as to how Noah’s ark served as the conduit through 
which the originally created living things left descendants in 
the world today, they have no genuine rival scientific hypothesis 
with comparable explanatory power to set beside an orthodox 
account of the history of our planet. An analogy may help to rein- 
force this point. The ravages of AIDS are caused by prior infection 
with the HIV virus, or so most people who have an opinion on 
the subject believe. Potential challenges based on the existence 
ofa few people who have harbored the virus for many years but 
who have not developed symptoms of AIDS might be met with 
attempts to understand what factors have inhibited the normal 
progression of the disease in these cases. Of course, future 
control of the disease could benefit from knowing what dis- 
tinguishes these more fortunate individuals. Yet, even before 


--- Page 57 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 39 
we attain this knowledge, there is no serious reason to doubt the 
standard account. Questioning the connection between HIV 
and AIDS on so slender a basis would be absurd—and danger- 
ous—given the vast body of positive evidence that medicine 
has amassed in the past quarter century. Such skepticism could 
only be remotely plausible if the medical evidence were some- 
how ignored, cast into shadow, so that only the handful of 
puzzling cases commanded our attention. 
Genesis creationism can only survive by well-publicized 
advertisement of “anomalies for Darwinism,” and by relying 
on public ignorance of the grounds on which nineteenth- 
century geologists abandoned it. Even this strategy, however, 
proves hard to sustain. For contemporary geology has access 
to windows into the past unknown in the early nineteenth 
century. The painstaking work of stratigraphical correlation, 
of charting the sequence of fossils in the rocks, has been supported 
from an entirely independent science: physics. 
Nowadays schoolchildren routinely learn that dates can be 
assigned to rocks by employing principles about radioactivity. 
Radioactive elements decay, yielding daughter elements (or 
decay products). By measuring the decay products and solving 
a few equations we can estimate the age of the stratum in 
which the products were found. This step is performed many 
times, employing different radioactive processes (processes 
that involve the decay of different initial elements), and the 
dates we calculate agree with one another—they are considered 
concordant in the terms of the trade. Thus we acquire a basis 
not only for ordering the strata, but also for creating a scale 
that assigns numerical ages to rocks at different levels.” 
Two obvious problems beset radiometric dating. First, how 
can we know the amount of an element initially present in a 


--- Page 58 ---

40 Living with Darwin 
sample? Second, how can we tell that the process hasn’t been 
contaminated through the introduction of pieces of daughter 
elements that did not come from radioactive decay? Geo- 
physicists address these questions in a variety of ways. They 
look for decay products that would not have been present 
when the materials to be dated were originally formed. Or 
they compute initial amounts by comparing different decay 
processes, using findings about the diffusion of potential inter- 
lopers to check that the system has remained uncontaminated, 
and so forth. Working out the details of different ‘dating 
methods enables them to recognize which kinds of materials 
can be dated in which ways, and, by assembling a very large 
number of independent techniques for assigning ages, they can 
rule out the concern that their estimates of initial frequencies 
or their claims about absence of contamination are wrong. 
This work has been done so thoroughly and in such detail 
that contemporary geology can talk with considerable con- 
fidence about the ages of the strata, and the times at which 
different kinds of living things emerged. It vindicates the 
conclusions drawn in the 1830s, showing that over almost 
four billion years—far longer than any nineteenth-century 
scientist could have anticipated—our planet has been home toa 
succession of floras and faunas, that most have become extinct, 
and that the species most salient to us (and to the authors of 
Genesis) are very recent arrivals. However gallantly it tilts against 
the evidence of the rock column, Genesis creationism today 
has to meet the hard challenge posed by radiometric dating.” 
Since the 1980s, Genesis creationism has retreated into 
the background, and I suspect that few architects of intel- 
ligent design are attracted by the prospect of a debate with 
geophysicists about the physics of radioactive decay. Instead, 


--- Page 59 ---

Goodbye to Genesis 41 
they concentrate their fire elsewhere, and I anticipate the 
response that my review of the demise of Genesis creationism 
merely defends an orthodoxy they are happy to allow. I hope 
that the response will be made openly and publicly, cried 
from the rooftops, because, if intelligent design accepts the 
orthodox story of the stages of life’s history, if it gives up the 
literal truth of Genesis, then its supporters should know this. 
They should not think that this movement will provide them 
with an ideal curriculum, one that will be fully compatible 
with the Christian scriptures as they understand them—or 
even that it will pave the way for some such curriculum in 
more godly times to come. If my discussion bluntly hammers 
away at points the proponents of intelligent design willingly 
concede, then they must believe, as I do, that Genesis cre- 
ationism is dead, and that dead it will remain. Here, the would- 
be resurrection men meet the limits of their power. 
Earlier critics of Darwin wanted far more than this, 
demanding a brief for biblical literalism. For, they declared, if 
the dam against nonliteral readings is once breached, the flood- 
waters of “complete apostasy” will sweep in.”* The only occa- 
sions for straying from literal interpretation are when the form 
is obviously poetic (as in the Psalms) or when the word of God 
is plainly adapted to the human point of view (as in the prob- 
lematic passage Joshua 10: 12-14, where Joshua commands the 
sun to stand still). Here, Darwin’s opponents counter a vener- 
able tradition of scriptural interpretation, one that recognizes 
many different kinds of narratives and texts within the Bible. 
In some Christian denominations, that tradition endures and the 
demand for literal reading is viewed as unnecessarily strict, 
even as quite misguided. But it isn’t hard to understand the 
literalists’ point. Suppose you abandon the literal truth of the 


--- Page 60 ---

42 Living with Darwin 
Creation story (or, more properly, stories—for there are two 
distinct versions at the beginning of Genesis), and the literal 
truth of the flood narrative. How much of the rest of Genesis also 
becomes suspect? There are, after all, a host of curious matters 
to contend with: the immense ages of the early protagonists, the 
puzzle of the mother of Cain’s children, the postmenopausal 
conception of Isaac, the remarkable behavior at Sodom where 
Lot offers his virgin daughters to an angry mob in order to 
defend the two beautiful young men (angels) who have just 
arrived, the wrestling match between Jacob and the angel. If 
we know that certain parts of the book are not literally true, we 
might worry that these peculiar stories can’t be taken at face 
value. Perhaps the allegorical parts of the Bible even extend 
beyond Genesis, so that we might wonder about Pharaoh’s 
bizarre changes of mood as his nation is afflicted with successive 
plagues, about Elijah’s miraculous confutation of the priests 
of Baal, about the virgin birth, about the vision on the road to 
Damascus, even about the resurrection itself. Devout people 
fear that, when thought through, traditions of nonliteral read- 
ing that have dominated much of the history of Christianity, 
and that are present in liberal Christianity today, will not leave 
much standing. How should we sort out what to take literally 
and what to take as allegory? Someone who poses the question 
may be led to investigate scholarly studies of the text, to learn 
the prevalent views about how it was composed and how this 
particular group of books became canonical—and, as we shall 
see, these investigations may prove profoundly disturbing. 
In saying goodbye to Genesis, do we bid farewell to a lot 
more? I shall postpone addressing the question until the final 
chapter of this essay. 


--- Page 61 ---

Chapter Three 
ONE TREE OF LIFE 
On the advice of his Cambridge mentor, John Henslow, 
Darwin chose the recently published first volume of Charles 
Lyell’s Principles of Geology, a magisterial development of 
understanding the earth’s past in terms of forces observable 
in the present, an account that summarized and extended the 
new orthodoxy that had replaced Genesis, as one of the few 
books to take on the voyage of the Beagle. Later, when the 
Beagle docked for the second time in Montevideo, Darwin 
received a copy of Lyell’s second volume, devoted to the issue 
of whether the succession of organisms whose remains were 
found in the rocks testified to some process of “transmuta- 
tion,” or whether it represented episodes of successive creation 
and extinction. Lyell argued against the relatedness of living 
things, opting instead for the idea of periodic creation, a process 
he candidly described as the “mystery of mysteries.” 
Lyell saw the alternatives with impeccable clarity. If the 
earth’s history reveals different floras and faunas at different 
stages, then there can only be two possibilities: either the later 


--- Page 62 ---

44 Living with Darwin 
ones are modified descendants of the earlier ones, or they 
are somehow created anew. How could the issue be resolved? 
In retrospect, Lyell’s ingenious arguments seem colored by 
his hopes at arriving at a psychologically and theologically 
comfortable perspective on the history of life. Given the 
apparent difficulty of deciding the issue either way, it is hardly 
surprising that Lyell’s conclusions took the form they did— 
or, that a decade later Darwin would cautiously present his 
own “transmutationist” views to his close friend, Joseph 
Dalton Hooker, by declaring that it was like “confessing a 
murder.” 
The observations on the Beagle voyage, and his subsequent 
reflections on what he had seen, were partially responsible 
for Darwin’s acceptance of a heretical view. Patiently, over 
the decades, he constructed a multifaceted case—“one long 
argument,’ as he called it—for a conclusion opposite to that 
reached by Lyell. The past history of life has left clues in the 
present, phenomena that can only be explained by supposing 
that living things are related to one another. 
Although the Origin begins with a discussion of natural 
selection, and although Darwin needed a mechanism through 
which species might be modified, much of the argument of 
the book is devoted to comparing the two alternatives Lyell 
had delineated. The “long argument” depends on reviewing 
numerous details about living things, as they appear in the 
present and as the fossil record shows them to have been in 
the past. Darwin traces the similarities and differences among 
organisms, considers the places and environments in which 
they live, describes the variations that occur in particular 
groups, and so on. In each case he asks whether the details he 
reports make sense on the supposition of creation, or whether 


--- Page 63 ---

One Tree of Life 45 
they are explicable only in terms of a history of descent from 
previous organisms. 
The following passage is typical of hundreds that recur 
throughout the Origin: 
It is difficult to imagine conditions of life more similar than deep 
limestone caverns; so that on the common view of the blind 
animals having been separately created for the American and 
European caverns, close similarity in their organization and 
affinities might have been expected; but, as Schiddte and others have 
remarked, this is not the case, and the cave-insects of the two 
continents are not more closely allied than might have been 
expected from the general resemblance of the other inhabitants 
of North America and Europe. On my view we must suppose 
that American animals, having ordinary powers of vision, slowly 
migrated by successive generations from the outer world into 
the deeper and deeper recesses of the Kentucky caves, as did 
European animals into the caves of Europe.” 
There are cave insects and ordinary, seeing, insects in North 
America, and also cave insects and ordinary, seeing, insects 
in Europe, and they occur in very similar physical environ- 
ments. All these insects share some general features. What 
interests Darwin is the fact that, beyond these common traits, 
the American cave insects show more similarities with the 
American seeing insects than they do with the European cave 
insects, just as the European cave insects are more like the 
European seeing insects than they are like the American cave 
insects. Why is this? As Lyell saw, there are only two possible 
accounts of the origins of these groups. Either the cave insects 
were separately created or they are modified descendants of 


--- Page 64 ---

46 Living with Darwin 
other organisms. Suppose that they were separately created. 
You might think that they would be created to fit their envir- 
onments, that there would be some design—an intelligent 
design perhaps—that would constitute the “best plan” for a 
cave insect, or the best plan for the common physical environ- 
ment, and that this would be found in cave insects across the 
world. That’s not what the natural world reveals, however. 
Instead, the “design” of the North American cave insects 
looks like a modification of the design of North American 
insects generally, and, likewise, the design of the European 
cave insects looks like the design of other European insects. 
Whereas the proponent of special creation has to see this as a 
puzzling brute fact—an expression of the whimsy of creation 
—Darwin offers a simple explanation. The cave insects are 
modified*® descendants of the insects who once lived in the 
vicinity, many of whose other descendants still buzz around in 
the open air outside the caverns, and that is why the American 
cave insects resemble the seeing American insects, and the 
European cave insects are like the seeing European insects. 
I've reconstructed this particular argument in some detail 
to show how powerful it is. Given the rejection of Genesis cre- 
ationism there are just two possible avenues for explaining the 
origins of groups of living things. Darwin shows that one of 
these, the “creationist avenue,” leads nowhere, but that the 
alternative does account for a particular phenomenon—the 
apparent retention of the characteristics of other insects in 
the vicinity. Thus he undercuts the main creationist explan- 
atory idea, to wit that the design of organisms is planned to 
fit their environments. So what? Creationists can surely find 
comfort in Lyell’s resonant phrase—this is a “mystery of 
mysteries.” They can reasonably declare, as far as the cave 


--- Page 65 ---

One Tree of Life 47 
insects alone are concerned, that this isa curiosity. Who should 
care about these particular creatures? The argumentative 
weight of the Origin, the heft that crushed creationist objec- 
tions during the 1860s, lies in the fact that this is not an isolated 
case. Again and again, Darwin offers arguments with a similar 
structure. 
Consider the horses. As breeders know well, foals some- 
times display coat patterns, bars or stripes, that resemble those 
found in zebras. Darwin reviews a range of examples, explain- 
ing them in terms of the descent of horses, asses, zebras, and 
other equine species from a common ancestor. He contrasts 
his account with that available on the alternative approach. 
“He who believes that each equine species was independently 
created, will, I presume, assert that each species has been 
created with a tendency to vary, both under nature and under 
domestication, in this particular manner, so as often to become 
striped like other species of the genus . . . To admit this view is, 
as it seems to me, to reject a real for an unreal, or at least for 
an unknown, cause. It makes the works of God a mere mock- 
ery and deception; I would almost as soon believe with the old 
and ignorant cosmogonists, that fossil shells had never lived, 
but had been created in stone so as to mock the shells now 
living on the sea-shore.”*' As with the cave insects, the crea- 
tionist alternative is reduced to seeing, in the apparent reten- 
tion of traits of other species, a whimsical creation, or, more 
piously, to avowing a “mystery of mysteries.” 
Why are there birds with webbed feet that live on dry land? 
Woodpeckers where no tree grows? Why are the fossils of 
extinct mammal species in Australia similar to the marsupials 
that inhabit the continent today? Why are the extinct armored 
mammals of South America akin to the currently living 


--- Page 66 ---

48 Living with Darwin 
armadillos? Why are the birds of South America so like one 
another and so different from the birds of the Old World? Why 
does the same apply in the case of reptiles and mammals? Why 
do the floras and faunas of islands regularly resemble those of 
the neighboring continents? The examples mount. “What can 
be more curious than that the hand of a man, formed for 
grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the 
paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be 
constructed on the same pattern, and should include the same 
bones, in the same relative positions?”®” Cases like this—and 
Darwin cites others concerning the relations of bones in the 
skull to vertebrae, jaw structure and leg structure in crustaceans, 
the inner structures of flowers—move him to.a strong state- 
ment of the explanatory vacuity of creationist orthodoxy. As he 
points out, when challenged to explain these similarities by 
pointing to “utility or by the doctrine of final causes,” staunch 
creationists have to admit that it is hopeless. They can only say 
that this is the way in which creation has occurred, “that it has 
so pleased the Creator to construct each animal and plant.”* 
That line becomes less plausible the more times the 
creationist is forced to utter it. For the fundamental point 
of Darwin’s deluge of examples is that, in a vast range of 
instances, when you look closely at the “design” of plants and 
animals and assume that the designer started from scratch, it 
is not at all intelligent. If you were designing a porpoise pad- 
dle, a horse leg, a human hand, a mole forelimb, and a bat’s 
wing, without any prior constraints, you could do a lot better 
by deviating from the common plan. To understand living 
things as manifesting intelligent design you have to appreciate 
the ingenuity with which the available materials have been 
modified to new purposes. It isn’t simply that these designs 


--- Page 67 ---

One Tree of Life 49 
are imperfect, but that a truly intelligent designer, liberated 
from any constraint to produce descendants from previous 
organisms, would be expected to do much better. Common 
descent shows up especially clearly in the many shared features 
of organisms that developed in quite different ways to meet the 
challenges of their environments. 
Imagine that you were given the task of painting a series 
of pictures that would realistically depict a rapidly changing 
scene. Each day, what you need to represent is different from what 
confronted you the day before, and the differences increase 
with time. Each day you are given a fresh canvas, and, at the 
end of your project, you have a series of pictures. 
You have a counterpart, someone who has a more difficult 
assignment. This person is only given one canvas, and must 
constantly paint and repaint. Some of the lines, those painted 
more recently, are relatively easy to amend or cover. Others, 
the older ones, resist concealment, becoming ever more in- 
delible, and have to be used as elements of later pictures. At the 
end of each day, a Xerox copy is made of the picture produced. 
Both of you finish, and the sequences of representations are 
compared both with one another, and with color photographs 
of the scenes you have been asked to depict. The pictures you 
have produced are quite different from the copies generated 
from your counterpart’s work—yours are judged to be far 
more faithful representations of the scenes you were asked to 
paint. Those who believe you both had a completely free hand 
(unfairly) take your counterpart to be a bungler. 
Central to the Origin is the idea that when you look at the 
details, the structures, situations, and relationships among liv- 
ing things are like your counterpart’s pictures. To suppose that 
these living things were separately created is to view the creative 


--- Page 68 ---

50 Living with Darwin 
agent as whimsical, bungling, a mediocre engineer, an unintel- 
ligent designer. 
By 1867, Darwin could write to his friend and champion, 
Thomas Henry Huxley, expressing his satisfaction that the “main 
point,” the relatedness of living things through descent with 
modification, had been widely accepted. Four years later, in an 
anonymous review, Huxley confidently judged that Darwin’s 
Origin had worked as complete a revolution in natural history 
as Newton’s Principia once achieved in astronomy. Just as, in 
the 1820s, many scholars had reluctantly given up on Genesis 
creationism, so too, in the 1860s, their counterparts, including 
Lyell himself, were forced to admit that Darwin had amassed 
far too many phenomena that could only be explained by 
supposing the relatedness of living things. 
Yet there was much that Darwin had not been able to 
explain, and he candidly drew attention to some principal prob- 
lems he could not solve. Particularly serious were questions to 
which later creationists—the scientific creationists of the 1970s 
and 1980s—and champions of intelligent design would point. 
Why does the fossil record not reveal the “numberless transitional 
links” presupposed by Darwin’s explanations? What accounts 
for the apparently sudden explosion of life at the beginning of 
the Cambrian period? (Fossil remains of multicellular organ- 
isms are first found, in considerable profusion, in strata about 
540 million years old.) How can Darwinians account for the 
origin of complex organs and structures—the eye being a 
favorite example?** Darwin’s contemporaries knew of these 
difficulties, and raised them in reviews and debates about his 


--- Page 69 ---

One Tree of Life 51 
theory. But they recognized the difference between the two 
Lyellian alternatives: one that accounted for nothing, the other 
that already explained a great deal and that held out, as Darwin 
saw, great promise for future research. 
Since 1870, the central argument for common descent, the 
argument I’ve been concentrating on here, has been applied 
to an enormous number of natural phenomena. Darwin had 
worked hard to resolve particular difficulties about distribu- 
tion, wondering how plant seeds might be carried to distant 
islands and how the worldwide distribution of some Alpine 
plants might be explained. In his garden at Down, he per- 
formed experiments to determine how long seeds could survive 
in saltwater and still retain the power to germinate. Using his 
estimates, he was able to show that the measured speeds of 
currents often allowed for transport from continent to island. 
He claimed that the scatter of Alpine plants at high elevations 
around the globe should be seen as the result of climatic 
changes. As the earth cooled, Alpine plants were able to invade 
the valleys and spread on the slopes of mountains previously 
uncolonized. With warming trends, they were no longer com- 
petitive in the lower elevations, and only the populations at 
higher levels were able to survive. As our understanding of 
the earth and its history has increased in the past decades, par- 
ticularly with the understanding of continental drift and with a 
more detailed picture of past climates, Darwin’s own answers 
have been refined and extended. The distribution of plants 
and animals around the world is explicable as the product of 
dispersal, descent, and modification. From the perspective of 
independent events of creation, it is simply a rigmarole. 
The most powerful subsequent development of Darwin’s 
central argument comes, however, from biologists’ increasing 


--- Page 70 ---

52 Living with Darwin 
ability to investigate the relationships among organisms at an 
ever finer grain. From the twentieth- or twenty-first-century 
perspective, descent involves the transmission of genes— 
segments of DNA in almost all organisms—and descent with 
modification occurs when the genes are altered: or their 
organization is rearranged. A particular stretch of DNA is 
identified by the order in which four types of molecule, the 
bases or nucleotides, adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine 
(A, C, G, T, for short) occur along it. Modifications to a DNA 
segment can occur in different ways: one of the bases may be 
changed (a T replaced by a C, say); some of the bases may be 
cut out, or another segment of DNA may be inserted; some- 
times parts of the segment may be inverted. (Famously, DNA 
molecules take the form of a double helix, in which the bases 
jut inside from the helical backbones, subject to the rules of 
pairing that As go with Ts, and Cs with Gs. DNA replicates 
by separation of the helices, with each strand serving as a 
template for the formation of a new partner. Many of the 
modifications occur when there are copying errors in this 
process.) With the advent of techniques for reading the genetic 
sequences in members of different species, the stage is set for 
comparison. Molecular evolutionists can construct an explan- 
atory picture of the changes that have produced the genetic 
diversity we find.” 
I shall have much more to say shortly about the ways in 
which our embryonic knowledge of genetic similarities and 
differences enriches the central argument of the Origin and 
vindicates the repudiation of Creationism in the 1860s. First, 
however, it’s valuable to understand how this is the culmina- 
tion of a process of comparative biology that starts with the 
most evident features of organisms—like the common bone 


--- Page 71 ---

One Tree of Life 53 
structures in mammalian forelimbs that Darwin cited—and 
proceeds to ever more minute details. The striking affinities of 
anatomy and physiology point clearly to relationships, but the 
exact character of the relationships, the determination of just 
which organisms are closer kin, depends on the history of 
modifications of the genetic material. 
Early in the history of classical genetics, long before biolo- 
gists knew that genes are segments of DNA, they discovered 
that the hereditary material was carried on the chromosomes 
—long, threadlike structures in cells, that stain in distinctive 
ways (hence the name) and that can be seen under the micro- 
scope. Later in the twentieth century, biologists recognized 
that some chromosomes display characteristic banding pat- 
terns. Later still, they could make pictures of the chromo- 
somes found in putatively related species—species that were 
seen as kin on the basis of the kinds of observable similarities 
Darwin used. They could then both demonstrate the affinities 
of chromosome number, chromosome size, and banding 
pattern, and use their analysis to uncover details of relation- 
ship that the cruder anatomical and physiological criteria 
could not determine. 
The chromosomes are the bearers of the heredity material, 
and the banding patterns reveal the large-scale ways in which 
the genes are organized (each band contains many genes, 
and the finer grain of internal organization is not shown in 
the banding patterns). By investigating the chromosomes, 
biologists obtained a first, albeit rough, picture of the genetic 
similarities among organisms. One particularly interesting 
comparison, achieved in the second half of the twentieth cen- 
tury, looked at chromosomes from human beings and from 
chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans.”* Chimpanzees and the 


--- Page 72 ---

54 Living with Darwin 
other great apes have 24 pairs of chromosomes, human beings 
23 pairs. (See Figure 3.1.) With a single exception, the chromo- 
some conventionally labeled “2” (the second longest), all our chro- 
mosomes can be matched, for size and for banding pattern, 
with chromosomes from the apes, and most closely with 
those of the chimpanzees. When the exceptional case, human 
chromosome 2, is set against the two unmatched ape chro- 
mosomes, it becomes apparent that the total length of those 
two chromosomes is almost exactly the same as the length 
of human chromosome 2—the single human chromosome is 
shorter by a very small amount—and that the banding pat- 
terns yield an almost exact match. The obvious Darwinian 
explanation for the similarity is that the four species descend 
from a common ancestor, with 24 pairs of chromosomes and 
that two of the chromosomes fused to form human chromo- 
some 2.” If human beings were a completely separate creation, 
why did the creative force find it apt to form our species in the 
chromosomal image of the great apes? 
Genes play an important role in the development and main- 
tenance of organisms by providing the instructions for building 
proteins, the molecules that are omnipresent in the chemistry 
of cells. Similarities in genes, that is in DNA sequences, are 
reflected in similarities in proteins, and, in the past decades, as 
it has become ever easier to analyze proteins associated with 
particular biological processes and activities, biologists have 
been able to compare the structures of proteins in different 
species. Here again they discern the same story. The affinities 
Darwin recognized at the level of anatomy and physiology are 
supported by the relationships among the proteins. Organisms 
previously claimed to be more distantly related have proteins that 
differ more than those seen as closer kin. Moreover, as with the 


--- Page 73 ---

BLM 
{Re 
Te 
Pat 
BI 
Hd 
m> 
BME 
STA) 
Cin 
WD 
it: 
Gxrmep 
Cm 
Dement 
rb 20) 
Me 
TH 
1S 
BS 
LE 
TRAE) 
FE 
cei 
ea 
i 
sf 
Lat 
ie 
te 
te 
CLM 
ee: 
See 
Ge) 
a 
‘ot 
ew 
CUlmIE 
pe 
= 
te 
ay 
soca 
eS 
Ting 
oe 
¢ oe 
BS 
> 
C1 
2 
ty 
eae 
rt 
at 
(oes 
8) 
O Sie 
ies) 
ot 
mim, 
et 
ae 
Ls 
eee 
tee 
t 
Meee 
tee 
| pea 
ie 
(HUES 
Meet 
iat} 
i 
LS 
|) 
ai 
eee 
me 
> 
Crm 
> 
maa 
= 
qi 
Berm 
> 
~ 
6 mite 
S 
AD 
3 
4 
P 
i 
Se 
Dame 
RG 
- 2 
WI 
(GS 
MMM 
Oy 
OME 
Ox 
a nr 
on 
“imi 
ea 
OE 
cx 
Tn 
| 
CME 
Sg 
CeGMEEO 
UE. 
(mpmecrrny 
© 
o <r 
Led 
(me 
ON 
Mem 
EF 
ee 
| 
ieee 
| a oe 
wa 
Che 
tee 
Cm) 
6 ad) 
eee 
el 
. 
Sueno 
S 
a 
on 
ie 
CT eee 
a 
Ot 
ee 
a) 
2 
= 
tes 
= 
2 
Be 
Gt 
Ba 
oie 
il 
ae) 
ere 
Soca 
eS 
Se 
Sy 
a: 
io 
HL 
Mn 
Ser 
Lo 
ot 
| 
eet 
ur 
a! 
cing: 
Riisinghn 
matt 
Sano) 
: SRC 
2 
Sc 
ie 
CREE] 
ET) 
et 
eet 
WH) 
| 
tT), 
i= 
SOU 
Ooo 
Oe 
MT 
= 
ee 
oe a o a ~ 
Comparison of the chromosomes of human beings, 
chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans. The chromosomes are 
shown in this order, from left to right, in each case. 
Figure 3.1 


--- Page 74 ---

56 Living with Darwin 
chromosomal studies, the comparison of proteins provides 
the basis for a finer analysis, for the delineation of specific 
relationships that could not have been determined on the basis 
of gross anatomy. Occasionally, there are corrections, cases in 
which one species, supposed on the basis of anatomical com- 
parison to be closer to a second rather than to athird, turns out 
to be more nearly related to the third. Even when this occurs, 
however, there is no basis for questioning broader conclusions 
about kinship. Nobody doubts that all three species are related 
more closely than they are to a vast number of more remote out- 
siders. Rather, the more fundamental criterion of modifica- 
tion at the genetic level (supposed to be reflected in the protein 
comparisons) is used to refine judgments arrived at by com- 
parative anatomy and physiology. 
Contemporary molecular genetics can now do what 
seemed, even a decade ago, improbably ambitious. Biologists, 
or, more exactly, their technicians and their robots, can pro- 
duce reams of genetic sequence data that can be used to make 
still more refined comparisons among species. The recent 
sequencing of the genomes of human beings and of chim- 
panzees has demonstrated just how close** we are. There is 
an extraordinary overlap in the DNA sequences, reinforcing 
the picture obtained from the study of chromosomes. The 
principal differences seem to lie in those parts of the DNA that 
direct the rates at which particular genes are “switched on” to 
make their characteristic protein products. Yet this is only part 
of a much larger story, one that reveals how some genes pre- 
sent in organisms very unlike the animals we know and love— 
single-celled organisms like yeasts for example—have versions 
(segments of DNA with significantly similar sequences) in all 
sorts of organisms, fungi and ferns, worms and mollusks, fish 


--- Page 75 ---

One Tree of Life 57 
and birds and mammals. The Darwinian explanation is that 
these genes originally evolved to direct some basic tasks within 
the cell—they are “housekeeping” genes—and multicellular 
organisms have taken over this machinery, sometimes modify- 
ing it, sometimes retaining parts of it that no longer serve their 
original purpose.” 
Why should organisms so diverse share related DNA 
sequences if large groups of them have been separately cre- 
ated? The creationist response must be that these genes are 
an especially good design idea, that versions of them are 
needed to carry out important tasks in all these organisms— 
for if that is not so, then assigning them across the board is 
another piece of creative whimsy. That response falls afoul 
of the fact that some of the genetic machinery needs to be 
suppressed in many instances, to be regulated so that its 
presence doesn’t interfere with important intracellular pro- 
cesses. Instead of being a brilliant plan on the part of 
“creative Intelligence,” some of the originally useful genes 
turn out to be parts of the equipment that other organisms 
are stuck with, potential obstacles to be overcome. 
If you were a talented engineer designing a whale from 
scratch, you probably wouldn't think of equipping it with a 
rudimentary pelvis. If you were designing a mammalian body, 
you might try to set things up so that development doesn't 
lead to a tangling of reproductive and urinary tubes so that one 
sex—females among marsupials like kangaroos, males among 
placental mammals (most mammals, including our own 
species)—is burdened with hernias waiting to happen. If you 
were designing a human body, you could surely improve on the 
knee. And if you were designing the genomes of organisms, 
you would certainly not fill them up with junk.*° 


--- Page 76 ---

58 Living with Darwin 
The most striking feature of the genomic analyses we 
now have is how much apparently nonfunctional DNA there 
is. Birds have it, bees have it, we have it, but some simpler 
organisms, bacteria, for example, have far less of it. The gen- 
omes of multicellular organisms are full of what look like 
the residues of sequences that were once functional genes, 
often in many copies, but that have now become degraded 
and play no role in generating proteins. Even worse, there 
are long repeating sequences, some of which~can increase 
beyond the point of simply being useless. Some of the worst 
disruptions of human functioning, both in early development 
(fragile X syndrome) and in forms of dementia (Huntington’s 
disease), occur as the result of repetitive DNA that has been 
lengthened in the transmission from parent to child. From the 
Darwinian perspective all this is explicable—the molecular 
equivalent of the tinkering that is pervasive in the history of 
life at the anatomical level. Evolution works with a common 
bone structure to yield here a bat’s wing, there a porpoise’s 
paddle. It works with inherited DNA sequences to cobble 
together molecular solutions to the problems of arranging 
profitable biochemical processes. Over the history of life, 
the residues of past tinkering accumulate in the genome, the 
once-functional sequences, the degraded remains of genes, 
the long repeats. What rival explanation can creationists pro- 
vide? They can’t say these are strikingly good designs. For 
much of what we find is a disorderly botch, some of it danger- 
ous and needing newly contrived methods of control. As 
the evidence accumulates, creationists increasingly must take 
refuge in responses Darwin saw as unsatisfactory evasions, 
appealing to the thought that these properties of life are 
unfathomable mysteries. 


--- Page 77 ---

One Tree of Life 59 
Despite the massive evidence for common descent, for a 
single tree of life, novelty creationism still lurks in the shadows 
of the intelligent design movement. The position is adjusted to 
avoid some Darwinian objections. Canny advocates will concede 
that some species are related by common descent, or even that 
this is the normal case in the history of life, but they insist that 
there have been special moments in that history when gen- 
uinely new designs have been produced by a creative agency. 
In effect, they draw bars across the allegedly unique tree of life, 
marking those places where the tree is broken, where history 
makes a fresh start. 
At which places, exactly, is the continuity of life disrupted? 
Perhaps Darwin’s opponents take more seriously his description 
of the origin of life—life “breathed” into the original forms—more 
seriously than his successors, or probably Darwin himself, 
would be inclined to do. Another prime example would be the 
origins of multicellular organisms. Yet another instance of the 
intervention of creative agency might be the appearance of our 
own species (an instance that has obvious religious resonances). 
There are hints in Of Pandas and People, the textbook written 
to give a “balanced” presentation of issues about “origins,” that 
the authors believe in an “abrupt appearance” of human 
beings.”’ If, as I suspect, their ambiguous language reflects 
a desire to break the tree of life, to separate Homo sapiens from 
everything else, then the intelligent design movement is com- 
mitted to novelty creationism. Of course, if the intelligent 
design-ers were explicitly to assume this commitment, they 
ought to come to terms with the massive body of evidence 
linking human beings to the rest of nature—the common 


--- Page 78 ---

60 Living with Darwin 
anatomical and physiological traits, the chromosomal similar- 
ities, the protein affinities, the DNA sequences we share with 
yeast, those we share with other vertebrates, those present in 
other mammals, the especially close kinship of our DNA 
with that of chimpanzees, the residues of once-functional 
sequences, the load of apparent junk. All this would have to 
be explained as the product of a special creative act, one that 
deserves to be labeled “intelligent.” Contrary to appearances, 
it must be an especially bright design idea. 
Contemporary novelty creationists don’t take ‘on that 
explanatory burden. Instead, they pursue a version of the 
strategy deployed by Genesis creationists: the best defense is 
a good attack. Just as the Genesis creationists attempt to argue 
that there are some stratigraphical anomalies, some places that 
show human and dinosaur remains in the same deposits, some 
signs of cataclysmic events, so too novelty creationists scour the 
scientific literature for unsolved puzzles. They raise familiar 
problems about the absence of transitional forms in the fossil 
record (one of the difficulties Darwin openly acknowledged 
and tried to address—the other is the efficacy of natural selec- 
tion, a topic that will occupy us in the next chapter). And they 
allege that molecular analyses are at odds with Darwinian 
claims. As with Genesis creationism, a patient response would 
review all the accusations, expose misunderstandings and 
fallacious arguments, distinguish the unsolved problems from 
the genuinely unsolvable. Here too, however, I think a less 
conciliatory reply is also appropriate. 
Let us concede, for the sake of present argument only, 
that the novelty creationists have fastened on real difficulties. 
Darwin's contemporaries knew very well that his proposals 
could not explain all the phenomena of the organic world. 


--- Page 79 ---

One Tree of Life 61 
Given the Lyellian alternatives, they opted overwhelmingly 
for the tree of life instead of events of special creation because 
the former, unlike the latter, explains something. How do 
matters stand a century and a half later? The answer is that, in 
breadth and depth, the capacity of the idea of descent with 
modification to explain the characteristics of living things has 
expanded enormously. By contrast, Creationism is just where 
it was in 1870 (or in 1859 for that matter), unable to advance 
a serious account of any of the kinds of phenomena on which 
Darwin built his case. Even if all the difficulties raised by 
novelty creationists were genuine, the choice between the 
Lyellian options should remain the same. 
My judgment may appear harsh. Aren’t there some tri- 
umphs for novelty creationism, some places where it faces 
up to the task of explaining the phenomena on which the 
Darwinian case for a single tree of life is based? Occasionally 
there are gestures that promise explanations of some of the 
evidence for the Darwinian conception of one tree of life. 
Consider the following passage from the recommended school 
text, Of Pandas and People: 
Darwinists take the widespread occurrence of fundamental 
chemical building blocks, processes, and organization as evidence 
of the common ancestry of life through macroevolution. Doesn't 
it make sense, say Darwinists, that the best adapted fundamental 
elements of ancient life forms would continue to be utilized by 
living systems, in spite of other changes through time? 
One response of design proponents is to cite the importance 
of the food chain. Food chains provide the support that makes 
possible large and diverse ecosystems. ... Design proponents 
reason that common building blocks are a matter of efficiency. If 


--- Page 80 ---

62 Living with Darwin 
the molecular building blocks used by predators were different 
from those of their prey, how could they utilize their food?” 
New acts of creative activity generate organisms with the same 
fundamental mechanisms found in previous living things, so 
that the new ones can interact with the old ones—specifically 
so that they can eat, or be eaten, by them. At first sight, it’s 
a plausible idea, about as plausible as the thought that the 
birds could evade the flood longer than the fish. 
On further thought, there are obvious questions. Just 
which of the shared features cited in support of common 
descent are to be explained: the conserved DNA sequences, 
the junk that litters the genome, the similarities of chromo- 
some number and banding patterns, or just the common 
metabolic pathways, cited by the text just before the passage 
I have quoted?* The text waves vaguely in the direction of 
a host of phenomena without offering any detailed account. 
Moreover, it mischaracterizes the Darwinian case for common 
descent. The point isn’t that the continued use of “the best 
adapted fundamental elements of ancient life forms” would 
“make sense,” but that more recent organisms are some- 
times stuck with these even when they no longer help in a new 
environment. 
This assessment, however, doesn’t penetrate to the root of 
the trouble, which is that no genuine explanation has really 
been given. There are similarities in the basic mechanisms 
and processes used by all organisms—but also differences. 
Animals, after all, don’t go in for photosynthesis. So the details 
matter. Just which features of past life would novel creation 
have to preserve if the newly created organisms were to inter- 
act with the old ones? The question is impossible to answer, 


--- Page 81 ---

One Tree of Life 63 
for we have no idea about the powers of this creative agency. 
Would it be able, for example, to create organisms with 
molecular processes employing amino acids not found in the 
rest of the organic world? Initially, this might seem impossible, 
but the biochemical tricks of life are sufficiently various to 
generate doubt: perhaps Intelligence can introduce mechan- 
isms that enable the new organisms to assemble the amino 
acids they need. 
We don’t know what Intelligence can or cannot do—and, 
equally, we have no clue about how it is directed in the process 
of creation.“ It is easy to slide into illicit personification as you 
read Of Pandas and People, to suppose that Intelligence wants 
to produce “large and diverse ecosystems.” Strictly speaking, 
of course, this is not the way we should be talking. Instead 
we should say that Intelligence is directed toward producing 
ecosystems of this sort. Apparently, Intelligence is also directed 
toward doing this by producing organisms that eat other 
organisms—and this, in itself, is a puzzling, even disturbing 
thought, since it would seem possible to equip all organisms 
with a device like photosynthesis that would avoid the messiness 
of predation. Intelligence also seems directed toward generat- 
ing organisms whose needs can be met. Nonetheless, as phe- 
nomena of extinction make plain, it’s compatible with the 
working of Intelligence that the needs of types of living things 
sometimes cease to be met—even in dramatic ways (as the 
mass extinctions, the most famous of which involves the 
demise of the dinosaurs, reveal). 
Like other expositions of intelligent design, Of Pandas and 
People simply assumes that Intelligence is directed in various 
ways and that it has particular powers, without making explicit 
any precise principle about the direction or extent of the 


--- Page 82 ---

64 Living with Darwin 
powers. We don’t know how, and to what extent, it will be 
directed toward meeting the needs of organisms, or to pro- 
ducing diversity, or what kinds of interorganic relations it is 
to favor. Nor have we any conception of what powers and 
limitations Intelligence has. In consequence, there’s no basis 
whatsoever for supposing that Intelligence would create new 
organisms with the features of those already around—or for 
determining which features would be preserved. No explanation 
is on offer, and there’s no real engagement with the mass of 
Darwinian evidence for common descent. 
* * * 
Novelty creationism is far more comfortable when it hews 
to the traditional path of anti-Darwinism, that of offering 
criticisms rather than providing positive accounts of the 
phenomena. One favorite ploy is to claim that the molecular 
analysis of proteins confounds Darwinian expectations. So, 
for example, the school text Of Pandas and People offers a table 
comparing the differences in versions of a common protein, 
cytochrome c, across a range of organisms. (See Figure 3.2.) 
After noting that the variations are “not surprising,” since they 
conform to “traditional taxonomic categories,” the authors 
proceed to their confutation of Darwinism: 
The reason this finding is so surprising is that it contradicts the 
Darwinian expectation. As we move up the scale of evolution 
from the silkworm moth, that expectation (although it was 
probably never stated as a prediction) was to find progressively 
more divergence on the molecular level. This expectation holds 
true, even though we are comparing what may be described 
as contemporary representatives of progressively appearing 


--- Page 83 ---

One Tree of Life 65 
Pig Turtle Frog Tuna Silkworm 
Pig 0 9 11 16 25 
Turtle 0 10 17 26 
Frog 0 14 27 
Tuna 0 30 
Figure 3.2 Percentage differences among cytochrome c molecules 
found in various organisms (more exactly: percentage difference in 
amino acid sequences of cytochrome c). This is a simplified version of 
the table given in Of Pandas and People. 
classes, rather than descendants and ancestors. . . . Indeed, when 
comparing living organisms, Darwinism would predict a greater 
molecular distance from the insect to the amphibian than to the 
living fish, greater distance still to the reptile, and greater than that 
to the mammal. Yet this pattern is not found.* 
As the table shows, the divergences between cytochrome c in 
silkworms, on the one hand, and tuna, bullfrogs, snapping turtles, 
and pigs, on the other, are all much the same. The differences 
in composition are 30, 27, 26, and 25 percent respectively. 
There is a very good reason why the “prediction” was never 
stated explicitly, a reason that has no basis in the caution or 
duplicity of Darwinians—for it’s not a “Darwinian expecta- 
tion” at all. The principle that derives from the idea of a single 
tree of life is both simple and obvious. Molecules in organisms 
that have had a more recent ancestor in common will diverge 
less than molecules in organisms whose last common ancestor 
is more remote. It follows that the molecular divergence 
between tuna and turtle should be less than the molecular 
difference between tuna and silkworm—as indeed it is (17 ver- 
sus 30 percent). Similar conclusions are upheld for other gen- 
uine consequences of the principle (that the divergence for pig 


--- Page 84 ---

66 Living with Darwin 
silkworm tuna frog turtle pig 
Figure 3.3. Tree diagram showing evolutionary relationships 
among five types of organisms. The heavy black circles represent 
the common ancestors of the organisms connected with them by 
upward-pointing lines. The lengths of those lines represent, very 
roughly, the time elapsed since the last common ancestor. 
and bullfrog should be less than that for bullfrog and silkworm, 
for example). What does the principle tell us about the relation 
of the divergence between tuna and silkworm to the difference 
between pig and silkworm? Absolutely nothing. For, on the 
Darwinian conception of the unique tree of life, the most 
recent common ancestor of tuna and silkworm was also the 
most recent common ancestor of pigs and silkworms. That 
ancestor also lived a very long time ago. More recently pigs 
and tuna had their last common ancestor, and, since then, their 
versions of the protein will have diverged. (See Figure 3.3.) The 
alleged confutation evaporates. 
Turn now to the complaints about the absence of “inter- 
mediates” in the fossil record. Paleontologists have recon- 
structed all sorts of sequences of fossils to show various 


--- Page 85 ---

One Tree of Life 67 
transitions in the history of life, and canny novelty creationists 
acknowledge this. They are not committed to denying that 
descent with modification ever occurs, or even that it is some- 
times caused by natural selection. Indeed, they should be 
quite unperturbed by the complaint, often launched by scien- 
tists against intelligent design, that their ideas are dangerous 
because they do not allow for the evolution of pathogens. 
Instead, they dispute the major transitions in evolution, the 
points at which genuine novelties emerge—birds or mammals, 
say, or the first land-dwelling animals, or even the first multicellular 
organisms. In none ofthese instances, they claim, can Darwin’s 
defenders point to a fine-grained series of ancestral forms out 
of which the new types gradually emerge. 
Darwin lamented the poverty of the fossil record, comparing 
it to a book in which most pages have been destroyed and, on 
the surviving pages, most of the words blotted out.*° To be 
fossilized at all, an organism has to die in the right place at the 
right time under the right conditions, and even then there are 
good chances that subsequent events will destroy the traces. 
From the 1860s on, Darwinians have pointed to a reptile-bird 
intermediate, the famous Archeopteryx, to show that, despite 
the vicissitudes of fossilization, there are cases in which major 
transitions can be found in the rocks. Prominent novelty cre- 
ationists demur, thus Phillip Johnson states, “If we are testing 
Darwinism rather than merely looking for a confirming 
example or two, then a single good candidate for ancestor 
status is not enough to save a theory that posits a worldwide 
history of continual evolutionary transformation.””” 
Johnson assumes that a fine-grained sequence of inter- 
mediates should be found in the fossil record. That, however, 
is something on which studies of the physics and chemistry of 


--- Page 86 ---

68 Living with Darwin 
fossilization can, and do, pronounce. Estimates derived from 
these independent areas of science reveal that the chances of 
fossilization are so low that we should not expect to find inter- 
mediate forms in the profusion Johnson requires. 
Yet paleontologists are sometimes lucky, as in the case of 
Archeopteryx and as in another example of a major transition, 
the reptile-mammal transition. Here there are many speci- 
mens of therapsids (mammal-like reptiles) and of early mammals. 
Johnson shows his appreciation of this case by referring to it 
as “the crown jewel of the fossil evidence for Darwinism.”** 
He continues with an unusually accurate condensation of the 
paleontological results. “At the boundary, fossil reptiles and 
mammals are difficult to tell apart. The usual criterion is that 
a fossil is considered reptile if its jaw contains several bones, of 
which one, the articular, connects to the quadrate bone of 
the skull. If the lower jaw consists of a single dentary bone, 
connecting to the squamosal bone of the skull, the fossil is 
classified as a mammal.”* It might seem very difficult for any 
animal to be “intermediate” between reptiles and mammals, 
given this criterion in terms of jaw morphology. There is, 
however, a very rich set of fossils showing reduction of 
the reptilian features and development of the mammalian 
traits. Particularly remarkable are fossils, most famously 
Diarthrognathus (which literally translates to “double jaw 
joint”), in which both types of jaw joint are present. 
Johnson recognizes that this atypically rich collection of 
specimens has been preserved, but he denies that it provides 
what Darwinians need. “Creatures have existed with a skull 
bone structure intermediate between that of reptiles and 
mammals, and so the transition with respect to this feature 
is possible. On the other hand, there are many important 


--- Page 87 ---

One Tree of Life 69 
features by which mammals differ from reptiles besides the 
jaw and ear bones, including the all-important reproductive 
systems.” It appears to be a reasonable demand. After all, 
the Darwinian argument relies on assuming that other 
mammalian features will correlate with dentary-squamosal 
jaw joints, and other reptilian features will go along with 
quadrate-articular jaw joints—as they do in living mammals 
and living reptiles. Yet that is just an assumption, and maybe 
things were different in the past. So we don’t have really solid 
evidence for the transition unless we have fossils that show 
changes in “the all-important reproductive systems.” 
Once again, Johnson has described just the evidence that 
would satisfy him—and very cleverly, too. For, as he ought 
to know, there isn’t a single mammalian reproductive system, 
but three—that of the monotremes (egg-laying mammals like 
the duck-billed platypus and the echidnas), that of the mar- 
supials, and that of placental mammals. Moreover, as he also 
surely knows, the fossil record will virtually never reveal dif- 
ferences among any of these and the reptilian reproductive 
system, because the differences depend on the soft parts, 
parts that almost never get fossilized.’' So the demand is for 
fossils of a very specific sort, and the physics and chemistry of 
fossilization tell us that the probability that those fossils will 
exist is effectively zero. It’s precisely because our only access 
to the full range of characteristics that changed in the reptile- 
mammal transition is through the distinctive bone structures 
that can be preserved in the rocks, that paleontologists use the 
structure of the jaw joint as a diagnostic tool. 
There are signs that Johnson recognizes that not all is well with 
the line of argument I’ve been examining, for he follows it up with 
an alternative. Darwinians are troubled by an embarras de 


--- Page 88 ---

70 Living with Darwin 
richesse. “But large numbers of eligible candidates are a plus 
only to the extent that they can be placed in a single line of 
descent that could conceivably lead from a particular reptile 
species to a particular early mammal species. The presence of 
similarities in many different species that are outside of any 
possible ancestral line only draws attention to the fact that 
skeletal similarities do not necessarily imply ancestry. The 
notion that mammals-in-general evolved from reptiles-in- 
general through a broad clump of diverse therapsid lines is 
not Darwinism. Darwinian transformation requires a single 
line of ancestral descent.” This is a mass of confusions. 
Contemporary Darwinians think of the tree of life as bushy— 
at moments of major transition there are often many branches 
(branches on branches, and so on), most of which are short 
lived. Darwinians expect that there will be many closely related 
species—daughters and sisters and cousins and aunts. But it 
may be difficult, with the tools available, to reconstruct which 
of the clearly related species is ancestral to which, to sort out 
the mothers and the daughters from the sisters and the cousins 
and the aunts. The fossil record doesn’t reveal the emergence 
of mammals-in-general from reptiles-in-general (whatever 
that would mean). Rather it shows that there were lots of 
related therapsid species that are potential ancestors to the first 
mammals, and we cannot tell (at least at present) which of 
them was the true progenitor. 
Because novelty creationist attacks seem so often to be 
based on misunderstandings or unwarranted assumptions, the 
patient response requires genuine patience. Furthermore, it is 
easy, when working through the deficiencies of some criti- 
cism, to feel that the task is Sisyphean, that no sooner has this 
particular stone reached the summit than another will appear 


--- Page 89 ---

One Tree of Life 71 
and require the same time-consuming work. Creationist litera- 
ture is especially creative in its misunderstandings, in pinning 
odd views on the opposition and then playing “Gotcha!”— 
as when Darwinism is committed to a “prediction” about 
cytochrome c, or when it is required to exhibit fossils that show 
changes in the reproductive system. It isn’t that Darwinism is 
a “flawed theory,” beset by innumerable problems. Rather, 
creationists can manufacture spurious “problems” faster than 
evolutionists can unmask their sophistries. 
Because of this, it’s important to appreciate the less patient 
response, to understand the fundamental structure of the 
debate. As Lyell saw so clearly, once you admit that there have 
been different types of organisms on the earth at different 
historical stages, there are just two possibilities. Either the 
new ones come from the older ones, or the new ones spring 
into being from a new creative act. Darwin's long argument 
showed that Lyell had picked the wrong option. Recognizing 
a single tree of life can account for innumerable details of the 
organic world that Creationism can only regard as the whimsy 
of Intelligence—and Lyell himself appreciated the point. With 
the explosion of detail in the century and a half since, coupled 
with the continued explanatory bankruptcy of the creationist 
program, intellectual honesty requires that one follow Lyell’s 
honorable lead. 


--- Page 90 ---

aie 
a 
_- 
5 
eee fue? oe dened niet 
Aner ‘Tesh dings 5 aie 
 Grarina tt yuibties piven Ay ranracespo 
caves. ests“ dy weg yin nd 
pares wl =) basemen i rind ld ihageireerateion ntl 
ra eer a) wage roy ep? ee Rie rag) ailtititern - 
“ah OP <ueaes on > larger ries scat 
eS ‘mat mc tints Ary: sited waren: 
2 s 
Vettes: 4 anny oy) s¥ai ote etsalt nie igen 
| Digieerete inne -opia rir neers Cas Be eee woas!aanlp tar 
SoOeRCingy: re tas Anh &. I nie on wena wu ee 
Seow yt caer: nal wore preditio Sale B= : 
; PUN Teo’ y Hibegrdasyh beter ma iene? ee: 
‘Zits a) enti War-tels een gies ene TatG 
: mi 
geomet: oa tate tare 
é ite 62h, Apel 
pa ce 
<<tteowsBiihe fibdiorey Sit sore coeur tin emp iin 
pies FE lan ymgeiwoed malls ical die Lopdefhcne ioe ‘leat 
aie verte fl! tevinia dps ori i Sy chi sngligeidy : 
Dabo eth ti oer itnengeds ola ielliniiet 
arneee cold Steerer t hen copy Saha ~ 
Sern a t iw ME Ca —="V ais # clrtiehoine 
7 * <> > , x 7) et mo a i ( 
‘ge ; eee a re ba ee 
ye a> ad _ ; 
fi Snes a ain A rg 
i 7 = % " > —>H 
’ palee io Uvex Cha Vis 
= i ic?’ Que  — fies - Rios 
y ‘ 
a —— ; 
> - 


--- Page 91 ---

Chapter Four 
AT THE MERCY OF CHANCE? 
Some ... deceived by the atheism they bore within them, 
imagined that the universe lacked guidance and order, as ifit were 
at the mercy of chance. 
St. Basil the Great 
(quoted by Pope Benedict XVI in discussing 
intelligent design) 
Henry Charles Fleeming Jenkin, once professor of engineer- 
ing at the University of Glasgow, is best remembered for his 
work with Lord Kelvin in laying the transatlantic cable. He 
probably never knew of the great compliment Darwin paid 
him in 1869, in a letter to Hooker, in which Darwin reflected 
on the review that Fleeming Jenkin had published two years 
earlier. “Fleeming Jenkin,” Darwin wrote, “has given me 
much trouble, but has been of more use to me than any other 
essay or review.” The trouble concerned natural selection, 
for Fleeming Jenkin’s analysis suggested that the accumulation 
of small variations under selection could not produce the 
effects Darwin had claimed. 
The difficulty was focused by using an example whose 
unconscious assumption of imperial majesty and racial 


--- Page 92 ---

74 Living with Darwin 
superiority is breathtaking—Fleeming Jenkin probably ex- 
pected his readers to glow and agree: 
Suppose a white man to have been wrecked on an island inhabited 
by negroes... Suppose him to possess the physical strength, 
energy, and ability of a dominant white race . . . grant him every 
advantage which we can conceive a white to possess over the 
native . . . yet from all these admissions, there does not follow the 
conclusion that, after a limited or unlimited number of genera- 
tions, the inhabitants of the island will be white. Our shipwrecked 
hero would probably become king; he would kill a great many 
blacks in the struggle for existence; he would have a great many 
wives and children . . . In the first generation there will be some 
dozen of intelligent young mulattoes, much superior in average 
intelligence to the negroes. We might expect the throne for 
some generations to be occupied by a more or less yellow king; 
but can any one believe that the whole island will gradually 
acquire a white, or even a yellow population . . . ?** 
The argument assumes a particular view of inheritance, that 
different characteristics in parents are likely to blend in their off- 
spring, and the appeal to “color” is, unfortunately, well chosen 
to make the point. For not only did Darwin lack any rival account 
of the mechanism of heredity, but he would have been hard- 
pressed to deny that, with respect to some traits, traits like skin 
color, blending of parental characteristics is often observed. 
Fleeming Jenkin raised other troubles as well, using Lord 
Kelvin’s estimate of the age of the earth to argue that natural 
selection could not possibly have produced the observed diver- 
sity of life in the time allotted. Here, too, Darwin had no 
effective answer, for any attempt to “speed up” the operation 


--- Page 93 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 75 
of natural selection would fall foul of the fact that, in human 
history, no example of “species transmutation” had been 
observed. Small wonder, then, that in the wake of two power- 
ful objections, one questioning the theoretical coherence of 
selection as Darwin understood it, and one using all the author- 
ity of physics to derive the inadequacy of selection, many who 
accepted the principle of a single tree of life sought different 
mechanisms for evolution. Some—the first champions of intel- 
ligent design, perhaps?—supposed that evolution had unfolded 
the diversity of living things, but that it had been guided 
throughout by the hand of the Creator. 
* * * 
It took several decades to appreciate that these apparently 
powerful arguments were wrong. Eventually, Kelvin’s seem- 
ingly impeccable estimates were undermined by the discovery 
of radioactivity, and the age of the earth was fixed at over four 
billion years,” instead of a few hundred million. Eventually, the 
commonsensical notion of blending inheritance was replaced 
by a theory that identified discrete units of inheritance, as 
Mendel’s insights were refined by T. H. Morgan and his succes- 
sors. Even then, however, it took time to understand just 
how to marry Darwin’s ideas with the new genetics, and to 
articulate a “genetical theory of natural selection.””° 
In the 1930s, however, the marriage was officially recog- 
nized, and natural selection was made respectable at last. 
Furthermore, the new genetic perspective revealed that many 
of the alternative causes of evolutionary change, proposed in 
the decades since 1870, could not do what was claimed for 
them. Almost by default, natural selection emerged as the 
principal mechanism of evolutionary change. 


--- Page 94 ---

76 Living with Darwin 
The dominant perspective, from the “modern synthesis” 
achieved in the 1930s to the present, takes evolution funda- 
mentally to consist of changes within the genome—the 
replacement of some alleles (forms of a gene) with others, the 
insertions of extra copies of a gene, or the rearrangement of 
the genetic material. Localized variation can occur in three 
distinct ways. There can be replacement of one of the DNA 
bases (A, C, G, T) by one of the others (substitutions—as, for 
example when a stretch of DNA consisting of the sequence 
CGGACTCG is replaced by CGGAATCG). There can be 
deletions of part of the sequence (CGGACTCG gives way to 
CGGTCG). Or there can be insertions (CGGACTCG becomes 
CGGGACTCG). Most of these changes disrupt the normal 
functioning of the genetic regions in which they occur. 
Frequently, the proteins that would usually be formed are no 
longer generated, or are generated in variants that fail to sup- 
port the processes for which they are required. Occasionally, 
however, a mutation will be advantageous, enabling the organ- 
ism in which it appears to do better in the competition for 
survival and reproduction. When that occurs, natural selection 
works in very much the way Darwin conceived of it. 
More global changes may well prove to be critical to the 
fashioning of advantageous genetic novelties. Perhaps the 
principal steps in the evolution of life involve the miscopying 
of particular regions of DNA, fruitful errors that allow for 
duplications of genes or for reshuffling of the genetic material. 
If a modification like this juxtaposes two DNA segments that 
were previously relatively far apart, the result may be to alter the 
frequency with which proteins are made—perhaps a region 
that directs the formation of a protein is now equipped with 
an adjacent sequence that increases (or decreases) the rate 


--- Page 95 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 77 
at which that protein is produced. Comparative genomic 
sequencing, which has already begun and that is likely to 
provide enormous information in the next decade or two, can 
enlighten us about the ways in which the most important 
evolutionary changes, the traits that lead to significantly differ- 
ent forms of life, have originated. Even if the source of a great 
leap forward lies in the rearrangement of genetic material 
rather than a new local mutation, the initial advantage it 
bestows will fuel its spread by natural selection, just as Darwin 
envisaged, and may thereby serve as the basis for the next 
advance. 
Central to Darwinian orthodoxy is the idea that these 
fundamental changes in the genetic material are not directly 
caused by the needs of the organism. The fact that a mammal 
would survive longer or reproduce more if it had a thicker 
coat does not mean that the genes causally involved in the 
production of hair and fur will mutate more frequently, or 
that, when they do, the variations will tend toward increased coat 
thickness. Similarly, our understanding of the ways in which 
the gametes (sperm and eggs) are formed in many organisms” 
forecloses the possibility that characteristics acquired during 
an organism’s lifetime can be passed on to its descendants, 
scotching the proposal that animals’ efforts to meet their 
needs can accelerate the pace of evolutionary change. Hence 
two of the mechanisms heralded by earlier evolutionists— 
including Darwin himself—as alternatives to natural selection 
were discredited by the modern synthesis of the 1930s.”* 
Contemporary evolutionary theory doesn’t provide only a 
theoretical account of how evolution under natural selection 
would occur, but also investigates the ways in which natural 
selection produces changes in particular populations. This is 


--- Page 96 ---

78 Living with Darwin 
done most readily for microorganisms—bacteria forced to 
grow in harsh environments, on media that fail to supply some 
crucial requirement for their survival. In the past 70 years, 
laboratory studies of this sort have demonstrated natural 
selection in organisms with relatively short generation times, 
and biologists have been able to measure rates of mutation. 
There have also been studies of natural selection in the wild, 
perhaps most spectacularly the detailed investigation of the 
birds that, according to legend, inspired Darwin to think 
about evolution in the first place. For over a quarter century, 
Peter and Rosemary Grant have led a research team that 
has thoroughly studied the finches on several islands in the 
Galapagos archipelago, showing through detailed obser- 
vation of the birds in successive generations, how natural 
selection has modified them, most notably in the size and 
shape of the beak.” 
Another famous study, one that will be relevant later, concerns 
the persistence of sickle-cell anemia. This disease arises in 
people who have two copies of a mutant allele (a variant form 
of a gene), the S allele, which generates an abnormal form of 
hemoglobin. Because the abnormal molecules have a ten- 
dency to form rigid crescent shapes under conditions where 
oxygen is in relatively short supply, these molecules can 
become stuck in narrow capillaries, leading to problems in 
blood circulation. Patients then experience crises, they suffer 
from kidney failure and strokes, and they often die young. 
You might think that natural selection would tell against the 
S allele, and that the normal version, the A allele, would be 
virtually universal. That hasn’t happened because the mixed 
combination, AS, not only yields the benefits associated with 
normal hemoglobin, but also provides protection against 


--- Page 97 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 79 
malaria. So, in African populations, and in other areas in 
which malaria is widespread, the S allele persists at a low but 
stable frequency, one that the theory of natural selection can 
predict quite precisely. 
Tracking down the exact way in which natural selection is 
operating on a wild population of organisms—that is, a popu- 
lation outside the controlled conditions of the laboratory—is 
extremely time consuming, for researchers have to consider 
alternative potential explanations for the increase of the trait 
that seems to be favored. They also have to recognize that 
genetic differences are often reflected in a number of distinct 
characteristics, for genetic modifications typically have mul- 
tiple effects, and it would be wrong to fasten on one of these as 
the crucial change that confers an advantage, without looking 
at the entire package. Seven decades of patient investigation 
have produced an impressive array of examples, some more 
complete and rigorous than others, enough certainly to show 
that natural selection can do the sort of thing Darwin claimed 
for it. The only rival mechanism for evolutionary change that 
has been theoretically vindicated and empirically demon- 
strated is “genetic drift,” a process in which equivalent alleles 
increase or decline in frequency in populations as a result of 
the accidents of mating or survival. Although this process may 
have helped to maintain genetic variation, it seems quite 
unlikely that the principal transitions in the history of life, 
many of which seem to show new, if clumsy, adaptations to a 
different environment, have involved lucky victories by some 
genes over equivalent alternatives. So Darwin's thesis that 
natural selection has been the main agent of evolutionary 
change has won vindication by attrition. It seems to be the 
only potential cause left standing. 


--- Page 98 ---

80 Living with Darwin 
Yet, despite everything that investigators of natural selec- 
tion have accomplished—and their achievements should not 
be underestimated—there are plainly things they have no hope 
of demonstrating. Given the difficulties of field research, any 
well-supported conclusion has to be relatively limited in scope. 
You show that a particular trait in a species has been shaped or 
maintained by natural selection, that finch beaks adapt to the 
distribution of available food items, for example. Darwin’s 
opponents can concede the studies, and question the sig- 
nificance of the results. This only shows, they declare, that 
natural selection can produce small-scale changes. It can 
replace one form of a finch with a different type. It’s a far cry 
from that to think that natural selection can generate (say) 
land-dwelling animals from fish. Nor does it help to point 
to the laboratory, and explain how all sorts of metabolically 
ingenious bacteria or pesticide-resistant insects can arise 
through natural selection. The opponents will charge that this 
is just more of the same, evolution “within a kind,” perhaps a 
bit more dramatic than the results from the field, but also 
potentially compromised by the fact that the process has 
occurred in a tightly controlled setting. They want something 
much grander, a detailed study showing natural selection 
“transmuting” one “kind” into another—giving an amphibian 
from a fish, or a bird from a reptile, for example. 
Nobody can answer that demand. From a Darwinian 
perspective, however, that isn’t because the theory of natural 
selection is seriously flawed, but because the demand is 
absurdly naive. Biologists have measured mutation rates. They 
know that favorable variations arise by mutation quite rarely, 


--- Page 99 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 81 
and that, if they were to try experimenting on the natural 
selection of organisms with relatively long generation times, 
it would take the lives of thousands of successive investigators 
to provide even the slightest chance of even the first steps 
toward experimental success. They know that the earth is 
ancient, that geological time has offered far more opportunities 
for evolutionary “experiments” than successive generations of 
human beings could manage. They know that there is just 
one tree of life, and that the evolutionary changes in question 
did occur in the expanses of geological time. On a human 
timescale, natural selection can be observed to do small things. 
Nothing else is known as a potential agent for the evolutionary 
changes. Therefore, it’s reasonable to think that the action of 
selection will produce more dramatic changes over longer 
periods, that the very large changes would be observable on 
a timescale inaccessible to human beings, one vastly greater 
than that of even our most protracted squabbles. 
Of course, if some of the pieces of “knowledge” I’ve 
attributed aren’t well established, then there will be grounds 
for questioning this defense. This is one reason I’ve tried to 
show why contemporary science is committed to an ancient 
earth and a single tree of life. As we shall see, intelligent design 
allows for, perhaps even encourages, backsliding on these 
points, but the official doctrine is that there is no quarrel with 
them. According to that doctrine, even if Darwinians are right 
about the age of the earth and the relatedness of all organisms, 
there are reasons to doubt whether the successes of selection 
in the small automatically translate into successes with more 
significant evolutionary transitions. 
At the heart of the intelligent design movement are two kinds 
of arguments, both designed to question the thought that 


--- Page 100 ---

82 Living with Darwin 
natural selection “scales up,” by identifying transitions that could 
not be managed by selection. The “concrete case” argument, as 
I shall call it, selects a collection of evolutionary changes, discusses 
them in detail, then endeavors to show that there’s no conceiv- 
able process of natural selection that could have started from 
the original group of organisms and culminated in the finally 
modified group. The “computational” argument abstracts from 
the details of individual cases, and presents them in terms of a 
more skeletal description, which is deployed to assign some 
basic probabilities. This basic assignment then allows for a 
calculation of the probability that the transition could have 
come about through the action of natural selection, and, since 
the estimate is extraordinarily tiny, the conclusion is that causation 
by natural selection is, to all intents and purposes, impossible. 
Neither of these lines of argument is original with con- 
temporary advocates of intelligent design. The concrete case 
argument is presented by Darwin himself as one of the “diffi- 
culties on theory” he attempts to address. The computational 
argument is prefigured in the writings of twentieth-century 
evolutionists who follow Darwin’s lead in raising difficulties 
they intend to explore—and possibly resolve—by finding other 
natural mechanisms that would substitute for or complement 
natural selection. Precisely because anti-selectionism can be 
pursued, thoughtfully and respectably, within evolutionary 
theory, these prominent strands in the intelligent design move- 
ment are hard to dismiss as “not science.” By the same token, 
however, it’s reasonable to wonder why intelligent design casts 
itself as the source of a new alternative, one that demands a 
novel high-school curriculum, rather than simply as proposing 
that biology classes might be made more exciting by consider- 
ing some of the suggestions of maverick evolutionists. 


--- Page 101 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 83 
The answer is that intelligent design is a two-part doctrine. 
Despite the fact that its negative part, its anti-selectionism, 
occupies almost all the movement’s writings, there’s also a 
positive claim, the thesis that whatever cause produced par- 
ticular changes in the history of life deserves the label “intelli- 
gent.” Hence, two issues need to be addressed. First, how 
troublesome are the complaints, the versions of the concrete 
case and computational arguments? Second, even if we were to 
wonder whether natural selection can yield the outcomes to 
which the complainers point, what reasons are there for supposing 
that the actual cause, whatever it is, is intelligent? 
* * OK 
Darwin’s own consideration of the concrete case argument 
focused on some complex organs and structures that he rightly 
believed to be hard to understand in terms of natural selection. 
Two examples are prominent in the Origin, the eye and the 
electric organs found in some fish. The latter example discon- 
certed Darwin because the fish with electric organs are of very 
different types, and have their organs in different parts of their 
bodies. Much to his relief, research on electric fish carried out 
by a contemporary who was not sympathetic to evolutionary 
ideas—“McDonnell of Dublin (a first-rate man)”°'—revealed 
that, for each type of fish with an electric organ, there is a 
related fish with a similar organ (not functionally electric) in 
the same position. What had initially appeared to be the 
challenge of understanding how different electric organs had 
been built from scratch, became the much simpler question of 
how a similar change had occurred in each instance. 
Darwin himself offered a tentative proposal about the evolution 
of the eye. He supposed that sensitivity to light might come in 


--- Page 102 ---

84 Living with Darwin 
degrees, and that it might be possible to find, among existing 
organisms, some with a crude ability to respond to light, others 
with a more refined capacity, and so on in something like 
a series. Perhaps, he speculated, research on these creatures 
might expose reasons why the different levels of sensitivity 
provided an advantage over rival organisms who had less, thus 
providing a way of answering (or sidestepping) the creationist 
quip, “What use is halfan eye?” 
It has taken more than a century of research on a wide 
variety of organisms to demonstrate that Darwin’s hunch was 
basically right. Appearances to the contrary, organs and struc- 
tures sensitive to light can be assembled piecemeal, with the 
intermediates enjoying some advantage over the competition. 
Biologists have studied organisms that respond to the light that 
impinges on their surfaces, organisms with indentations of 
the superficial layer that are able to acquire information about 
the direction of the light, organisms with deeper indentations 
whose light detection is more fine grained, organisms that 
have a structure resembling a pinhole camera, organisms that 
interpose a translucent medium between the surface and the 
aperture through which the light comes—and so on. By study- 
ing this sequence of organisms, they have been able to explore 
the transitions through which relatively crude abilities to 
detect light were successively refined. One feature of the 
story deserves emphasis. Darwin didn’t start with a comparison 
between the fully formed eye—in a human being or an octopus, 
say—and then think of the component parts as being intro- 
duced, one at a time. He resisted the challenge to explain first 
the advantage of an eighth of an eye, then the advantage of a 
quarter of an eye, and so on, and focused instead on a function, 
light sensitivity, that might have been refined from an initial 


--- Page 103 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 85 
state of absence. To put it more bluntly, he didn’t allow his 
envisaged challengers to define the sequence of “inter- 
mediates” for him. 
Savvy champions of the concrete case argument know this 
story. They appreciate Darwin’s ingenuity in responding to 
the challenge, and, although they think the response ulti- 
mately fails, their reasons for this judgment depend on a 
more general problem for evolution under natural selection. 
That more general problem derives from the fine structure of 
the components of complex organs (like eyes), the molecular 
mechanisms that have to be in place for eyes to work. For all 
Darwin’s cleverness, he failed to appreciate the full depth, and 
the full generality, of the difficulty confronting him. 
The principal exponent of the complex case argument is 
Michael Behe, a professor of biochemistry, who argues at 
length in Darwin’s Black Box that the real troubles of natural 
selection become visible when you appreciate the molecular 
components of complex biological systems. Almost every- 
where you look in nature, there are complicated structures 
and processes, with many molecular constituents, and all the 
constituents need to be present and to fit together precisely 
for things to work as they should. Biochemical pathways 
require numerous enzymes to interact with one another, in 
appropriate relative concentrations, so that some important 
process can occur. If you imagine a mutation in one of the 
genes that directs the formation of some essential protein, 
or if you suppose that the genetic material becomes shuffled 
in a way that allows for differences in the rates at which pro- 
teins are formed, it looks as though disaster will ensue. 
Crucial pieces will be missing, or won't be present in the right 
proportions, so that everything will break down. How then 


--- Page 104 ---

86 Living with Darwin 
could organisms with the pertinent structures or processes 
have evolved from organisms that lacked them? 
Behe offers numerous instances of molecular machines 
that, he claims, could not have been built up in stages by nat- 
ural selection. Among his most influential examples is.a dis- 
cussion of devices that some bacteria use for motion, flagella. 
He contrasts the bacterial flagellum with a different motor, 
used by other cells, the cilium. “In 1973 it was discovered that 
some bacteria swim by rotating their flagella. So the bacterial 
flagellum acts as a rotary propeller—in contrast to the-cilium, 
which acts more like an oar.”® Both flagella and cilia are 
intricate structures, and Behe describes the many molecular 
parts and systems that have to be present if they are to do their 
jobs. He concludes that the complexity of the organization 
dooms any attempt to explain its emergence as the result of 
natural selection. “As biochemists have begun to examine 
apparently simple structures like cilia and flagella, they have 
discovered staggering complexity, with dozens or even hun- 
dreds of precisely tailored parts. Itis very likely that many ofthe 
parts we have not considered here are required for any cilium 
to function in a cell. As the number of required parts increases, 
the difficulty of gradually putting the system together sky- 
rockets, and the likelihood of indirect scenarios plummets. 
Darwin looks more and more forlorn.”™ Indeed, the most 
famous portraits of Darwin hardly make him look exactly 
cheerful, but it’s worth asking why examples like these should 
render him more forlorn. 
Perhaps it seems obvious. Natural selection depends upon 
mutations that are not produced in response to the organism’s 
needs. The bacteria are at the mercy of chance, which will fling 
in this variant protein or that, with negligible probability that 


--- Page 105 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 87 
the latest novelty will fit with what went before or will 
contribute to the design project of building a flagellum. In 
essentials, however, this is precisely parallel to an old crea- 
tionist strategy, just the one that Darwin sidestepped in the 
case of the eye. Behe has specified how the intermediates are 
to be formed, and it isn’t surprising that his preferred scenario 
has the air of impossibility. 
What exactly is known about the bacterial flagellum? 
During the past few decades, careful molecular studies have 
identified the genes that direct the assembly of the motor, and 
have explored the ways in which it is put together in the 
development of an individual bacterium. Some mutations in 
these genes allow for bacteria to move, albeit less efficiently. 
What is currently missing, however, is that systematic study 
of the differences among bacteria with flagella and bacteria 
without that would parallel the knowledge attained in the case 
of vision. A sufficiently intensive study of the genomes of 
bacteria that lack flagella would enable biologists to explore 
the potential role of some of the crucial genes, and of the 
proteins they give rise to, when others are absent, and thus 
enable them to make more progress with Behe’s apparently 
formidable challenge. 
Most sciences face unsolved problems—indeed the exciting 
unsolved problems are the motivators for talented people to 
enter a field. Chemists still struggle to understand how newly 
made proteins fold into their three-dimensional shapes as they 
are synthesized. To take an instance closer to hand, Behe’s 
own discussion acknowledges that there’s still a lot to learn 
about the molecular structure and functions of cilia. Unsolved 
questions are not typically written off as unsolvable—nobody 
proposes that there’s some special force, unknown to current 


--- Page 106 ---

88 Living with Darwin 
chemistry (an “intelligent force” perhaps?) that guides the 
proteins to their proper forms, or some hand that assembles 
the cilium in the development of an individual bacterium. 
Why, then, should we believe that the problem of the bac- 
terial flagellum is unsolvable? Just because, in the absence of 
systematic molecular studies of bacteria with and without 
flagella, we can’t currently give a satisfactory scenario for the 
evolution of the bacterial flagellum under natural selection, 
why should we conclude that further research couldn't dis- 
close how that evolution occurred? 
We are beguiled by the simple story line Behe rehearses. 
He invites us to consider the situation by supposing that the 
flagellum requires the introduction of some number—20, 
say—of proteins that the ancestral bacterium doesn’t ori- 
ginally have. So Darwinians have to produce a sequence of 
21 organisms, the first having none of the proteins, and each 
subsequent organism having one more than its predecessor. 
Darwin is forlorn because however he tries to imagine the 
possible pathway along which genetic changes successively 
appeared, he appreciates the plight of numbers 2-20, each of 
which is clogged with proteins that can’t serve any function, 
proteins that interfere with important cellular processes. 
These organisms will be targets of selection, and will wither 
in the struggle for existence. Only number 1, and number 21, 
in which all the protein constituents come together to form 
the flagellum, have what it takes. Because of the dreadful plight 
of the intermediates, natural selection couldn't have brought 
the bacterium from there to here. 
The story is fantasy, and Darwinians should disavow any 
commitment to it. First, there is no good reason for supposing 
that the ancestral bacterium lacked all, or even any, of the 


--- Page 107 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 89 
proteins needed to build the flagellum. It’s a common theme 
of evolutionary biology that constituents of a cell, a tissue, or 
an organism are put to new uses because ofa modification of the 
genome. Perhaps the immediate precursor of the bacterium 
with the flagellum is an organism in which all the protein con- 
stituents are already present, but are employed in different ways. 
Then, at the very last step there’s a change in the genome that 
removes whatever chemical barrier previously prevented the 
building of the flagellum. In this organism (the precursor), 
the function of one of the proteins is to increase the efficiency 
of a particular energy-transfer process. The precursor of the 
precursor lacked that protein, so that the genetic change that led 
to the precursor improved a process that was previously adequate. 
So it goes, back down a sequence of ancestors, all quite capable 
of functioning in their environments but all at a selective 
disadvantage to the bacteria that succeeded them. 
Isn't this all fantasy too? Of course®—but it is no more the 
product of speculative imagination than Behe’s seemingly 
plausible assumption that the components of the flagellum 
would have had to be added one by one, and would have sat 
around idly (at best) until the culminating moment when all 
were present. Moreover, we were supposed to be offered a 
proof of impossibility, and that won’t be complete until Behe 
and his allies have shown that all the conceivable scenarios 
through which bacteria might acquire flagella are flawed. 
Really demonstrating impossibility—or even improbability— 
here and in kindred instances, is extremely difficult, precisely 
because it would require a much more systematic survey of 
the molecular differences among bacteria. 
The serious way forward is to amend our ignorance, by 
sequencing the genomes of different bacteria, with and without 


--- Page 108 ---

90 Living with Darwin 
flagella. Using our current knowledge of the genetic basis of the 
flagellum, researchers would be able to specify more clearly 
what the intermediate forms—those with some, but not all, 
of the crucial genes —might have been like, and what functions 
the relevant proteins might have served. Until we know these 
things, efforts to describe intermediates will be so much 
whistling in the dark. Behe’s examples rely on guesses that 
simply anticipate what this hard work would reveal. 
So we have the illusion of an impossibility proof. Allegedly 
there could be no sequence of intermediates concluding with 
the fortunate, flagellum-bearing bacterium, in which each 
member of the sequence enjoyed a selective advantage over its 
predecessor. Behe’s story (quite charmingly told in Darwin’s 
Black Box) offers his own preferred version of what the se- 
quence would have to be like. Since Darwinians have no 
commitment to simpleminded stories of sequential addition of 
components, there is no reason to accept Behe’s description. 
Because the same rhetorical strategy pervades his entire book, 
showing up in all the instances of the concrete case argument 
he provides, all the parade of examples really shows is that 
there are some interesting problems for molecularly minded 
evolutionists to work on, problems they might hope to solve in 
the light of increased understanding from comparative studies 
of the genetics and development of a wide variety of organisms. 
The computational argument occurs in a variety of forms 
in current intelligent design literature, sometimes with 
relatively simple calculations of infinitesimal probabilities, on 
other occasions with much more technical specification of 


--- Page 109 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 91 
conditions under which we should make the “design infer- 
ence’ and conclude that some aspect of life has been 
intelligently designed. Whether or not intelligent design-ers 
attempt to be fully explicit about the requirements for invoking 
design, all their versions require the preliminary step of arguing 
that it is highly improbable that various aspects of life on earth 
could have emerged through natural selection. To use an ana- 
logy much beloved by earlier creationists, Darwinian claims 
about selection and the organization of life are equivalent 
to the idea that a hurricane in a junkyard could assemble a 
functioning airplane. 
Besides providing the concrete case argument, Behe offers 
several versions of its computational cousin. Here’s his attack 
on a scenario for the evolution of a blood-clotting mechanism, 
tentatively proposed by the eminent biochemist Russell 
Doolittle: 
Let’s do our own quick calculation. Consider that animals with 
blood-clotting cascades have roughly 10,000 genes, each of which 
is divided into an average of three pieces. This gives a total of 
about 30,000 gene pieces. TPA [tissue plasminogen activator] has 
four different types of domains. By “variously shuffling,” the odds 
of getting those four domains together is 30,000 to the fourth 
power [presumably Behe means that the chance is one-thirty- 
thousandth to the fourth power], which is approximately one- 
tenth to the eighteenth power. Now, if the Irish Sweepstakes had 
odds of winning of one-tenth to the eighteenth power, and if a 
million people played the lottery each year, it would take about a 
thousand billion years before anyone (not just a particular person) 
won the lottery... . Doolittle apparently needs to shuffle and 
deal himself a number of perfect bridge hands to win the game.” 


--- Page 110 ---

92 Living with Darwin 
At first sight, this looks very powerful, since, given the time 
available for the evolution of life on earth (four billion or so 
years), it seems extremely improbable that the clotting mech- 
anism could have evolved through natural selection. 
Yet we should think carefully about the ways in which the 
pertinent probabilities are calculated. Behe is relying on two 
general ideas about probability. One is the thought that, when 
events are independent of one another, the probability that 
both will occur is the product of the individual probabilities— 
if you toss a fair die twice, then the chance of getting two sixes 
is 1 in 36; for, on each toss, the probability is 1 in 6, and, since 
the tosses are independent of one another, you multiply. The 
other idea is that, when you have a range of alternatives and 
don’t have any reasons for thinking that one is more likely 
to occur than another, each of the possibilities has an equal 
chance. This idea, the notorious “principle of indifference,” is 
known to be problematic, but, judiciously employed, it serves 
us well in some everyday contexts—as, for example, when we 
conclude that each side of the die has the same probability of 
falling uppermost. 
Even in ordinary life, however, there are occasions on which 
applications of these principles would lead us to obviously 
unacceptable conclusions, so that we would rethink our 
computations. Consider a humdrum phenomenon suggested 
by Behe’s analogy with bridge. You take a standard deck of 
cards and deal 13 to yourself. What is the probability that you 
get exactly those cards in exactly that order? The answer is 1 in 
4 X 10*'. Suppose you repeat the process 10 times. You’ll now 
have received 10 standard bridge hands, 10 sets of 13 cards, 
each one delivered in a particular order. Scrupulously, you 
record just the order in which all these cards were received, and 


--- Page 111 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 93 
calculate the chance that this event occurs. The probability, 
you claim, is 1 in 4'° x 107", which is approximately 1 in 10?"°— 
notice that this denominator is enormously larger than Behe’s 
10’*. It must be really improbable that you (or anyone else) 
would ever receive just those cards in just that order in the 
entire history of the universe. But you did, and you have witnesses 
to testify that your records are correct. Excitedly, you contact 
Michael Behe to announce this-quite miraculous event, surely 
evidence of some kind of Intelligence at work in the universe. 
Your report would not be well received. Like everyone else, 
Behe knows how to understand this commonplace occurrence. 
Given the way in which the cards were initially arranged, the 
first deal was bound to go as it did. Given the shuffling that 
produced the ordering prior to the second deal, that deal, too, 
was sure to give rise to just those cards in that order; and so on. 
So there was a perspective, unknown to you, from which the 
probability of that sequence of cards wasn’t some infinites- 
imally small number, but one (as high as chances go). If you 
describe events that actually occur from a perspective that 
lacks crucial items of knowledge, you can make them look 
improbable. We know enough about card dealing and coin 
tossing to understand this, and to see the calculation I 
attributed to you as perverse—for, although you don’t know 
what the initial setup was, you should have recognized that 
there was some initial setup that would determine the 
sequence. Hence you should have known that application of 
the two general principles of probability in this context would 
provide a misleading view of the chance that this particular 
sequence would result. 
In the case of the evolution of blood clotting, our ignorance 
is deeper. Not only do we not know what the initial molecular 


--- Page 112 ---

94 Living with Darwin 
conditions—the prior state of the organisms in the population 
in which blood clotting emerged—were, we also don’t know 
whether that initial state favored certain sorts of molecular 
changes rather than others. We have reason to think that 
Behe’s assumption that there’s a precise chance of 1 in 30,000 that 
each gene piece will participate in the “shuffling” process is 
incorrect. For, given what we know about mechanisms within 
the genome, the idea of exactly equal chances is suspect. But 
we don’t know whether, given the initial molecular state, the 
chance of the cascade Doolittle hypothesizes remains infinites- 
imally small or whether it is actually one. Any estimate of the 
probability here is an irresponsible guess. 
My imagined experiment with the deck of cards suggests 
a different way to think about the problem. Imagine that all 
the hands you were dealt were mundane—fairly evenly dis- 
tributed among the four suits, with a scattering of high cards in 
each. If you calculated the probability of receiving ten mun- 
dane hands in succession, it would naturally be a lot higher 
than the chance of being dealt those very particular mundane 
hands, with the cards arriving in precisely that sequence 
(although it wouldn’t be as high as you might expect). Blood 
clotting might also work in the same way, depending on how 
many candidates there are among the 30,000 “gene pieces” to 
which Behe alludes, that would yield a protein product able 
to play the necessary role. Suppose that there are a thousand 
acceptable candidates for each of the four positions in the 
molecule we need (TPA). The chance of success on any par- 
ticular draw is now about 1 in 2.5 million. If there were 10,000 
tries a year, it would take, on average, two or three centuries 
to find an appropriate combination, a flicker of an instant in 
evolutionary time. 


--- Page 113 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 95 
My assumptions are no better—and no worse—than 
Behe’s, for neither of us knows how tolerant the blood-clotting 
system is of the molecular combinations that the animals in 
question (whatever they were) might have supplied. We simply 
don’t know what the right way to look at this problem is. But, 
given our ignorance, we shouldn't make wild guesses and then 
declare that the probabilities are so low that evolution under 
natural selection is impossible: A better research strategy 
would be to try to assemble information that will replace the 
guesses with serious estimates. 
Moreover, even when the chance ofa particular event turns 
out to be extremely small, it is important to resist the idea 
that that event could not have occurred. Imagine that you 
own a ticket in a lottery with an extremely large number of 
tickets—a million, say—and that the lottery is decided by a 
fundamentally random process, one that has no underlying 
causal basis by which the outcome will be determined. (You 
might suppose that each ticket is associated with a specific 
atomic nucleus of some radioactive element, and that the 
prize will go to the person whose nucleus decays first.) On any 
perspective we might justifiably adopt, there is a probability of 
one ina million that you will win, and similarly for all the other 
ticket holders (nobody has more than one ticket). Clearly, 
somebody will be lucky, and, after the fact, we'll have to admit 
that something very improbable has occurred. Moreover, this 
conclusion remains valid even if the number of tickets is 
vastly expanded. However small a probability we compute, 
it would be wrong to suppose that an outcome with that 
probability would be impossible. Finally, even ifsome people had 
massive numbers of tickets, it would still be possible for some- 
one holding only one to win. That shows that an extremely 


--- Page 114 ---

96 Living with Darwin 
improbable outcome, one much less probable than alterna- 
tives, is still possible.® 
So there is another way to think about the allegedly minute 
probabilities of life as we know it. Our galaxy has roughly 
200 billion stars, and the total number of galaxies, each with 
similar numbers of stars is—literally—astronomical. Some 
fraction of these stars has planets that are potentially suitable 
for sustaining life. Each such planet could be conceived as 
“buying a ticket” in an enormous lottery, with the prize, or one 
of the prizes, consisting in the emergence of life, For any of 
those planets, the probability of gaining that prize is extremely 
small, but ifthere are enough of them, one will win. That lucky 
planet may have been ours. 
Because the computational argument is so pervasive in the 
intelligent design literature, it’s worth looking at another ver- 
sion of it, one that focuses on a major challenge for Darwinism, 
the problem of the origin of life. In past decades, there have 
been many attempts to develop scenarios, or partial scenarios, 
for the emergence of the first living things. Along the way, 
there have been moments of excitement: the discovery that the 
building blocks of proteins (amino acids) could be generated 
from a soup of much simpler molecules (hydrogen, methane, 
ammonia, and so forth), molecules that might have been pre- 
sent in earth’s primeval state; the discovery that there are 
forms of RNA that can form and replicate in a medium con- 
taining their basic constituents, and that can cut and splice 
other RNAs. Yet there are still extremely difficult problems 
in understanding how the molecular components of even the 
simplest cell might evolve, and how they might be assembled 
into a single package. It is thus no surprise that champions of 
intelligent design declare that the probabilities that simple 


--- Page 115 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 97 
living things could arise “by chance”—or, more exactly, by the 
mechanisms adduced by Darwinians—are so low that some 
quite different explanation is required. 
This fertile territory breeds many versions of the computa- 
tional argument. I shall focus ona representative calculation, that 
offered by Stuart Pullen in his Intelligent Design or Evolution? 
who tries to show that the assembly of the insulin protein 
within a primeval soup would be wildly improbable.® Pullen 
begins by using data from the experimental research of 
Stanley Miller, one of the principal figures in attempts to 
simulate the production of biologically significant molecules 
from soups of prebiotic constituents. Proteins are built up by 
selecting from a menu of 20 amino acids, and, although three 
of these were not synthesized in Miller's experiments, Pullen 
generously allows for them to occur at low rates.” He then 
uses a favorite analogy, imagining a “trapped scientist” who 
tries to find the combination of a lock by selecting blocks that 
represent the amino acids from a container (in this instance 
a truck!) that represent the biologically significant molecules 
formed in the primeval soup. If the scientist picks appropriate 
proteins in the right order, the lock opens, and he is free. The 
analogy assumes that the amino acids are found in the relative 
frequencies Miller reports (subject to the generous assump- 
tion that some molecules that aren’t found occur at low rates), 
and that the formation of the protein, like the draws made by 
the trapped scientist, consists in a sequence of random, inde- 
pendent, trials. Pullen triumphantly reports his conclusion. 
“Odds of evolving in the primordial soup are 1 time in 2”° tries 
or 1 time in 2.2 X 10’ tries. This can never happen.””! 
What, never? Well, hardly ever. Yet Pullen’s apparently 
generous estimate, like Behe’s, depends on filling gaps in our 


--- Page 116 ---

98 Living with Darwin 
knowledge with convenient assumptions. Why should one 
believe that the ratios obtained from Miller's experimental 
reports are good guides to the pertinent probabilities? What 
Miller hoped to demonstrate—and brilliantly succeeded in 
showing—was that amino acids could be synthesized from a 
mixture of prebiotic constituents. He did not claim that the 
mixtures used in his experiments were the only possible soups 
out of which amino acids might be generated, or that they 
were accurate facsimiles of the primitive conditions on the 
earth. Rightly so, for although we can propose hypotheses 
about how it might have been, nobody knows how it actually 
was. Miller’s work is significant because it answers a particular 
question. Is it possible to obtain amino acids from a mixture 
of simpler molecules (like hydrogen, methane, and ammonia)? 
Pullen presses the data obtained into a computation about a 
different question. Is it possible to obtain insulin by a random 
process in a Miller soup? Now we don’t know that Miller’s 
specific soup is anything like the primeval mix. We don’t know 
whether insulin was formed in it (nor is it at all clear how we 
might resolve that question). And we don’t know if it would 
have been formed by some random process of molecules 
bumping into one another that might be like the sequential 
tries of the trapped scientist. Consequently, we have no idea 
whether the probabilities assigned to the insertion of particu- 
lar amino acids are correct (they might be off by a factor 
of tens, hundreds, or thousands), no idea whether it is right 
to multiply them, and even no idea whether the task assigned 
the Darwinian is a significant one (if insulin wasn’t made in the 
primeval soup, then the low probability is irrelevant). 
The origin of life is a very hard problem precisely because 
we have so little idea about the constraints on a solution. 


--- Page 117 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 99 
Darwinians assume that, from some unknown initial con- 
dition, biologically significant molecules—nucleic acids and 
proteins—would be generated and would eventually be 
assembled into a cell. The challenge is to go further, to specify 
how it might have been done. To respond to that challenge, 
you have to guess, to make assumptions about the initial con- 
ditions—and some inspired guesswork, followed by ingenious 
experimental research, has revealed that some aspects of 
original life can be simulated. What the decades of research 
also reveal is that our ignorance of those initial conditions is 
so extensive, and the range of possible assumptions so vast, 
that probability estimates are likely to be deceptive. Given 
a particular set of assumptions, guesses, you can calculate the 
probability that the evolution of life will proceed according 
to a particular scenario, but, because there are so many rival 
alternative guesses, you have no basis for assigning a prob- 
ability to the emergence of life, period. The numbers juggled 
by the proponents of intelligent design are worthless. 
Doesn’t this cut both ways? If our ignorance is as vast as 
I've suggested, can Darwinians claim to know that life could 
have originated, and diversified, by the types of processes they 
currently recognize? The questions are rightly posed, for 
intelligent design can easily inspire a dogmatic overreaction. 
In its negative stance, the intelligent design movement iden- 
tifies some unsolved problems for Darwinian evolutionary 
theory, and claims, illegitimately, that they are unsolvable. 
Until these problems are actually solved, however, it will be 
reasonable to wonder whether they can be disposed of without 
extending the resources of orthodox Darwinism. 
So perhaps a full understanding of the history of life re- 
quires something else, besides the mechanism of natural 


--- Page 118 ---

100 Living with Darwin 
selection? And, if something else, then why not intelligent 
design? Among contemporary evolutionists, a few look for 
alternative physicochemical mechanisms that might explain 
the “origins of order,” or might yield understanding of the 
evolution of complex traits and structures.” The fans of 
intelligent design have failed lamentably to demonstrate that 
the unsolved problems of Darwinism are unsolvable. Yet, 
while we are seeking solutions, shouldn’t we welcome their 
perspective as another pointer to research? 
So far I have focused on the negative doctrine of intelligent 
design, the identification of unsolved evolutionary problems. We 
now have to consider the positive thesis, the claim that the phe- 
nomena to which Darwin’s detractors point are produced by a 
process that deserves the label “intelligent.” Two issues need 
to be considered. First, on what grounds should we apply the 
label? Second, what help can intelligent design provide in 
understanding the phenomena in question? 
It’s important to play by the rules. We mustn't personify 
Intelligence. Instead, according to the official doctrine, the 
acquiescence in a single tree of life, there are some evolution- 
ary transitions—the original formation of life from nonlife, 
the emergence of the bacterial flagellum and the blood- 
clotting cascade—that can only be understood in terms of the 
action of a mechanism other than selection, that is, in terms of 
the operation of Intelligence. 
As I've noted, there are some scientists who focus on kindred 
phenomena and try to find alternative physical mechanisms 
that would substitute for or complement natural selection. 


--- Page 119 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 101 
They don’t dignify their proposed mechanisms with the label 
“intelligent.” So we must inquire what grounds might support 
this title. 
Making any judgment about whether a mechanism is 
intelligent or not appears rather difficult until we have been 
told considerably more about the way in which that mech- 
anism operates. Officially, of course, we aren’t supposed to 
personify this mechanism, and it’s hard to understand just 
what the attribution of Intelligence even means if we resist the 
personification. If something counts as intelligent, wouldn't 
it have psychological states and engage in psychological pro- 
cesses—and wouldn't anything like that be very like a person? 
Intelligent design-ers do not address such questions. All we 
learn from the full gamut of their literature, is that they conceive 
of Intelligence as whatever it is that produces the outcomes 
they identify as too complex to be attained through the 
operation of selection. The line of reasoning seems to be this: 
these phenomena, unattainable by selection, look designed or 
planned, and, as a result, the mechanism that produced them 
must be intelligent. 
There is a fallacy here. Even without the slightest character- 
ization of the mechanism, we’re meant to infer one of its 
characteristics from the appearances of its products. One of 
Darwin’s great achievements was to argue that you can have 
the appearance of design without a designer. Of course, even 
if they allow a limited role to natural selection, intelligent 
design-ers will contend that the kinds of complex organization 
to which they point couldn’t have been produced by Darwin's 
surrogate for a designer—natural selection. Yet if we forget 
about natural selection, and ignore the controversies about 
what it can and cannot do, there are plenty of other instances in 


--- Page 120 ---

102 Living with Darwin 
which striking order, pattern, and even beauty emerge from 
processes in which there is no planning, no design, but only the 
operation of blind and simple rules. 
Consider standard celebrations of the free market. Fre- 
quently, these not only contend that large-scale order can 
emerge without planning, but also that attempts to plan, how- 
ever sensitive and ingenious, would be bound to do far worse. 
The classic starting point for positions of this type is a famous 
passage of Adam Smith’s. Speaking of an entrepreneur taking 
stock of the possibilities, Smith writes, “By preferring the sup- 
port of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his 
own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner 
as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his 
own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an 
invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his 
intention. Nor is it always the worse for society that it is no 
part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes 
that of the society more effectually than when he really intends 
to promote it.”” Following Smith, generations of social scien- 
tists have argued, with different degrees of success in different 
cases to be sure, that the actions of myopic individuals busily 
pursuing their own concerns can generate a larger order that 
none of them had planned. At least some of these explanations 
are hard to resist.” 
Or consider some contemporary studies of the ways in 
which the arrangements of petals in flowers, the banding 
patterns on seashells, the “designs” on the wings of butterflies 
and moths, and the coat patterns of mammals are generated 
in the development of those organisms—studies that give rise 
to strikingly beautiful computer graphics. In all these cases, 
researchers have been able to show how relatively simple— 


--- Page 121 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 103 
unintelligent, unplanned—processes can be iterated to yield 
structures that look so intricate that one would naively take 
them to have been planned by an intelligent designer.”° 
These examples—and others can be found in the phe- 
nomena of chemical reactions that organize striking patterns, 
in the honeycombs of the beehive, and in the structures of 
snowflakes—reveal that we have to be careful in inferring 
the character of a causal process from the order we think we 
discern in its outcome.” It’s simply a fallacy to suppose that 
because a particular structure or mechanism appears complex, 
then the causal agent that brought it about must be appro- 
priately characterized as having “foreseen” or “planned” or 
“designed” the outcome. Even if intelligent design-ers were 
right in supposing that the phenomena they indicate couldn’t 
have evolved by natural selection, only a more explicit iden- 
tification of the causal mechanism that was at work could 
justify the conclusion that that mechanism is intelligent. 
So, turning to the second question posed above, what help 
can intelligent design provide when we try to understand the 
difficulties it takes to beset Darwinism? How does it deal with 
the bacterial flagellum, for example? 
If we take Behe at his word when he declares that he finds 
“the idea of common descent” to be “fairly convincing,” and 
that he has “no particular reason to doubt it,””’ then we should 
suppose that bacteria with flageila emerged from ancestors 
who lacked flagella. In line with the simple additive story he 
uses to make a history of natural selection appear implau- 
sible, he must suppose that the ancestors were missing a num- 
ber of crucial proteins that the lucky descendants acquired, 
proteins that, once present, fit themselves together in the 
flagellum. If the intelligent design perspective is to help settle 


--- Page 122 ---

104 Living with Darwin 
the unsolved problems of evolution, it would be good to have 
an alternative account that tells us how Intelligence facilitated 
the transition. 
Unfortunately, the rest is silence. Neither in Behe’s writ- 
ings, nor in those of any other intelligent design-er, is there the 
slightest indication of how Intelligence performs the magic 
that poor, limited, natural selection cannot. On the face of it, 
there are just two basic possibilities. The first option is that 
Intelligence arranges the environment so that the intermediates— 
the apparently hapless organisms, cluttered. with useless 
proteins—are protected against elimination under natural 
selection. (If we were unofficially inclined, we might say that 
the good Lord tempers the wind to the shorn bacterium.) The 
second option is that Intelligence provides for coordinated 
mutations to arise. If 20 genetic changes are needed, it brings 
about all of them at once. Or we can mix elements of both 
options and suppose that Intelligence introduces mutations in 
clumps—first ten, say, and then another ten, or first seven, then 
another seven, then six—and arranges protective environ- 
ments for the intermediates. Of course, any story along these 
lines raises serious doubts. Just how does the coordination 
of the genetic changes or the modification of the environ- 
ment work? 
In presenting the possibilities in this way, I may seem to be 
forcing words into the mouths of the intelligent design-ers. 
Their core position, after all, is that at crucial moments in the 
history of life, descendants of some ancestors who lacked some 
trait (or organ or structure) came to possess the pertinent trait 
(organ, structure) by some causal process that is, unlike natural 
selection, intelligent. Why, then, do they have to talk about 
genes, mutations, and the need for protection against natural 


--- Page 123 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 105 
selection? The answer is that the traits in question are heritable 
—they are not introduced in each generation by some con- 
tinued activity on the part of Intelligence, but emerge through 
the interactions of genes and environments. As in the case of 
the bacterial flagellum, there are underlying genes, and hence 
there have to be genetic changes in the passages from the 
ancestors to the descendants. If these changes occur over several 
generations, then, on the intelligent design-ers’ own principles, 
there has to be protection against the tendency of natural 
selection to weed out the hapless intermediates. If they happen 
in one step, then, again by the favored principles, there must 
be coordinated mutations. Hence, even if the position would 
prefer to talk more vaguely of “novelties,” it is committed to 
one of the options I have presented. 
What intelligent design urgently needs if it’s going to make 
any progress in understanding these transitions, in tackling 
the problems it claims to raise, is a set of coherent principles 
that identify the ways in which Intelligence is directed and 
what its powers and limitations are. If we lapse from the official 
story for a moment, we have to have some idea about what 
Intelligence “wants to achieve” and what kinds of things “it 
can do to work toward what it wants.” What basis do we have 
to think that Intelligence aims to remedy the plight of the 
flagellumless bacteria, who can’t evolve into bacteria-with-a- 
flagellum under natural selection? What basis is there to 
believe that Intelligence—or anything else, for that matter— 
can coordinate genetic changes or modify environments? 
In fact, we need two distinct kinds of principles. First, there 
have to be principles that specify when Intelligence swings into 
action. Perhaps they will tell us that Intelligence operates when 
there are potentially advantageous complex traits that can’t 


--- Page 124 ---

106 Living with Darwin 
evolve by natural selection. Second, there must be principles 
that explain what Intelligence does when it acts. Perhaps these 
will identify the sorts of genetic changes Intelligence can 
arrange, or the ways in which it can inhibit the normal opera- 
tion of selection. 
It is already clear that these principles will be hard to state 
precisely. For, if Intelligence has been waiting in the wings 
throughout the history of life, seizing opportunities as they 
arise, we know that there are all sorts of things it hasn’t done. 
Apparently Intelligence isn’t directed toward eliminating the 
junk from genomes or removing vestigial structures like the 
whale’s pelvis or generating radically new arrangements for 
mammalian forelimbs. It’s possible, of course, that although 
directed toward these ends, Intelligence is simply unable to 
bring them about. So any satisfactory principles must differ- 
entiate between the bacterial flagellum, blood-clotting cas- 
cade, and similar places where Intelligence shows its prowess, 
and the accumulated junk, vestigial structures, and genetic 
blunders, where it remains in abeyance. 
Drawing this distinction is even more difficult than I have 
made it appear. For there are really simple genetic problems 
with respect to which Intelligence seems to be impotent. 
As I noted earlier, sickle-cell anemia has persisted because 
the gene that gives rise to the disease, when present in double 
dose, the S allele, confers an advantage when it appears in 
combination with the standard A allele, by providing resist- 
ance to malaria. This is the simple part of a classic evolu- 
tionary story, one routinely taught to those schoolchildren 
fortunate enough to learn something about evolution. 
However, there is a twist, one not so widely known. In some 
African populations, there appears another form of the gene, the 


--- Page 125 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 107 
C allele, usually only present at a low frequency.”* The com- 
parative rarity of the C allele is initially puzzling, for people 
who have two copies have the best of both worlds—they enjoy 
the resistance to malaria, and they aren’t silent carriers of a 
deadly disease. Given its apparent advantages, why doesn’t the 
C allele drive the others out? Why do inferior genes persist? 
The sad answer is that natural selection tends to drive the 
C allele out of the populations in which it makes its cameo 
appearances. When it is relatively rare, its carriers tend to pro- 
duce offspring with people who have the standard alleles—the 
A allele and the S allele—and, unfortunately, the combinations 
of C with A and C with S are inferior to both the more frequent 
genotypes (AA and AS). If only the C allele could reach a thresh- 
old frequency, then the chances of its bearers mating with one 
another and having children with the CC genotype would be 
sufficiently great to outweigh the defects of the CA and CS 
combinations—and, at that point, natural selection would 
eliminate the A and S alleles, producing a population with a 
genotype that would offer greater protection against disease.” 
If Intelligence can handle the transition to the bacterial 
flagellum, then, according to the story on which Behe relies 
to discredit natural selection, it must be able to coordinate 
genetic changes or to provide environmental protection for 
otherwise vulnerable intermediates. Indeed, since there are, 
on Behe’s hypothesis, a number of proteins that must be intro- 
duced to make the flagellum, it must be able to perform one 
or the other of these tricks on a rather grand scale. By contrast, 
the genetic problem with the C allele is trivial. It could be 
solved if Intelligence could protect a few organisms—those 
with the CA and CS genotypes—from the rigors of selection 
until the C allele had reached the requisite threshold frequency. 


--- Page 126 ---

108 Living with Darwin 
It could also be solved if Intelligence could arrange for some 
coordinated mutations, not a long series as with the bacteria, 
but just some extra C mutants. In fact, if Intelligence could 
simply produce one C allele in a human male and, simultane- 
ously, a C allele in a human female, and then ensure that C- 
bearers mated with one another fora few generations, everything 
would work out beautifully. Apparently, however, Intelligence 
isn’t up to these jobs. But if it can’t perform these easy tasks, 
why should we think it can manage the transition to the bac- 
terial flagellum? 
Perhaps, however, the problem isn’t with the power of 
Intelligence, but with its direction. Intelligent design-ers might 
suppose that their favored mechanism responds to the “needs” 
of the flagellumless bacteria, but not to those of human 
populations in which the S allele—and the debilitating dis- 
ease it brings—is maintained by natural selection.” If we were 
to talk illicitly, we might wonder why Intelligence is more 
“worried about” the disadvantages that beset unflagellated 
bacteria than about the human beings who are, according 
to religious tradition, the foci of divine concern. Even if 
we play by the rules, however, it’s appropriate to ask for 
the set of principles that govern the direction and power of 
Intelligence. Can intelligent design-ers explain how the prob- 
lematic evolutionary transitions—those beyond the scope of 
natural selection—are accomplished, how Intelligence fails 
to overcome relatively small genetic barriers, and fails to 
clean up the repetitive DNA, purge the vestigial structures, 
and so on? 
Why do intelligent design-ers ignore the basic problem of 
explaining the power and direction of the mechanism they 
invoke, a problem that strikes at the heart of their theory? 


--- Page 127 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 109 
Apparently, their preferred perspective faces a multitude of 
currently unsolved puzzles about the scope and direction of 
Intelligence. Yet, unlike their counterparts in other scientific 
ventures, they are reluctant to suggest their strategies for 
seeking solutions. Their reticence provokes the charge that 
what they are doing is not science, but perhaps breaking their 
silence would be theologically unwise. Saying too much might 
disrupt the harmony between the sanitized version of intel- 
ligent design elaborated in the classroom during the week 
and the richer account delivered from the pulpit on Sunday. 
Moreover, saying anything that would genuinely respond to 
the puzzles might be saying too much. 
Yet, I suspect many people would simply reject the terms in 
which I have posed the problem. Friends of intelligent design 
would prefer not to talk about evolutionary transitions at all. 
So, they might say, the complex structures are built from 
scratch. Intelligence is a creative force that replaces older 
types of organisms with new, individually designed species. 
Conceived in this way, intelligent design disavows Behe’s 
acceptance of descent with modification, drawing bars across 
the tree of life to mark the places of radical discontinuity, of 
events of special creation. Intelligent design-ers stand forth as 
novelty creationists. 
No canny opponent of Darwinism wants to say this too 
loudly, at least not when the discussion focuses on the scientific 
credentials of intelligent design. For, as we've seen, the retreat 
from Genesis leads to Lyell’s alternatives, and a serious discus- 
sion of Lyell’s alternatives dooms novelty creationism. Indeed, 
the discussion of the direction and power of Intelligence under- 
scores the fundamental failure of novelty creationism, exposing 
a new kind of whimsy in the creative agency that produces 


--- Page 128 ---

110 Living with Darwin 
flagellated bacteria and fails to produce human beings with 
functional hemoglobin as well as malarial resistance. 
The real situation is that intelligent design-ers oscillate, 
officially rejecting novelty creationism when it seems strategic 
to do so, covertly adopting creationist ideas when there are 
hard questions about how evolutionary transitions are_man- 
aged. Yet however they wriggle, they find no satisfactory posi- 
tive doctrine, no set of principles about Intelligence that can 
adequately account for the phenomena. This is why readers 
hunt through their literature seeking fragments of positive 
theory in vain. They won't find it. Because to advance any such 
theory would expose the corpse of dead science. 
Is my judgment too harsh? As I conceded above, problems 
about the origins of life on our planet are extremely difficult, 
and Darwinians have only been able to offer scraps of partial 
solutions. Perhaps this is one place at which intelligent design 
might offer a genuine alternative. 
Yet the difficulty here is precisely the same as that exposed by 
the case of the bacterial flagellum. One might initially suppose 
that the residual problems of Darwinian efforts to explain the 
emergence of life from nonlife—the formation of proteins, the 
coordination of proteins and nucleic acids, the assembly of 
a package of hundreds, or thousands, of molecules in a primi- 
tive cell—could be cleared up by abandoning the complexities 
of biochemical research for the invocation of Intelligence. The 
illusion of an explanation can easily be generated, for it’s 
natural to conceive Intelligence—illicitly—in the image of the 
divine Creator, whose hand reaches into the primeval soup (or 


--- Page 129 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 111 
slime?) and skillfully assembles the DNAs and the RNAs, the 
enzymes and the lipids. If you staunchly resist that temptation 
—as intelligent design-ers claim to think you should—then the 
story is much more austere. Natural selection cannot produce 
and assemble all these molecules. Intelligence can. 
How, exactly? If there is anything more than an empty 
word in this doctrine, we need, as before, to know how 
Intelligence is directed and what its powers and limits are. 
Under what circumstances is Intelligence directed to produce 
complex structures? What kinds of complexities are its targets? 
(If we are to be careful and austere, we can’t assume that 
Intelligence—like the God of the scriptures—wants to create 
life, and wants this kind of cellular life in particular.) What 
powers does it have in producing these complex structures? 
Until we have answers, there’s no doctrine at all, and no genuine 
explanation has been given. 
Moreover, any attempt to provide explanations is limited 
by problematic constraints, just as we saw in the case of the 
bacterial flagellum. To give sweeping powers to Intelligence 
would raise issues about the messiness of the history of life. 
Why does Intelligence not eliminate the accumulations of 
junk and structures that have lost their original functions? Why 
doesn’t it create new species from scratch, without burdening 
them with the relics of the past? To give lesser powers would 
make it hard to understand how the extremely difficult task of 
the initial assembly of cells was carried out at all. To suppose 
that Intelligence is only directed toward giving life a kick-start 
would abandon all the arguments about the failures of natural 
selection throughout the major evolutionary transitions— 
and would commit Intelligence to a whimsical tolerance of 
bungled designs that is likely to be theologically troubling. 


--- Page 130 ---

112 Living with Darwin 
Intelligent design-ers sometimes protest that they do not 
need to answer these questions, claiming that the explanatory 
burdens for their proposals are rather different from those 
that attend Darwinism. In his promise to answer the toughest 
questions about intelligent design in his book, The Design 
Revolution, William Dembski maintains that intelligent design 
“isnot a theory about a process but about creative innovation.”*" 
Yet, one might suppose, the results of creative innovation are 
frequently understood in terms of the intentions and powers 
of creators. Dembski sidesteps the point. “But intelligences are 
free. In the act of creation they violate expectations. They cre- 
ate as they choose to create. There’s nothing that required 
Mozart to compose his Jupiter Symphony or Bell to invent the 
telephone or Shakespeare to write King Lear.”* Fair enough— 
and it is reasonable to conclude, as Dembski does, that the 
innovators’ contemporaries could not have predicted their 
innovations. The crucial issue, however, is whether we can 
understand the products, after the fact, as expressions of the 
purposes and the capacities of the creative agents. That 
appears to be precisely what musicologists and historians of 
technology and literary scholars sometimes attempt to do. 
By exactly the same token, if some past “innovation” in the his- 
tory of life produced a bacterium with a flagellum, there are 
serious explanatory questions about how this living product 
represents the purposes and powers of Intelligence. If intelli- 
gent design is to earn respect as a genuinely scientific alter- 
native, it cannot dodge such questions, but must take on the 
task of illuminating the events in the history of life after they 
have occurred. 
The time has surely come to articulate intelligent design not 
as its savvy advertisers present it, but as the majority of those 


--- Page 131 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 113 
drawn to the position conceive of it. For them, matters are 
relatively simple. The unsolved problems of Darwinism in 
accounting for the origins of life provide grounds for believing 
an alternative. An all-powerful God, who delights in creation, 
brought life into being on our planet. Perhaps this was not 
quite done in the way that Genesis, read literally, would suggest. 
Perhaps life on earth does have a long history, but it has been 
guided throughout by the Creator. At times, God may even 
have intervened again, to create new life forms, and, when we 
find alleged evolutionary transitions that natural selection 
would seem unable to effect, we recognize the marks of these 
acts of creation. 
One of David Hume’s great insights was to ask what the 
character of the creation shows about the character of the 
Creator. Although that question might strike the devout as 
frivolous, or impertinent, it was very much in the spirit of 
Hume’s own time, a time when reverent spirits investigated 
nature for traces of the divine purpose. With the explosion of 
our knowledge of how nature works, Hume’s question has 
renewed force. Why did the Creator produce life by such 
lengthy and roundabout means? Why did He assemble primi- 
tive cells, and preserve elements of their structures in all sub- 
sequent organisms? Why has He permitted defects and junk 
to persist throughout his creation? Why is He unable—or 
unwilling—to solve the simplest genetic problems? Religious 
people reply that we cannot question—we are unable to under- 
stand the power and the purposes of God. That is a simple 
avowal of the point I have been making. If Intelligence is 
(unofficially) taken as a surrogate for God, we are unable to 
understand Its aims and capacities. No principles about its 
direction or about its powers can be stated. 


--- Page 132 ---

114 Living with Darwin 
Without such statement, however, intelligent design has 
no positive doctrine. Without positive doctrine, it provides no 
explanations. Without explanations it has no standing as a 
scientific alternative to Darwinism. And so the status claim 
made on its behalf is unwarranted. It is empty. Dead. 
Fleeming Jenkin gave Darwin much trouble because, given 
what was then common understanding, the theoretical poss- 
ibility of natural selection was suspect and the rate at which it 
could cause evolutionary change appeared far too slow. From 
the perspective of the 1860s, inheritance appeared to blend 
the traits of parents and the timescale for life on earth seemed 
confined to some hundreds of thousands of years. Late Victorian 
researchers did not know the things they thought they did, but 
they were entitled to worry that natural selection might not 
be the chief agent of evolutionary change. 
Intelligent design-ers give contemporary Darwinians much 
trouble—but not because they pose intellectual challenges of 
the caliber of Fleeming Jenkin’s. Their negative thesis consists 
of flawed attempts to show that currently unsolved problems 
are unsolvable without invoking their preferred alternative. 
Instead of arguing on the basis of established knowledge, they 
make unjustified assumptions about issues where we are— 
and know that we are—quite ignorant. Moreover, when it is 
scrutinized, their alternative turns out to be explanatorily 
bankrupt, hapless with respect to the very problems it raises 
as crucial difficulties for Darwinism. Indeed, the scientists 
who denounce intelligent design as not science are, I believe, 
responding to this explanatory bankruptcy. 


--- Page 133 ---

At the Mercy of Chance? 115 
I think we can now understand what is right and what is 
miscast in these denunciations. The temptation is to assume 
that there’s a special type of specious doctrine, pseudoscience, 
marked out by some criterion from the genuine article, and 
that the people who espouse doctrines of this kind are pseudo- 
scientists. I suggest that making the primary distinction 
between science and pseudoscience gets matters exactly back- 
wards. There are people who assume the trappings of science, 
who go through the motions and talk the talk. They are 
pretenders, and thus appropriately seen as pseudoscientists. 
Pseudoscience isn’t marked out by any clear criteria that 
distinguish it as a body of doctrine. It is simply what pseudo- 
scientists do in their more-or-less-ingenious pretenses. 
Justifying accusations of pretense is hard, requiring sub- 
stantial study of the behavior of the accused. I hope to have 
said enough about the bobbings and weavings of intelligent 
design-ers, their rhetorical tactics, and their backing away from 
serious questions, to show why there might be a basis for the 
accusation. In the end, however, the label doesn’t matter. 
Despite all the loud claims made by the resurrection men, they 
have failed to revive the discarded doctrines of the past. 
My critique has taken intelligent design at face value, sup- 
posing that it attempts to provide a scientific alternative to 
Darwinian orthodoxy. Perhaps, however, there is an alternative 
interpretation, one that recognizes the intelligent design-ers 
as intending only to identify the limits of natural science. On 
this reading, they would argue only that some evolutionary 
transitions cannot be understood in terms of the operation 
of natural selection—or indeed in terms of any other natural 
process—and they would modestly decline to advance any 
explanation of why such transitions have occurred. So con- 


--- Page 134 ---

116 Living with Darwin 
strued, they would still be vulnerable to my scrutiny of their 
alleged proofs of impossibility, but they could evade my challenge 
to specify the principles under which Intelligence operates. 
They are simply not in that explanatory, that scientific, 
business. The envisaged retreat is unattractive. Not only would 
committed reticence make the claim that any natural explana- 
tion is impossible even less plausible, but it would also have the 
crippling disadvantage of forfeiting any claim to be doing science. 
Whether the resulting position would be even theologically 
satisfactory is a question we shall explore shortly. 
Intelligent design-ers give Darwinians much trouble 
because their officially sanitized doctrine is presented with a 
wink.™ That wink signals to the sincerely religious that there 
is a faith-friendly alternative to godless evolutionism, and so 
recruits to the cause people who have no part in any pretense 
and no idea that they are supporting an illusion. The zeal with 
which that cause is defended is the source of political—not 
intellectual—trouble for Darwinism. My next, and final, task 
is to try to understand the sources of this zeal. 


--- Page 135 ---

Chapter Five 
A MESS OF POTTAGE 
For Wales? Why Richard, it profits a man nothing to give his soul 
for the whole world—But for Wales, Richard, for Wales! 
Spoken by Thomas More, in Robert Bolt, 
A Man For All Seasons 
W hen the Kansas School Board approved a characterization 
of science that would allow for the teaching of intelligent 
design in high-school biology, champions of Darwinism were 
quick to issue a stern warning. States that subordinate serious 
scientific education to religious concerns cannot expect to be 
attractive to businesses that are advancing, or applying, new 
forms of technology. In consequence, their citizens will lose 
opportunities for exciting and lucrative employment. More 
generally, American failure to honor established science will 
lead to a national decline in preparedness for the economic 
challenges of coming decades, as schoolchildren protected 
from disturbing ideas will no longer be able to compete in 
global markets. Darwinian commentators conjured the vision 
of the booboisie (in Mencken’s famous phrase), burying their 
heads, ostrichlike, in rural idiocy, and thereby precipitating the 
decline of the West. 


--- Page 136 ---

118 Living with Darwin 
Many crucial, and controversial, assumptions are necessary 
to infer that the inclusion of intelligent design as part of 
science will lead to the inevitable impoverishment of scientific 
education and the demise of American (or Kansan) competi- 
tiveness. It is far from obvious that the ills of scientific edu- 
cation in the United States stem from squeamishness about 
teaching Darwin, or that the production of virtuosos in the 
scientific fields most relevant to economic growth will hinge 
on whether a large segment about evolution—unbalanced by 
any mention of intelligent design—figures in the curriculum. 
Even if these conclusions were correct, however, I doubt that 
stern warnings would strike those who want an inclusive 
definition of science, who want their children to hear about 
intelligent design, as penetrating to the heart of the matter. 
Quite reasonably, they would see the warnings themselves as 
another expression of the attitudes and values they reject. 
In Robert Bolt’s dramatization of the fall of Thomas More 
in A Man For All Seasons the protagonist is tried for his refusal 
to swear the oath acknowledging Henry VIII as the head of the 
English church. As the trial proceeds, More observes that his 
former protégé, Richard Rich, is wearing an impressive gold 
chain, and he asks Rich to explain its significance. When 
Rich replies that he has been promoted to a high post in the 
administration of Wales, More gently questions the choice, the 
venal bargain, he has made. 
To use Mencken’s vivid label, and to think of the worried 
Christian parents as the “booboisie,” is a peremptory way of 
distancing and dismissing a serious perspective. Like Bolt’s 
hero, the thoughtful people who want their children to learn 
about intelligent design view the warnings about jobs and the 
global economy as a crass failure to see what is genuinely 


--- Page 137 ---

A Mess of Pottage 119 
important. An older story (Gen. 26, 31-3) might be more 
salient for them, the tale of the bargain between Jacob and 
Esau. Jacob is in the field, cultivating his crops, when Esau 
returns faint from the hunt. He asks his brother for food. 
And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright. 
And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall 
this birthright do to me? 
And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and 
he sold his birthright unto Jacob. 
To trade your soul for Wales, to let Darwinism unchecked 
into the schools, these are equivalent, equivalently myopic, 
bargains, exchanges in which you give up your birthright for 
a bowl of lentils—for a mess of pottage. 
In fact, it is worse. The birthright, or the soul, you give up is 
not your own, but that of your child. Instead of doing your 
duty for your sons and daughters, instead of steering them in 
the faith and helping them to God, you open hatches through 
which they may fall, jeopardizing their chances of salvation 
in hopes that they may obtain some trivial mundane reward. 
I know from my own case how poignant a child’s loss of faith 
can seem to a religious parent. During my teens, although I 
continued to sing in church choirs, it became evident to my 
family that I no longer believed in the Christian doctrines in 
which Ihad been brought up—I made no secret of my abstinence 
from the sacraments, for example. For my mother, the edu- 
cation I had received, once seen as wonderful, beyond any 
dreams she could have had for me, now appearedas terrible, the 
source of a turn in my life that had deprived me of the single 
most precious possession any person can have. The worldly 


--- Page 138 ---

120 Living with Darwin 
successes my education promised me were completely irrelevant, 
utterly incapable of assuaging her sorrow. 
I grieved for her grief, but could not—cannot—see things 
as she did. Yet even though I do not think there is any birthright 
I have traded for a mess of pottage, any sense in which I have 
given my soul for Wales, I believe that adequate understanding 
of the resistance to Darwinism must recognize the perspective 
that takes acceptance of orthodox biological education as a 
terrible bargain. Enough has been said in previous chapters 
about the fallacies purveyed by the intelligent design-ers. My con- 
cern now is with the honest and worried people who accept the 
advertisements for intelligent design with a sense of liberation, 
and with the values they hope to preserve. 
The simplest way to address worries about the effects of 
teaching evolution is that pioneered in Westminster Abbey 
over a century ago. From the eulogies at Darwin’s funeral to 
eloquent contemporary presentations,” religious people have 
argued that the opposition between Darwinism and faith is 
only apparent. If you can have God and Darwin too, then the 
concerns of those who support intelligent design can be met 
without grasping at the illusions the design-ers concoct. From 
this perspective, the controversy persists because of two mis- 
takes: one that fails to see how the evolution of life on earth, 
caused by natural selection, might elaborate the plan of a 
Creator who set things up to proceed in this way and who 
leaves natural processes to run their course, and another that 
disguises currently unsolved difficulties with Darwinism as 
unsolvable, thereby creating space for a much-touted, but 


--- Page 139 ---

A Mess of Pottage 121 
ultimately empty, alternative. A nonproblem is created, and a 
spurious solution is then offered. 
According to this diagnosis, the honest supporters are 
doubly deceived. They are bombarded with the admonish- 
ment that they must choose between God and Darwin. Then they 
are told that, despite the widespread scientific support for 
Darwin, there’s another point of view, defensible on scientific 
grounds, and unfairly derided by the academic establishment. 
Those who say these things appear more trustworthy than the 
remote Brahmins who pooh-pooh opposition to evolution. 
The audience has little reason to think critically about the story 
they are told. Many of them find the scientific details difficult, 
and, when they contrast the reassurances of their trusted coun- 
selors with the haughty dismissals of a secular orthodoxy, their 
sense of alienation from science deepens. 
I agree with some parts of this account. With any major 
piece of science, it is possible to identify unsolved problems, and 
to conjure up a “case for balance,” a case that would require 
significant work and attention to expose it for the charade it is. 
Present the “case for balance” in evolutionary theory to people 
who are already worried about the impact of Darwinian ideas 
on their children, people who lack the tools to identify its 
chicanery, people who don’t have the motivation to probe it as 
they would other heterodox claims, and it’s highly likely that you'll 
succeed in rallying them to the cause. Where I demur, however, 
is in the thought that the worries about Darwinism are them- 
selves unfounded, that the supporters of intelligent design 
have misguidedly erected a non-existent opposition between 
Darwinism and the religious doctrines central to their faith.*° 
From the late nineteenth century on, religious people who 
have thought hard about the Darwinian view of the history of 


--- Page 140 ---

122 Living with Darwin 
life have found it deeply troubling. George John Romanes, 
author of books on religion and works of science, found 
Darwin’s vision agonizing. It seemed to him that the universe 
had “lost its soul of loveliness.”*” In his groundbreaking The 
Varieties of Religious Experience, William James articulated more 
extensively this sense of loss, offering an arresting image. “For 
naturalism, fed on recent cosmological speculations, mankind 
is in a position similar to that of a set of people living on a 
frozen lake, surrounded by cliffs over which there is no escape, 
yet knowing that little by little the ice is melting, and the 
inevitable day drawing near when the last film of it will dis- 
appear, and to be drowned ignominiously will be the human 
creature’s portion. The merrier the skating, the warmer and 
more sparkling the sun by day, and the ruddier the bonfires at 
night, the more poignant the sadness with which one must take 
in the meaning of the total situation.”** Given this picture of 
life as early twentieth-century science seems to depict it, James 
can only view cheerfulness, or even the absence of despair, as based 
on false optimism, on failure to face reality. It is hardly sur- 
prising that he sees religious impulses as cries, triggered by the 
need for something different or for something more—“Here 
is the real core of the religious problem: Help! Help!’”* 
Perhaps this is overwrought, even neurotic? I don’t think so. 
Romanes and James, like the evangelical Christians who rally 
behind intelligent design today, appreciate that Darwinism is 
subversive. They recognize that the Darwinian picture of life 
is at odds with a particular kind of religion, providentialist reli- 
gion, as I shall call it. A large number of Christians, not merely 
those who maintain that virtually all of the Bible must be read 
literally, are providentialists. For they believe that the universe 
has been created by a Being who has a great design, a Being 


--- Page 141 ---

A Mess of Pottage 123 
who cares for his creatures, who observes the fall of every 
sparrow and who is especially concerned with humanity.” Yet 
the story of a wise and loving Creator who has planned life on 
earth, letting it unfold over four billion years by the processes 
envisaged in evolutionary theory, is hard to sustain when you 
think about the details. 
Many people have been troubled by human suffering, and 
that of other sentient creatures, and have wondered how those 
pains are compatible with the designs of an all-powerful and 
loving God. Darwin’s account of the history of life greatly 
enlarges the scale on which suffering takes place. Through 
millions of years, billions of animals experience vast amounts 
of pain, supposedly so that, after an enormous number of 
extinctions of entire species, on the tip of one twig of the 
evolutionary tree, there may emerge a species with the special 
properties that make us able to worship the Creator. Even 
though there may be some qualitative difference between 
human pain and the pain of other animals, deriving perhaps 
from our ability to understand what is happening to us and to 
represent the terrible consequences, it is plain to anyone who has 
ever seen an animal ensnared or a fish writhe on a hook, that 
we are not the only organisms who suffer. Moreover, animal 
suffering isn’t incidental to the unfolding of life, but integral to 
it. Natural selection is founded on strenuous competition, and 
although the race isn’t always to the ruthless, there are plenty 
of occasions on which it does produce “nature red in tooth and 
claw” (in Tennyson’s pre-Darwinian phrase). Our conception 
of a providential Creator must suppose that He has con- 
structed a shaggy-dog story, a history of life that consists of a 
three-billion-year curtain-raiser to the main event, in which 
millions of sentient beings suffer, often acutely, and that the 


--- Page 142 ---

124 Living with Darwin 
suffering is not a by-product but constitutive of the script the 
Creator has chosen to write. 
To contend that species have been individually created with 
the vestiges of their predecessors, with the junk that accumulates 
in the history of life, is to suppose that Intelligence—or the 
Creator—operates by whimsy. The trouble is that the charge 
doesn’t go away when the action of the Creator is made more 
remote. For a history of life dominated by natural selection 
is extremely hard to understand in providentialist terms. 
Mutations arise without any direction toward the needs of 
organisms—and the vast majority of them turn out to be 
highly damaging. The environments that set new challenges 
for organic adaptation succeed one another by processes 
largely independent of the activities and requirements of the 
living things that inhabit them. Even if the succession of envir- 
onments on earth has some hidden plan, Darwinism denies 
that the variations that enable organisms to adapt and to cope 
are directed by those environments. Evolutionary arms races 
abound. If prey animals are lucky enough to acquire a favorable 
variation, then some predators will starve. If the predators are 
the fortunate ones, then more of the prey will die messy and 
agonizing deaths.”’ There is nothing kindly or providential 
about any of this, and it seems breathtakingly wasteful and 
inefficient. Indeed, if we imagine a human observer presiding 
over a miniaturized version of the whole show, peering down 
on his “creation,” it is extremely hard to equip the face with a 
kindly expression. 
Toward the end of the Origin, Darwin points to some strik- 
ing, and disturbing, phenomena, which on the Lyellian alterna- 
tive appear to signal the whimsy (or, perhaps, callousness) of the 
Creator. He suggests that his account, unlike the explanation in 


--- Page 143 ---

A Mess of Pottage 125 
terms of special creation, should remove many surprises at the 
character of the living world. “We need not marvel at the sting 
of the bee causing the bee’s own death; at drones being pro- 
duced in such vast numbers for one single act, and then being 
slaughtered by their sterile sisters; at the astonishing waste of 
pollen by our fir-trees; at the instinctive hatred of the queen 
bee for her own fertile daughters; at ichneumonidae feeding 
within the live bodies of caterpillars; and at other such cases.”” 
The last example is well chosen, for the behavior of the 
ichneumonidae—parasitic wasps—is particularly unpleasant. 
The wasps lay their eggs in a living caterpillar, paralyzing the 
motor nerves (but not the sensory nerves) so that the cater- 
pillar cannot move or reject its new lodgers. As the eggs hatch, 
and the larvae grow, they eat their way out of their host. 
Darwin presents his catalogue of surprisingly nasty aspects 
of nature to argue that taking these arrangements to result 
from acts of separate creation implies an extraordinary degree 
of whimsy on the part of the Creator. He doesn’t make explicit 
an implication that disturbs many of his most sensitive 
readers—those for whom his universe has lost “its soul of 
loveliness’—the fact that matters are little better if the 
Creator's activity is more distant. The mess, the inefficiency, 
the waste and the suffering are effects of natural processes, so 
that they shouldn’t be seen as directly planned and introduced. 
But the Creator has still chosen to use those processes to unfold 
the history of life. The general inefficiency of the processes, 
the extreme length of time, the haphazard sequence of envir- 
onments, the undirected variations, the cruel competition 
through which selection so frequently works, is all foreseen. 
And the individual nastinesses to which Darwin points are 
expected outcomes of deploying these sorts of processes. If we 


--- Page 144 ---

126 Living with Darwin 
search the creation for clues to the character of the Creator, a 
judgment of whimsy is a relatively kind one. For we easily 
might take life as it has been generated on our planet as the 
handiwork ofa bungling, or a chillingly indifferent, god. 
Sober consideration of the history of life is bound to gen- 
erate just the questions that fueled the nascent skepticism of the 
eighteenth century, doubts directed toward providentialism. 
For Voltaire and for Hume, the ancient problem of the exis- 
tence of evil in a world designed by a powerful and benevolent 
deity arose with new force. In his Dialogues Concerning Natural 
Religion, Hume placed a series of questions in the mouth of 
one of his characters. Are the evils unforeseen? Oris it that they 
are foreseen and the deity has no power to remove them? Or 
should we suppose that they are foreseen and recognized as 
removable but that the Creator simply chooses not to do so? The 
general lines of theological answer, well known to Hume, and 
repeated by many apologists since, are that the evils we per- 
ceive are merely local, and that they make an essential con- 
tribution to a larger good. (The apologies are principally the 
work of theologians and academic philosophers. Many devout 
people find them wrongheaded and insensitive, and would 
reject the entire idea of attempting to fathom the divine plan.) 
Ambitious providentialists try to say what this greater good 
is, and why pain and suffering are necessary for it to exist. 
Virtues require adversity. Courage cannot exist without the 
threat of danger. Generosity is only possible if there is also 
want. Moreover, for genuine virtue to be present, people must 
beable to act freely. That means that there must be the possibility 
of sin. Hence we shouldn't be surprised if the powerful and 
loving Creator has brought about a world in which there is pain 
and suffering, some of it produced independently of human 


--- Page 145 ---

A Mess of Pottage 127 
beings, some of it resulting from free human actions. If the 
most important good—the existence of people who freely act 
virtuously—is to be present in the Creation, then the dark and 
cruel aspects also must be included. 
There is plenty to challenge here, and complex philo- 
sophical debates have raged around such questions as whether 
God could have created people who always freely chose to do 
the good. I shall be content with two simpler, and, I believe, 
more disturbing points. The first of these stems directly from 
the Darwinian picture of the history of life. When you con- 
sider the millions of years in which sentient creatures have 
suffered, the uncounted number of extended and agonizing 
deaths, it simply rings hollow to suppose that all this is needed 
so that, at the very tail end of history, our species can manifest 
the allegedly transcendent good of free and virtuous action. 
There is every reason to think that alternative processes for 
unfolding the history of life could have eliminated much of the 
agony, that the goal could have been achieved without so long 
and bloody a prelude. 
The second point is that the providentialist’s doctrine that 
humans and nonhuman animals suffer in the interests of 
achieving some greater good must be reconcilable with the 
assumption of divine justice. You cannot defend torturing a 
few individuals who are known to be innocent on the grounds 
that setting some examples will contribute to a safer society. 
By the same token, a just Creator cannot consign vast numbers 
of its creatures to pain and suffering because this will promote 
some broader good. Divine justice requires that the animals 
who suffer are compensated, that the suffering isn’t simply 
instrumental to the wonders of creation but redeemed for 
them. Dostoevsky’s Ivan Karamazov presents the fundamental 


--- Page 146 ---

128 Living with Darwin 
point. “It’s not worth the tears of that one tortured child who 
beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stink- 
ing outhouse, with its unexpiated tears to ‘dear, kind God’! It’s 
not worth it, because those tears are unatoned for. They must 
be atoned for, or there can be no harmony.” How, then, are 
the agonies, especially the agonies of the innocent, atoned for? 
The providentialist may seem to have an obvious reply. 
Atonement comes in union with God, perhaps in an afterlife. 
Further reflection makes it evident that this only raises new 
difficulties.” If the suffering of the child, or of the holocaust 
victim, is genuinely outweighed by some greater good, re- 
ceived in an afterlife, we ought to ask if that suffering is neces- 
sary for that good to be received. If it is, then others who have 
been denied the suffering will turn out to have been short- 
changed. They will not have experienced something that is 
necessary for the attainment of the greater good. Because such 
acute suffering is needed for salvation in the afterlife, those 
who do not suffer similarly cannot be saved. If, however, 
salvation is possible without the suffering, then the agonies are 
unatoned for. They weren't needed for the glorious reward. 
Finally, if it is suggested that there are two kinds of people, 
those who need to suffer to win eternal salvation and those 
who do not, we need to know just how the holocaust victims 
are different from those whose lives are free from comparable 
violations—and just why the divine plan demands the exis- 
tence of some who can only attain heaven through extreme 
suffering. 
I've been exploring ambitious providentialism, which 
attempts to respond to the existence of evil, pain, and suffering 
by explaining why they are necessary for the greater good of the 
Creation. Providential religion could be humbler, admitting 


--- Page 147 ---

A Mess of Pottage 129 
that the reasons of God are beyond human understanding. It 
could concede that, when we look at the history of life, seek- 
ing clues to the character ofits divine Creator, we're likely to be 
confused and misled, but that is because we are finite creatures, 
incapable of appreciating God’s greatness or His purposes. 
Yet this strategy of retreat comes at a price. First, it involves 
just that suspension of curiosity that moved Darwin to an aty- 
pically scathing critique. If you are prepared to treat the divine 
plan as ultimately mysterious and incomprehensible, then 
why introduce that thought just here? Why not go further? You 
might declare that the appearances of common descent are 
deceptive, that species have been newly created with the vestiges 
of formerly useful organs and structures, with the masses of 
genomic junk, and that the Creator has His own unfathomable 
reasons for doing this. You might even insist that the earth has 
been made with the appearance of great age, that the order of 
the fossils in the rocks and the radioactive residues are products 
of a recent Creation, that in all these instances the intentions 
of the Creator in mimicking a Darwinian world are beyond 
human understanding. Wherever it occurs, in defending a 
beneficent Creator against the evidence of whimsy or indiffer- 
ence, in advocating novelty creationism, or in resurrecting 
Genesis, the appeal to the incomprehensibility of the Deity 
faces the same objection. “It makes the works of God a mere 
mockery and deception; I would almost as soon believe with the 
old cosmogonists, that fossil shells had never lived, but had 
been created in stone so as to mock the shells now living on the 
sea-shore.”® The appeal to “mystery” is always available—and 
always an abdication of the spirit of inquiry. For those who 
would reconcile God and Darwin, it’s hardly an acceptable 
resting place. 


--- Page 148 ---

130 Living with Darwin 
Hume challenged his providentialist contemporaries by 
asking them to consider what character they would ascribe to 
the deity if they set aside their preconceptions and simply used 
the observed phenomena of life on our planet as the basis for their 
inference.* It might appear that the challenge is unfair, that 
there are occasions on which we suppose that appearances 
are deceptive, believe that what seems a natural conclusion 
from the observed phenomena should not be drawn, think 
that there is an—unknown—explanation for the discrepancy 
between the “obvious implication” and what we ought to 
accept. Not all unanswered questions are unanswerable. It 
would be entirely unreasonable for me to protest that there 
is no way to fill in the blanks in my unfinished crossword, or 
for the community of scientists to assert that there is no answer 
to some large question—the problem of protein folding, say— 
that currently baffles them. In some instances, we would 
properly assume that there is a solution to a problem, even 
though we recognize quite clearly that we shall never be able to 
provide it. There are vast numbers of questions of human 
history about which we'll always remain ignorant. At this 
point, however, a deeper problem emerges. For on the occa- 
sions on which we are justified in thinking that there is an 
explanation, currently or even permanently unbeknownst to 
us, we have background knowledge to which we can appeal. 
Although we cannot say what route Caesar followed on the 
Ides of March, the information we have provides grounds for 
thinking that he followed some definite course to the Capitol. 
If the providentialist is to turn back Hume’s challenge—or 
the Darwinian extension of it—then it must be because there 
are antecedent grounds for supposing that the providential 
Creator exists. Were that not so, then there would be no basis 


--- Page 149 ---

A Mess of Pottage 131 
for supposing that the waste, the suffering, and the inefficiency 
should not be taken at face value. 
Troubling questions now arise. Why should anyone think 
there must be a providential Creator behind the apparent evils 
of the world, a God whose purposes we cannot fathom? On 
what do providentialists rely when they maintain that there 
must be some unknown order behind the messiness of life? 
So the conflict between Darwin and providential religion 
leads inexorably into a broader battle. It pitches us into what 
is often (but wrongly) viewed as a war between reason and 
religion generally, one that erupted in the eighteenth century 
and that has intensified ever since. Darwinism is entangled 
with what I'll call the “enlightenment case against super- 
naturalism.” Evolutionary ideas form a separable part of the 
case, as well as amplifying other themes within it. It is wrong 
to give Darwin complete credit as the “anatomist of unbelief.” 
But it would also be wrong to pretend that his ideas are not 
important to the “delineation of doubt.” I shall try to explain 
below why he is so prominent a figure in the conflict, why he 
serves evangelical Christians as the bogeyman. 
The enlightenment case began with attacks on providen- 
tialism, but the vast majority of the world’s religions have not 
been committed to a wise and powerful Creator with a great, if 
unfathomable, plan. An inclusive pantheon would contain 
many gods—and spirits, and ancestors—who have little inter- 
est in human or animal welfare, some of whom can be placated 
in various ways, most of whom have to be acknowledged 
as sources of power. An even more capacious collection of 


--- Page 150 ---

132 Living with Darwin 
religious entities would include impersonal powers, forces like 
the Mana of some Polynesian or Melanesian religions, with 
which it is important to align oneself. It is not easy to identify 
what distinguishes these objects of religious concern, these 
gods and ancestors, spirits and forces, except to say, vaguely, 
that they are very different from the normal things with which 
human beings deal, that they are not perceptible except under 
very special circumstances, that they are somehow “super- 
natural” or “transcendent.” 
Religion is itself an extraordinarily diverse and multi- 
faceted phenomenon, emerging in different forms in different 
societies, and even assuming new identities in a changing his- 
torical and social context. At different times, and in different 
locations, the major religions of the world, Judaism and 
Islam, Buddhism and Hinduism, as well as Christianity, have 
all embraced very different conceptions of the religious life. 
Because of this, an enlightenment case against religion is likely 
to fail. Religious traditions can evolve, adapting themselves 
to the arguments presented so that the skeptics’ attempts to 
define “religion” once and for all are portrayed as limited and 
crude. Instead, I suggest, we should recognize an enlighten- 
ment case against a common strand within religious tradi- 
tions, against supernaturalism. 
Providentialist religion, as we have seen, supposes that 
there is an unknown—even unknowable—explanation for the 
mess of life, and, in doing so, relies on claims to know that 
there is a wise and benevolent Creator. The enlightenment 
case scrutinizes this claim to knowledge, and does so by oppos- 
ing all alleged knowledge of supernatural (or transcendent) 
entities. It recognizes that many versions of the world’s reli- 
gions are committed to the existence of supernatural beings 


--- Page 151 ---

A Mess of Pottage 133 
and to the truth of particular stories about these beings. Most 
religions that have existed thus far have been supernaturalist, that 
is, they have relied on oral traditions or canons of scripture 
that describe the characteristics and actions of supernatural 
entities, usually although not always supernatural persons, and 
acquiescing in the religion frequently requires belief that many 
of these descriptions are literally true. Devout Christians have 
typically believed that Jesus was once literally raised from the 
dead. Devout Jews have often supposed that God literally 
made a covenant with Abraham and, later, with the chosen 
people. Devout Muslims routinely think that the angel Gabriel 
spoke the exact words that the Prophet heard and recited, the 
words recorded in the Qur'an. Australian aborigines believe 
that important events occurred during what they call the 
“Dreamtime.” Devotees of African religions make strong 
claims about the enduring presence of ancestors, and so on. 
The enlightenment case begins with an assault on the doc- 
trines that are presupposed in providentialist Christianity, but 
it proceeds to attack all versions of supernaturalist religion. 
Indeed, as we shall discover, part of its strategy for undermin- 
ing any particular religion involves a negative attitude toward 
supernaturalism in general. 
Despite its scope, this is not a war against all religion. For 
there are other kinds of religion, “spiritual religions,” as I shall 
call them, that don’t require the literal truth of any doctrines 
about supernatural beings. Some professing Christians and 
professing Jews have heard the dispatches from the enlighten- 
ment front, and responded by abandoning commitment to the 
literal truth of virtually all the sentences in their respective 
Bibles. The possibility of spiritual religion will occupy us later. 
The next step in an investigation of the tangled relationship 


--- Page 152 ---

134 Living with Darwin 
between Darwinism and religion must be a quick review of 
the enlightenment case against supernaturalism. 
The enlightenment case against supernaturalism begins 
by asking for the grounds on which the devout might become 
confident that there must be some explanation for the pains 
and sufferings of sentient beings, for the waste and inefficiency 
of the history of life and the operation of natural selection. 
Providentialist Christians reply that they accept a body of 
background doctrine, which tells them of a powerful, wise, 
and benevolent Creator. They endorse this doctrine because 
they believe in the literal truth of certain statements in the 
Christian Bible.*” They respect the authority of a particular 
church, or denomination, or tradition, and rely on the original 
revelation of divine truth, embodied in the sacred scriptures 
and unfolded by the learned in each generation. 
The enlightenment case subjects this idea to intense exam- 
ination. Can the long and intricate process that leads from 
some original event—a supposed revelation—through the 
formation of the texts, their dissemination and interpretation, 
provide any real basis for firm belief that the disorder and 
messiness of life is only apparent? Or are religious believers 
like children, deeply committed to a story inculcated by fond 
parents, children who declare that there must be some explana- 
tion that allows reindeer to fly and presents to be universally 
dispensed on Christmas Eve—even though no such explana- 
tion comes to mind? (They are firmly convinced, after all, that 
there is a Santa Claus.) From the eighteenth century to the 
present, dedicated scholars have probed the scriptures, tried to 
understand the circumstances of their composition, scoured 
the historical record to account for their acceptance as can- 
onical, and have elaborated sociological explanations of the 


--- Page 153 ---

A Mess of Pottage 135 
careers of some major religions. Their investigations suggest 
that the texts and traditions cannot support the confidence of 
the faithful—and it is hardly surprising that religious people 
usually know far less about these scholarly studies than they do 
about Darwinian evolution. 
The canonical Christian texts are the Gospels and the letters 
attributed to Paul. Literary analysis and historical studies have 
established, as firmly as anything in ancient history is ever 
established, that not all the letters the New Testament assigns 
to Paul were written by the same person, but that the gen- 
uinely Pauline documents are the earliest part of the Christian 
canon, written about twenty years after the Crucifixion by a 
man who had never had any intimate association with Jesus 
and whose convictions had been altered by a critical event. The 
four Gospels, written about two decades later still, are incom- 
patible with one another on many points of detail. Jesus does 
similar things and tells similar stories, but in different locations, 
to different audiences, or in a different temporal order. There 
are striking differences about the events after Jesus’ death. The 
original version of the earliest Gospel—that of Mark—ends 
with an empty tomb; the brief description of an appearance of 
the risen Christ comes only in a later addendum to the text. 
Both Matthew and Luke provide much more elaborate stories 
of Jesus’ appearances to the disciples, but the locations, and 
people involved, are remarkably different. John, the latest of 
the Gospels, provides the most extensive narrative, giving 
details of the appearances of the risen Christ that are at variance 
with those ofall the others—and only John picks out an individual 
disciple, Thomas, who refuses to believe in the resurrection 
without seeing and touching. Not all these conflicting reports 
can be literally true. 


--- Page 154 ---

136 Living with Darwin 
There are similar difficulties with the beginnings of Jesus’ 
life. Mark provides no details, but begins with the adult Jesus 
coming to the Jordan to request baptism by John the Baptist. 
Both Matthew and Luke, however, tell elaborate stories, and one 
of Matthew’s formulations provides a clue about how they pro- 
ceeded. A distinctive feature of Matthew’s Gospel is his interest 
in connecting events in Jesus’ life with Old Testament *pro- 
phecies about the Messiah. (Overall, Matthew is most con- 
cerned with linking the nascent Jesus movement of his time 
—roughly 80 CE—to Jewish laws and traditions.) He turns 
frequently to Isaiah, using a standard Greek version of the text 
(the Septuagint), formulating a prophecy in language’ most 
Christians know well. “Behold! A Virgin shall conceive, and 
bear a Son. And shall call his name, Immanuel.” The original 
Hebrew, however, is less biologically shocking, announcing 
only that a young woman shall conceive. The pre-Christian 
translators who crafted the Septuagint chose the Greek word 
parthenos (virgin), and thereby unwittingly inaugurated a piece 
of Christian theology, the Virgin birth—or, as I would prefer 
to put it, they led Matthew to create a myth. 
The mythical character of these stories becomes ever 
more apparent when you compare the narratives offered by 
Matthew and Luke. Luke’s moving version of the events 
surrounding the birth of Jesus requires Joseph and Mary to 
travel from Nazareth to Bethlehem. Matthew has no need ofany 
such journey, since he locates them in Bethlehem all along. 
Matthew has wise men, but no shepherds. Luke has shepherds 
but no wise men. (The Christianity with which I grew up 
solved the problem in the obvious way by combining every- 
thing.) There are some serious difficulties in reconciling the 
dates. Herod, a main character in Matthew’s story, died about 


--- Page 155 ---

A Mess of Pottage 137 
ten years before the appointment of the Roman official whom 
Luke takes to have been an administrator in the region at the time 
of the nativity. But I want to focus on a different detail. 
Because he wants the birth of Jesus to fulfill the prophecy 
that the Messiah would be born in Bethlehem, Luke has to 
explain why Joseph and the pregnant Mary made a journey 
from Nazareth. His solution is offered in a beautiful passage, 
one that rings out in churches each Christmas (Luke 2:1—4). 
“And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a 
decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be 
taxed. And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was 
governor of Syria. And all went to be taxed, every one into his 
own city. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the 
city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of David, which is 
called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of 
David.”** The overwhelming evidence is that this is complete 
fiction. 
Not only are there no records of a census or a general 
taxation at this time, but, even if there had been one, this is 
surely not the way in which it would have been conducted. 
We know something about Roman attitudes toward the religious 
lore and ethnic traditions of the Jews—at best, they saw them 
as barbaric enthusiasms. We also know something about the ways 
in which Romans obtained population counts and how they 
levied taxes. Instead of moving the people about, they quite 
sensibly dispatched their own trusted officials. Luke invites us 
to think of Cyrenius as having done something quite mad. In 
the interests of administering some kind of census or taxation, 
he encourages a mass migration to bring people to the places 
with which particular ancestors are associated, ancestors 
whose importance is fixed by Jewish culture. 


--- Page 156 ---

138 Living with Darwin 
Asa last example, consider the depiction of Pilate offered by 
the Gospels. The familiar story of the Roman official offering to 
release Jesus and encountering a baying Jewish mob has played 
a significant role in Christian anti-Semitism. The action Pilate 
contemplates, releasing a prisoner for a local religious festival, 
is quite unprecedented in the Roman administration of Judea, 
or of any other province with indigenous zealotry, It is also 
incompatible with what we know of the man, some of whose 
repressive actions are documented, who was, apparently, re- 
called because of protests against his harsh treatment of the 
Jews. What accounts for the portrait of a sympathetic figure, so 
different from the indications we have from other sources? 
The canonical Gospels were written as the expression of 
a broader Hellenistic Jesus movement, after it was clear that 
that movement was unlikely to flourish as a reform of Jewish 
religion,” and after the Roman grip on the eastern Mediter- 
ranean had tightened. The evangelist who first recorded the 
story, Mark, chose a strategy of appeasing the Romans and 
making scapegoats of the Jews. His choice was politically 
adept, and probably helped the movement appeal to non-Jews 
ina world dominated by Rome. Yet I concur with the judgment 
of the Jesus Seminar, a group of theologians that has brought 
the most developed textual scholarship to bear on the accuracy 
of the Gospel narratives. “That scene, although the product of 
Mark’s vivid imagination, has wrought untold and untellable 
tragedy in the history of the relations of Christians to Jews. 
There is no black deep enough to symbolize the black mark 
this fiction has etched in Christian history.” 1° 
Only in the second century of our era was the Christian 
canon assembled. The New Testament as we have it is surely a 
compromise, designed to satisfy groups of believers with different 


--- Page 157 ---

A Mess of Pottage 139 
favored texts and different oral traditions. Some followers of 
Jesus, however, were left out. Among them were those who 
treasured different “Gospels’—the Gospel of Mary, the Secret 
Book of James, and, perhaps most interestingly, the Gospel of 
Thomas.'” This last text, discovered in 1945, overlaps with 
Matthew and Luke in reporting many of the familiar sayings and 
parables of Jesus, but also contains others that are startling. 
The disciples said to Jesus, “We know that you are going to leave 
us. Who will be our leader?” 
Jesus said to them, “No matter where you are, you are to go to James 
the Just, for whose sake heaven and earth came into being.”'” 
Thomas, for whom the Gospel is named, has private conver- 
sations with Jesus, in which he is told secrets that cannot be 
revealed, insights that the other disciples cannot understand. 
Perhaps this is why the Gospel of John is so keen to debunk 
Thomas’ credibility, to portray him not as the privileged recip- 
ient of higher truths, but as “Doubting Thomas.”!°’ 
The documents Christians take to be canonical were chosen 
as the result of political struggles among many nascent Jesus 
movements, in which efforts to incorporate the ideas of an 
itinerant teacher within the framework of Judaism lost out to 
a more cosmopolitan vision favored by the Rome-oriented 
Paul. Within that cosmopolitan conception there were also 
variations, some of which were included in the compromise 
we have, others of which were eliminated as heretical. Out of 
this has come a collection of inconsistent documents, many 
of whose parts are evidently fictitious. How can reliance on 
this canon provide grounds for thinking that, despite all 
appearances, life has been planned by a powerful and bene- 
volent deity? 


--- Page 158 ---

140 Living with Darwin 
The effects of scholarly study of Christian scripture have 
long been evident to those who have taught seminary students. 
In a famous letter of resignation, Julius Wellhausen, one of 
the great interpreters of the scriptures, acknowledged the 
effects of his discoveries. “I became a theologian because I was 
interested in the scientific treatment of the Bible; it has only 
gradually dawned upon me that a professor of theology like- 
wise has the practical task of preparing students for service 
in the Evangelical Church, and that I was not fulfilling this 
practical task, but rather, in spite of all reserve on my part, was 
incapacitating my hearers for their office.”'** With reason, 
many evangelical sects keep the news from the scholarly 
front from the faithful. Often, the tactic chosen consists in flat 
assertions that deny the reasoned judgments of scholars about 
historical or linguistic matters. The King James Study Bible (de- 
signed, as the note to the reader explains, to provide a reliable 
guide for “conservative Christians”) responds to the lengthy 
discussions about the priority of Mark and about the existence 
of an additional source from which both Matthew and Luke 
drew with a single sentence: “There is still very strong reason 
to hold to the priority of Matthew as the first gospel account of 
the life of Christ.”'° The faithful are given neither an extended 
account of what the scholarly consensus is, nor of what the 
“very strong” reasons are for rejecting it.’ 
Although I have been concentrating on Christianity, and on 
the difficulties involved in accepting the claims made by canon- 
ical Christian texts as literally true, similar points apply to 
other religious traditions. The sources of difficulty are typically 


--- Page 159 ---

A Mess of Pottage 141 
the same. Extraordinary events are supposed to have taken 
place in the more-or-less distant past, to have been recorded in 
writing or passed down in oral recitation, so that people who live 
today should believe in the literal truth of the cherished stories. 
When the processes through which these stories have come 
down to us are examined, there are often grounds for doubt 
about the marvelous events that initiated the process, often 
internal contradictions in the variant versions, often signs of 
political struggles in formulating orthodoxy. This, however, is 
merely the beginning of trouble for an uncritical reliance on 
texts and traditions. As understanding of the diversity of the 
world’s religions increases, it’s hard for believers to avoid view- 
ing themselves as participants in one line of religious teaching 
among many. You profess your faith on the authority of the 
tradition in which you stand, but you also have to recognize 
that others, people who believe very different, incompatible 
things, would defend their beliefs in the same fashion. By what 
right can you maintain that your tradition is the right one, that 
its deliverances are privileged? 
For all their doctrinal disagreements, Muslims, Jews, and 
Christians agree on many things. If, however, you had 
been acculturated within one of the aboriginal traditions of 
Australia, or within a society in central Africa, oramong the Inuit, 
you would accept, on the basis of cultural authority, radically 
different ideas. You would believe in the literal truth of stories 
about the spirits of ancestors and about their presence in 
sacred places, and you would believe these things as firmly 
as Christians believe in the resurrection, or Jews in God's 
covenant, or Muslims in the revelations to the Prophet. 
Victorian explorers, confident in the superiority of their race, their 
culture, and their particular version of Christianity, collected 


--- Page 160 ---

142 Living with Darwin 
stories from the dark continents they visited, labeling them as 
primitive superstitions. They failed to observe that the cultural 
processes that generated the exotic beliefs they recorded were 
exactly the same as those that lay behind their own religious 
doctrines—in all instances, there is a long sequence of genera- 
tions along which stories of extraordinary happenings are 
passed on as the lore of a social group. To what can a believer 
within any particular tradition—Christianity, say—point to 
show why it is uniquely right, and its rivals wrong? 
The trouble with supernaturalism is that it comes in so 
many incompatible forms, all of which are grounded in just 
the same way. To label someone else’s cultural history as 
“primitive” or “superstition” (or as both) is easy, until you 
realize that your basis for believing in the literal truth of the 
wonderful stories of your own tradition is completely analo- 
gous to the grounds of the supposedly unenlightened. There 
are no marks by which one of these many inconsistent con- 
ceptions of the supernatural can be distinguished from the 
others. Instead, we have a condition of perfect symmetry. 
Perhaps the symmetry can be accepted. Perhaps all these 
traditions are fundamentally correct, and we should focus on the 
core doctrine on which all agree. Yet as comparative studies 
disclose more and more differences among religions, some 
polytheistic, some monotheistic, and some without any con- 
ception of a personal deity, the more attenuated any such 
“core doctrine” becomes. Hence you arrive at frustratingly 
vague definitions of “religion” that appeal to some “accep- 
tance of the transcendent.” Even if it were supposed that the 
traditions were right about the doctrines they hold in com- 
mon, the specific stories—the resurrection, the covenant, the 
divinely inspired recitation—would have to be abandoned. 


--- Page 161 ---

A Mess of Pottage 143 
It would be necessary to move beyond supernatural religion to 
spiritual religion. 
Social and historical studies of the growth and spread of 
major religions reinforce this point. Although we lack direct 
evidence for many religious traditions—including all those 
that flourished before the invention of writing—it is possible 
to recognize the features that have fueled the rise of successful 
modern sects, and to explore some historical cases. A crude 
hypothesis based on what evidence we have suggests that 
religions spread within societies when they offer members of 
the societies something they want. They spread across soci- 
eties when they encourage social cohesion, and when they 
enable a society to deal successfully with its neighbors. The 
details are likely to differ from case to case, and a blanket claim 
of this sort is only the prelude to serious history. The principal 
point, however, is that religious doctrines don’t have to be true 
to be successful. Truth, like Mae West’s goodness, may have 
nothing to do with it. 
Why did Christianity succeed in the Greco-Roman world? 
Statistics suggest that upper-middle-class pagan women were 
relatively more attracted by the religion—perhaps because 
they perceived the lives of their Christian counterparts as 
better than their own (that Christian husbands were more 
faithful and less abusive).'”’ An intriguing conjecture proposes 
that, in an urban world marked by filth and recurrent out- 
breaks of plague, the Christian injunction to comfort the sick 
would have raised survival rates in times of epidemic, simply 
because of the beneficial effects of giving water and other 
forms of basic care. Outsiders would have seen that Christians 
recovered more frequently, and might have attributed this to 
divine concern for their well-being.'”* 


--- Page 162 ---

144 Living with Darwin 
Sociological studies of contemporary religious groups have 
documented the ways in which churches can attract members 
by offering companionship to lonely people.’ Provided that 
a bundle of religious doctrines satisfies the needs of group 
members, promotes harmony within the group, and indirectly 
helps in generating new descendant groups.or in taking over 
others, those ideas are likely to spread and may even become 
prevalent. Surely some religions have been very good at doing 
these things, at encouraging, for example, acts of great sacrifice 
to achieve religious rewards. We cannot yet aspire to tell the 
full story of why religions of so many different kinds have been 
prevalent across human societies, but the specific instances 
in which historical and sociological explanations can be given 
strongly suggest that the causes of success stem from the attract- 
iveness of stories and alleged historical claims, on the emotions 
they provoke and the actions they inspire—and that they have 
nothing to do with the literal truth of those tales and histories. 
Up to this point, the enlightenment case proceeds as if the 
religious believer had no direct access to sources of religious 
truth, but must rely on a tradition originating in the very dis- 
tant past. Many religious people, however, think differently.'"° 
Christians talk of encounters with Jesus, and of an enduring 
presence in their lives. According to the statistics, religious 
experience is quite widespread—although perhaps the statis- 
tics are worrying, because the rates vary quite dramatically 
from year to year, decade to decade.!"! 
I have no doubt that the overwhelming majority of the 
reports of religious experience are perfectly sincere. The im- 


--- Page 163 ---

A Mess of Pottage 145 
portant issue is why they occur. Religious people would prefer 
to think that the visionaries have, at least temporarily, a special 
ability to discern aspects of reality that ordinary experience 
can't disclose. The obvious scientific rivals invoke psycho- 
logical and sociological causes—stimulation of normal sen- 
sory channels, against particular psychological backgrounds, 
induces people to assimilate their current experiences to the 
religious framework supplied by their culture, or by some 
culture with which they are familiar. 
How can this issue be resolved? Not in the ways in which we 
corroborate other kinds of special powers—as when we test 
the musician who claims absolute pitch or the gourmet who is 
reputed to have an ability to detect the types and vintages of wines. 
Without an independent means of checking the believer’s 
reports, it is hard to see how to reach any firm judgment. The 
point has been appreciated by religious groups, who have 
struggled to find ways of assessing self-described visionaries. 
The solution achieved in medieval procedures for certifying 
those with genuine religious experience was to compare their 
affirmations with the orthodoxies of church tradition. But, 
since religious experience is supposed to validate religious 
doctrine in a way that appeal to tradition cannot, that solution 
is inept as a resolution of the issue that confronts us. 
Once again, the vast array of forms religious experience 
takes causes trouble. The visions of Jews, Muslims, and Chris- 
tians differ in ways we might think of as fundamental until we 
attend to the reports offered by the Yoruba, the Inuit, and 
Australian aborigines about their own religious experiences. 
To propose that the religious experiences of those whose lives 
are full of encounters with goddesses, ancestors, and totemic 
spirits are to be understood in psychosocial terms, while those 


--- Page 164 ---

146 Living with Darwin 
reported by Western monotheists are accurate representations 
of religious truths invites obvious and unpleasant questions 
about why the psychosocial explanation shouldn't be adopted 
more broadly. To maintain that all the religious experiences 
are completely correct is evidently impossible. The reports of 
visionaries are massively inconsistent. No religious believer 
thinks—or could think—that the central stories of all religions 
are literally true. 
Once again, the obvious way to salvage some role for reli- 
gious experience is to suggest that all sincere religious experi- 
ences disclose some aspect of the divine, but that this is overlaid 
and colored in each case by the social and psychological con- 
structions of individuals and their rival cultural traditions. The 
Catholics who see the Virgin in a window in Brooklyn are enjoy- 
ing a vision of something that transcends mundane reality, but 
they interpret it according to the specific ideas of their religious 
culture. The specific ideas cannot be recognized as literally 
correct—all we can say is that they, like their Yoruba counterparts, 
have been in touch with some “element of ultimacy.” 
A response like this cannot support supernaturalism— 
again, it points in the direction of spiritual religion. Super- 
naturalists cannot find it reassuring to be told that the idea of 
Jesus as a constant living presence is a psychosocial construc- 
tion, even though the core of the experience is an accurate 
sense of the “transcendent.” Moreover, what we know about 
the contexts in which religious experiences occur readily 
fosters a deeper skepticism. Troubled people, people whose 
emotional lives are disturbed, are significantly more likely to 
report religious experiences, and there are fragmentary sug- 
gestions that the administration of hallucinogens increases the 
rate at which such experiences occur.'’” It would be wrong to 


--- Page 165 ---

A Mess of Pottage 147 
maintain that we know that sincere religious experiences are 
the products of delusion. We should recognize clearly that we 
don’t know what to make of some parts of human experience. 
Given the extent of our ignorance in this area, supposing that 
religious experiences can somehow be assimilated to the cate- 
gories and doctrines that have descended to us from ancient 
times is a blind leap. 
Faith is frequently prized for its readiness to make that kind 
of leap. Many religious people would surely be impatient with 
the arguments I have rehearsed here, and would declare that 
the importance of religious commitment lies in the fact that 
it does not seek reasons. The proper religious attitude is one 
of trust. “So,” a devout Christian, or Muslim, or Jew might 
declare, “I simply accept these claims about past events, these 
doctrines about what people should do and what they should 
aspire to be. To ask me to provide reasons—or to play clever games 
that try to show I have no reasons—is entirely beside the point.” 
Yet here the enlightenment case presses from a new direc- 
tion. If you are going to use your religious attitudes to run your 
life, if you are going to let religious doctrine guide you to deci- 
sions that will affect the lives of others, then the willingness 
to leap without evidence, to commit yourself in the absence of 
reasons, deserves ethical scrutiny. As William Clifford, a late 
Victorian mathematician and apologist for science, saw very 
clearly, we do not usually endorse the behavior of people who 
act without reason, ardently convinced that things will turn 
out well. In Clifford’s famous example, the ship owner whose 
wishful thinking leads him to send out an unsound ship is 
rightly held responsible when the passengers and crew drown. 
The earnest religious believer who supposes that God has 
commanded him to kill his son, or that religious doctrine 


--- Page 166 ---

148 Living with Darwin 
requires him to eliminate the ungodly, or that it is wrong to 
undertake the operations doctors prescribe to save the lives of 
children, will subordinate ethical maxims he would otherwise 
use to guide his conduct to the dictates of faith, faith that is 
admittedly blind, supported by no defensible reason. We 
should protest that blind commitment, for, if it is allowed to 
issue in action, it is profoundly dangerous. 
In practice, people don’t protest, because they think of the 
religious doctrines that move them, and move their friends, as 
sources of a correct ethical attitude. If the enlightenment case, 
as developed so far, is cogent, they can have no basis for this 
judgment. It, too, is an article of blind faith. The true character 
of acting from unreasoned faith is revealed when you look 
at the actions of those who are moved by a different faith, at 
militant fanatics who aim to murder those who do not con- 
form to their religion, for example. Christians will naturally 
think of themselves as different, but, as we have seen, there is no 
basis for holding that the religious doctrines they avow are any 
more likely to be correct than those of other faiths, even of 
radical and intolerant versions of other faiths. The blindness 
with which they commit themselves to acting in accordance 
with their preferred interpretation of a particular text is no 
different from that of people who would express.a similar 
enthusiasm for the Protocols of the Elders of Zion or who would 
regard Mein Kampf as divinely inspired. 
The same ethical mistake pervades all of these instances. 
Unreasoned acceptance is only tolerable if the religious atti- 
tudes adopted are so confined and restrained that they have no 
implications for consequential moral decisions. Blind faith 
requires a firm appreciation of the importance of not being 
earnest.” 


--- Page 167 ---

A Mess of Pottage 149 
The elements of the enlightenment case against super- 
naturalism are well established. They have been elaborated in 
considerable detail by many scholars during the past two cen- 
turies. I have been attempting to clarify the logical structure, and 
logical force, of these combined elements. My whirlwind tour 
through the enlightenment case aims to support two points. 
First, it shows the serious difficulties supernaturalists face 
when they try to invoke the unfathomable mystery of God’s 
plan as a way of evading the apparently overwhelming evid- 
ence that the world in which we live was not designed by a 
providential Creator. Second, it enables us to understand why 
Darwin is the source of such vehement opposition, why he is seen 
as the chief villain in the promotion of atheism. 
The line of argument I have developed throughout this 
essay shows Christianity in retreat. The evidence for an anci- 
ent earth compels us to say goodbye to Genesis, so that at 
least part of the Bible must be read as not literally true. (As I 
have noted above, this is an ancient and respectable approach 
to reading the scriptures.) Darwin’s discovery of a single tree 
of life undercuts creationism, and requires that any action on 
the part of the deity must be remote. When we understand 
the messiness of the processes through which life unfolds, any 
design must be judged as largely unintelligent, any Creator as, 
at best, whimsical and capricious. Providential religion can 
only be sustained by supposing that God’s design is an unfath- 
omable mystery. 
The attempted retreat of providentialism, the vague gesture 
toward unknowable purposes, can only be sustained if there’s 


--- Page 168 ---

150 Living with Darwin 
some ground for supposing that appearances are deceptive, 
that, behind the muddle of life, there is a Creator with deeper 
intentions. Any attempt to save providentialism must be com- 
mitted to a specific piece of supernaturalist doctrine. Here, the 
enlightenment case exposes the troubles for supernaturalism 
that Darwinism brings into prominence, for it shows that 
there is no basis for holding that the received stories of this 
Creator are literally true. Parts of the enlightenment case are 
clearly separable from any Darwinian ideas, as with the critical 
reconstruction and analysis of scriptural texts. Yet there are 
good reasons why Darwin, not Wellhausen or Hume or 
Voltaire, is taken as the leader of the opposition to what is 
valuable and sacred. 
For the enlightenment case is not widely appreciated, and 
most of the brilliant thinkers who have developed it are 
unread, if not unknown. More exactly, they tend to be unread 
and unknown in the United States. Adolescent students in 
European schools study some of the relevant figures, to a lesser 
extent in Britain, to a much greater extent in the countries of 
Western continental Europe.'* American defenders of super- 
naturalist or providentialist religions, some of them literalists 
about Genesis, others literalists about significantly fewer of 
the scriptures, are protected from the shock of biblical criti- 
cism, of sociological history of religions, of anthropological 
studies that show the diversity of religious ideas, of psycho- 
logical evidence about religious experience, and of ethical 
reflections on the dangers of unreasoned decisions. When 
these potentially dangerous ideas surface, they are dismissed 
with brusque denials—the strategy of the King James Study 
Bible might, rather harshly, be described as one of lying for 
God." Not only are the individual pieces mostly unrecog- 


--- Page 169 ---

A Mess of Pottage 151 
nized, but the enlightenment case is rarely presented as a 
whole, as I have developed it (albeit briefly) here. 
Darwin, however, is visible. He is in the schools, potentially 
corrupting the youth and leading them to spurn the precious 
gift of faith. He serves as the obvious symbol of a larger attack 
on supernaturalist religion, about which thoughtful Christians 
know, even if they are not aware of all its details. Their concern 
is justified, although they may think, wrongly, that the onslaught 
on their faith is contained and condensed in Darwinism. For 
the enlightenment case will not surface in the education of 
their children, at least not until they attend universities, and 
probably notin any systematic way, even then. To defend the faith 
the important step is to keep Darwin out of the classroom, or, 
failing that, to “balance” his corrosive influence. 
Intelligent design-ers, like the scientific creationists before 
them, promise a way to do just that. They raise sufficient dust 
about “unsolvable problems” for Darwinian evolution to give 
concerned people the hope that there is a genuine alternative, 
friendlier to faith and acceptable with good conscience. When 
these advertisements are probed, as I have probed them in pre- 
vious chapters, they are found to be thoroughly false. Over- 
whelming evidence favors the apparently menacing claims of 
Darwinism. Worse still, the threat to providentialist and super- 
naturalist religions, forms of religion that are firmly entrenched 
in many contemporary societies, turns out to be genuine. 
Where does this barrage of arguments leave us? Darwin's 
most militant defenders would insist that they take us all the 
way to secularism, even that they constitute a knockdown case 
for atheism. I dissent from that conclusion for two reasons. 
First, even though the enlightenment case demonstrates that, 
taken as literal truth, the stories and historical claims of all the 


--- Page 170 ---

152 Living with Darwin 
religions about which we know are overwhelmingly likely to be 
mistaken, it does not follow that the world contains nothing 
beyond the entities envisaged by our current scientific picture 
of it. The history of inquiry shows that our horizons have 
often expanded to encompass things previously undreamed 
of in anyone’s natural philosophy. Whether inquiry will ever 
disclose anything that can satisfy the religious impulse, that 
can merit the title of “transcendent,” is itself doubtful, and we 
can be confident that, even if this remote possibility is realized, 
it will not approximate any of the stories our species has so 
far produced. It would be arrogant, however, to declare cate- 
gorically that there is nothing that might answer to our vague 
conception of the transcendent—there is too much that we 
know that we do not yet know. 
Second, and more importantly, the critique of providen- 
tialism and supernaturalism leaves open the possibility of what 
I have called “spiritual religion.”''® Each of the major Western 
monotheisms can generate a version of spiritual religion by 
giving up the literal truth of the stories contested by the 
enlightenment case.'’” How can this be done? I shall illustrate 
the possibility by using the example of Christianity. 
Spiritual Christians abandon almost all the standard stories 
about the life of Jesus. They give up on the extraordinary birth, 
the miracles, the literal resurrection. What survive are the 
teachings, the precepts and parables, and the eventual journey 
to Jerusalem and the culminating moment of the Crucifixion. 
That moment of suffering and sacrifice is seen, not as the 
prelude to some triumphant return and the promise of eternal 
salvation—all that, to repeat, is literally false—but as a sym- 
bolic presentation of the importance of compassion and of 
love without limits. We are to recognize our own predicament, 


--- Page 171 ---

A Mess of Pottage 153 
the human predicament, through the lens of the man on the 
Cross, 
Spiritual Christians place the value of the stories of the 
scriptures not in their literal truth but in their deliverances for 
self-understanding, for improving ourselves and for shap- 
ing our attitudes and actions toward others. Yet spiritual 
Christianity—like spiritual Judaism or spiritual Islam—is vul- 
nerable from two directions. To those who have grown up in 
a more substantial faith, who have not appreciated the force 
of the enlightenment case and who see no need to abandon 
supernatural religion, the spiritual version seems too attenuated 
to count as genuine religion at all. So, even though many con- 
temporary Americans agree that large portions of scriptural 
texts should not be read literally, most of them do not com- 
pletely abandon supernaturalism in favor of spiritual religion. 
They continue to affirm that a personal God made a covenant 
with the Jews or that Jesus literally rose from the dead.'” 
Where spiritual religion is most clearly visible, in explicit 
denials that the Jews were chosen in any straightforward 
sense or in attempts to explain the natural events that lie 
behind the conflicting resurrection narratives of the Gospels, 
the content of the religion seems to consist of powerful ethical 
ideas and exemplars.’”° 
From the other side, secular humanists will see spiritual 
religion as a last desperate attempt to claim a privilege for 
traditions whose credentials have been decisively refuted. 
Secularists can find value in the teachings of Jesus, inspiration 
in the image of the sacrifice on the cross—but also in ideas of 
the Torah or the Qur'an, in the sayings of the Buddha, in 
Socrates and Augustine, Kant and Dewey, Gandhi and Du Bois. 
Moreover, they can acknowledge the power ofthe stories, their 


--- Page 172 ---

154 Living with Darwin 
ability to move and to inspire, while insisting that these are 
not unique to religious literature. Why not go all the way, to 
a cosmopolitan understanding of thought about what is valuable 
and worth achieving, a secular conception that celebrates the very 
best in the ideas and stories from many different traditions, 
some of them unquestionably secular? 
Pressed from two flanks, spiritual religion can easily appear 
unstable. On one side it is liable to lapse from clearheaded 
acceptance of the enlightenment case and to topple back into 
supernaturalism. On the other, it may replace partiality to a 
particular tradition—Judaism or Christianity say—and-meta- 
morphose into a cosmopolitan secular humanism. Fora secular 
humanist, like me, spiritual religion faces the challenge of pro- 
viding more content than the exhortations to, and examples of, 
compassion and social justice that humanists enthusiastically 
endorse, without simultaneously reverting to supernatural- 
ism.'’ Although I do not see how that challenge can be met, it 
is not clear how to circumscribe all possible responses to it—and 
thus to close the case against religion, period. The enlightenment 
case culminates in a (polite) request to the reflective people who 
go beyond supernaturalism to spiritual religion, to explain, as 
clearly as they can, what more they affirm that secular human- 
ists cannot grant. 
That, I suggest, is where reason leads us. But it cannot 
be—nor should it be—the end of my story. 
*k * ** 
For, though they speak with the tongues of men and of 
angels, the voices of reason, as they have sounded so far in this 
essay, should not expect to carry the day. The conclusion they 
draw deprives religious people of what they have taken to 


--- Page 173 ---

A Mess of Pottage 155 
be their birthright. In its place, they offer a vision of a world 
without providence or purpose, and, however much they 
may celebrate the grand human adventure of understanding 
nature, that can only appear, by comparison, to be a mess of 
pottage. Often, the voices of reason I hear in contemporary 
discussions of religion are hectoring, almost exultant that com- 
fort is being stripped away and faith undermined; frequently, 
they are without charity. And they are always without hope. 
Religion is, and has been, central to the lives of most people 
who have ever lived. From what we know of the history of 
the growth and spread of particular creeds, its pervasiveness is 
understood in terms of the social purposes it serves, and 
nobody should expect it to disappear without a struggle, under 
the impact of what proclaims itself—accurately, I believe—as 
reason. For the benefits religion promises to the faithful are 
obvious, and obviously important, perhaps most plainly so 
when people experience deep distress. Darwin doesn’t provide 
much consolation at a funeral. 
Of course, secularism has its own revered figures, people 
who met personal tragedies without turning to illusory comforts. 
Hume faced his painful death stoically, persisting in his skepti- 
cism to the end. T. H. Huxley, Darwin’s tireless champion, 
wracked with grief at the death of his four-year-old son, 
refused Charles Kingsley’s proffered hope ofa reunion in the here- 
after. Perhaps these figures should serve as patterns for us all, 
admirable examples of intellectual integrity and courage that 
will not take refuge by turning away from the truth, by sup- 
posing, with the supernaturalists, that stories about life after 
death are literally true. 
It is crushingly obvious, however, that those most excited 
by the secular vision—those who celebrate the honesty of 


--- Page 174 ---

156 Living with Darwin 
spurning false comfort—are people who can feel themselves 
part of the process of discovery and disclosure that has shown 
the reality behind old illusions. Celebrations of the human 
accomplishment in fathoming nature’s secrets are less likely to 
thrill those who have only a partial understanding of what has 
been accomplished, and who recognize that they will not con- 
tribute, even in the humblest way, to the continued progress of 
knowledge. Hume’s and Huxley’s heirs, like Richard Dawkins 
for example, preach eloquently to the choir, but thoughtful 
religious people will find their bracing message harsh and 
insensitive. How can these celebrants of secularism under- 
stand what many other people stand to lose if their arguments 
are correct? How can they expect those people to be grateful 
for the mess of pottage they offer? 
Because such questions naturally arise, many people resist 
those arguments, hoping that they are incorrect or incomplete. 
They know that the case launched against their cherished 
beliefs is clever, but they are also tempted by the thought that 
the cleverness is flawed. If others, recognizably more sympa- 
thetic to their faith, can point however vaguely to potential 
faults, they will be grateful—and they will be disinclined to 
inspect too closely the gifts they are offered. So, again and 
again, they view Darwin as the enemy of what they hold most 
dear, and they resist Darwinism with whatever devices their 
apparently sympathetic allies can supply. 
Christian resistance to Darwin rests on the genuine insight 
that life without God, in the sense of a Darwinian account of 
the natural world, really does mean life without God in a far 
more literal and unnerving sense. Even those who understand, 
and contribute to, the enlightenment case can find the resultant 
picture of the world, and our place in it, unbearable. William 


--- Page 175 ---

A Mess of Pottage 157 
James’ arresting image of the high cliffs that surround a frozen 
lake, on which the ice is slowly melting, testifies to his own 
yearnings for some way of enlarging, or enriching, the sci- 
entific worldview he felt compelled to accept. In our own day, 
the religious scholar Elaine Pagels has provided a moving 
account of her similar needs. 
Throughout her distinguished career, Pagels has explored 
the variant doctrines within early Christianity, showing with 
great lucidity and subtlety how the canonical texts of the New 
Testament represent a selection from a much more varied set 
of religious ideas. She recognizes, as Wellhausen did more 
than a century before her, that her work undercuts the thought 
that central claims of the orthodox documents are literally true. 
Her religious perspective aims to move “beyond belief,” to a 
spiritual religion of seeking and individual discovery, one that 
can find inspiration in many Christian sayings and stories, as well 
as in the teachings of other religions. The Gospel of Thomas, left 
out ofthe canon in the interests of “Christian truth,” strikes her 
as particularly suggestive in pursuing her own quest.'”” 
She would not always have viewed her life this way, for, as 
she explains, there was a long period during which she did not 
attend church. Then, after a morning run the day after she 
learned that her infant son hada disease that would lead toa very 
early death, she paused in the vestibule of a New York church. 
“Standing in the back of that church, I recognized, uncomfort- 
ably, that I needed to be there. Here was a place to weep with- 
out imposing tears upon a child; and here was a heterogeneous 
community that had gathered to sing, to celebrate, to acknowl- 
edge common needs, and to deal with what we cannot control 
or imagine. Yet the celebration in progress spoke of hope; 
perhaps that is what made the presence of death bearable. 


--- Page 176 ---

158 Living with Darwin 
Before that time, I could only ward off what I had heard and felt 
the day before.”'?? This poignant account contains, I believe, 
much that is deeply insightful. 
Pagels found uplifting music. She met sympathetic people, 
willing to listen and to talk with her about important things. She 
discovered a place in which there was no need to hide her grief. 
She became part of a family, a “family that knows how to face 
death,” as she puts it.'** That family brought her comfort. 
In the most obvious sense, she did not find hope—or so, at 
least, I believe. The celebration may have told the familiar, 
comforting, Christian stories. Yet, tempting though it might 
have been to brush aside the enlightenment case inthe need 
for consolation, in such urgent need as Pagels surely had, the 
hope generated by taking those stories as literally true would 
have been illusory. To believe in the genuine possibility of a 
future that would bring her personal tragedy to a happy ending— 
to envisage a reunion in the hereafter, as Kingsley suggested to 
the grieving Huxley—would be self-deception. 
The importance of Pagels’ precise description of what 
occurred in the church, and of the perspective she develops in 
her book, lies, I suggest, in the genuine possibility of comfort 
without supernaturalist hope. When the soprano soloist sings 
the movement Brahms added at the last moment to his German 
Requiem, “I will comfort you as one whom his mother com- 
forteth” (“Ich will euch trosten, wie einen seine Mutter trostet”), the 
promise is literally false—there is no God who will wipe the 
tears from our eyes—but the music itself consoles. In deeper and 
more enduring ways, so do the love and sympathy of others, the 
support of a caring community. 
There is a tendency for those who can accept life without 
God to pride themselves on their intellectual integrity. They, 


--- Page 177 ---

A Mess of Pottage 159 
unlike the ostriches of the “booboisie,” can face the facts with- 
out flinching. It is easy to think that the dominance of secular 
perspectives within universities, and in other places where 
highly educated people are found, is readily explained in terms 
of clear-headedness and tough-mindedness. These are people 
who can appreciate the force of the arguments, and who will 
not allow reason to be clouded by weak emotions. I doubt, 
however, that that is a complete account. Academics and 
scientists, as well as other professionals, can more easily sustain 
a sense of their lives as amounting to something, even in the 
absence of faithful service to God. Their lives are centered on 
work that is frequently significant and challenging, exciting 
and rewarding. Typically, they belong to communities in 
which serious issues can be openly discussed, in which there 
are readily available opportunities for the sharing of troubles 
and concerns. Even so, when unanticipated personal trouble 
strikes, the mechanisms for providing comfort may be quite 
inadequate. 
Pagels’ moving testimony is important to remind us of the 
need for comfort, and, in doing so, it opens a window into the 
lives of the people who most vehemently resist Darwin. They 
are typically not as lucky as the fortunate secularists who can 
affirm the enlightenment case, embrace life without God, and 
get on with their interesting work, their comfortable leisure 
pursuits, and their rewarding discussions with friends and 
colleagues. For many Americans, their churches, overwhelm- 
ingly supernaturalist, providentialist churches, not only pro- 
vide a sense of hope, illusory to be sure, but also offer other 
mechanisms of comfort. They are places in which hearts can 
be opened, serious issues can be discussed, common ground 
with others can be explored, places in which there is real 


--- Page 178 ---

160 Living with Darwin 
community, places in which people come to matter to one 
another—and thus come to matter to themselves. Without 
such places, what is left? 
Moreover, for those who have been victims ofinjustice, who 
have found themselves stigmatized or marginalized by the 
secular state, cut off from its benefits and subjected to unfair 
burdens, religious gatherings can serve as occasions for focus- 
ing legitimate protest. From the Old Testament prophets to 
Martin Luther King, Jr., religious leaders have offered the poor 
and downtrodden opportunities to reclaim their rights. From 
the meeting houses that have broadcast the outcry of the urban 
poor to the liberal Catholic churches of Latin America, religion 
has provided a place in which individual sufferings can be 
united in a political movement. At their best, the religions of 
the world have championed the causes of the oppressed. 
To resist Darwin, or the enlightenment case that looms 
behind him, is hardly unreasonable if what you would be left 
with is a drab, painful, and impoverished life. For people who 
are buffeted by the vicissitudes of the economy, or who are 
victimized by injustice, or who are scorned and vilified by the 
successful members of their societies, or whose work is 
tedious and unrewarding, people for whom material rewards 
are scanty or for whom the toys of consumer culture pall, for 
people who can unburden themselves most readily in religious 
settings and who find in their church a supportive community, 
above all for people who hope that their lives mean something, 
that their lives matter, the secular onslaught threatens to 
demolish almost everything. That is why the voices of reason 
are as sounding brass or as tinkling cymbals. 
Writing in the 1920s, thoroughly aware that the enlightenment 
case had created a “crisis in religion,” America’s premier 


--- Page 179 ---

A Mess of Pottage 161 
philosopher, John Dewey, argued for a new attitude to religion 
and the religious. We need, he suggested, outlets for the emo- 
tions that underlie religion, and this requires the emancipa- 
tion of the religious life from the encumbrance of the dogmas 
of the churches, of their commitment to the literal truth of 
their favored stories. The task is to cultivate those attitudes that 
“lend deep and enduring support to the processes of living.” 
Dewey was, I believe, pointing to a position on which spiritual 
religion and secular humanism can converge, the former by 
erecting barriers against sliding back into supernaturalism, and 
embracing a cosmopolitan conception of the contribution of 
many different traditions to our understanding of the deepest 
questions about ourselves and our ideals, the latter by giving up 
its bracing recommendations to move beyond superstition, 
and by appreciating the genuine needs that stand behind religion. 
“It is the claim of religions that they effect this generic and 
enduring change in attitude. I should like to turn the statement 
around and say that whenever this change takes place there is 
a definitely religious attitude. It is not a religion that brings it about, 
but when it occurs, from whatever cause and by whatever 
means, there is a religious attitude and function.”’”° At the 
beginning of the twenty-first century, we haven't achieved the 
broadening of the religious life Dewey envisaged.'” For most 
Americans, the only occasions that cultivate the attitudes that 
support the processes of living are dominated by the doctrines 
of the traditional religions. If anything, the forms of Chris- 
tianity that have been most successful in recruiting new mem- 
bers place heavy emphasis on the full acceptance of dogma, 
on literal interpretations of the canonical texts. Despite the 
demolition of the doctrines that Darwin and his enlightenment 
allies ought to have wrought, scriptural myths pervade many 


--- Page 180 ---

162 Living with Darwin 
American lives because we have found no replacements for the 
traditional ways of supporting the emotions and reflections 
essential to meaningful human existence. 
None of this is to deny that religion, as it has been elabo- 
rated in the substantive stories of the major traditions, is also 
capable of doing enormous harm. The history of religions 
reveals not only the consolations of the afflicted and the 
legitimate protests of the downtrodden but also the fanatical 
intolerance that expresses itself in warfare and persecution, 
that divides families, cities, and nations, that forbids people to 
express their love as, and with whom, they choose. We should 
not forget the last part of the enlightenment case, and its pro- 
per repudiation of subordinating ethical reflection to blind 
faith. It is possible to appreciate the ways in which the religions 
human societies have developed have met genuine human 
needs, without forgetting that the myths they have elevated as 
inviolable dogma have often been destructive. As one of many 
examples, we might recall the verdict of the Jesus Seminar. 
Mark’s imaginative fiction about Pilate and the Jewish mob has 
been the source of profound misery and harm. Dewey saw our 
situation clearly—the challenge is to finda way to respond to the 
human purposes religion serves without embracing the false- 
hoods, the potentially damaging falsehoods, of traditional 
religions. We need to make secular humanism responsive to 
our deepest impulses and needs, or to find, if you like, a cos- 
mopolitan version of spiritual religion that will not collapse 
back into parochial supernaturalism. 
If the issues were clearly understood, that would stand forth 
as our crisis in religion, expressed in the recurrent battles about 
secular knowledge, of which the disparaging of Darwin is the 
most evident example. Why is evolution still controversial in 


--- Page 181 ---

A Mess of Pottage 163 
the United States, even though opposition to Darwin is viewed 
with surprise and disdain in virtually all the rest of the affluent 
world? I offer a speculative answer, one that only touches on 
some dimensions of the issue.'** American life is often a highly 
competitive scramble for material goods, one in which many 
people do not fare well. The social evolution of cities, small 
towns, and suburbs has led to increasing atomization, with 
ever fewer opportunities for shared civic life. Unlike their coun- 
terparts in Western Europe, Americans are often unprotected 
against foreseeable misfortunes. When difficulties threaten, 
or when they strike, people have few opportunities to converse 
about their worries and fears. When the material rewards seem 
tawdry and unsatisfying, when consumer culture appears arid 
and empty, when people have no sense of why their lives 
matter, they lack places in which to air their thoughts to others, 
to engage in exploration of possibilities. Many Americans can 
turn only to the churches for the sense of community that 
addresses the insufficiencies in their lives. There are often no 
secular alternatives. For plenty of Americans, there is no coun- 
terpart to the neighborhood pub or the piazza. 
The democracies that have most fully appreciated the 
enlightenment case, that have been most successful in the 
transition to secularism, are those in which there are social 
networks of support. Citizens are protected from the risk of 
severe poverty; they are provided opportunities for taking 
care of their health.'” Above all, there is a sense of community 
life, secular spaces in which people gather, and in which they can 
talk about their hopes and aspirations, their anxieties and 
troubles. Gatherings of this sort can provide the occasion for dis- 
cussions that bring people to see what matters to them, what 
makes their lives significant—or, perhaps, the experience of 


--- Page 182 ---

164 Living with Darwin 
the gathering itself, independently of what is said, can give a 
sense of meaning, of mattering. All these forms of support 
might still prove inadequate to the most extreme shocks that can 
beset our lives—they might not answer to all the needs that 
Pagels felt, and found met by the church “family.” Never- 
theless, to look for such systems of support, to develop and 
extend them to meet our human needs, to offer people oppor- 
tunities to confront more directly what their lives might mean 
and why they might matter, seems to me to be the best direc- 
tion in which to find a solution for our religious crisis. 
There are, I believe, two sides to our problem, one social 
and one intellectual. The intellectual aspect arises because 
the most obvious places in which people can seek answers to the 
question of what their lives mean and why they matter are 
places dominated by supernaturalist religion, or, secondarily, 
are literary and philosophical texts imbued with superna- 
turalist doctrine. Recent philosophy, especially, but not only, 
in the English-speaking world has found little time for larger 
questions about the meaning and value of human lives, and 
the theologies of spiritual religions are complex and not 
broadly accessible.’*? We are a long way from William James’ 
forthright declaration, “The whole function of philosophy 
ought to be to find out what definite difference it will make to 
you and me, at definite instants of our life, if this world-formula 
or that world-formula be the true one.”"*' Yet if philosophers 
since James have treated the questions of how “world-formulas” 
bear on human lives with distaste or with disdain, writers and 
artists have been less fastidious, exploring the possibilities for 
meaningful life in a world beyond supernaturalism. One way 
to do philosophy as James conceived it would be to explain 
and elaborate on literary and artistic insights. '** The intellectual 


--- Page 183 ---

A Mess of Pottage 165 
problem, then, is urgent, deep, often neglected by champions 
of secularism—but not, | think, hopelessly intractable. If, in 
these last pages, I have focused more on the social side of the 
problem, it is both because I believe that social preconditions 
need to be met before intellectual solutions to questions about 
life’s significance can be properly appreciated and assessed, 
and also because a sense of community can itself bring 
reassurances about the value of human lives. Fortunate people, 
embedded in well-functioning communities, can feel, deeply 
and securely, that their lives matter, without interrogating 
why this is so. 
I offer only the roughest sketch of a serious problem, one 
of which intelligent design is the latest symptom. The vehe- 
ment opposition to Darwin results in large measure from the 
existence of a powerful case, one in which Darwin’s ideas play 
a significant and highly visible role, against supernaturalism 
and providentialism, the most widespread forms of Chris- 
tianity and other traditional Western religions, coupled with a 
recognition that endorsing that case would leave many lives 
impoverished and empty. With good reason, people refuse to 
sell their souls for Wales, to trade what they view as their 
birthright for a mess of pottage. 
There is truth in Marx’s dictum that religion, more pre- 
cisely supernaturalist and providentialist religion, is the opium 
of the people, but the consumption should be seen as medical 
rather than recreational. The most ardent apostles of science 
and reason recommend immediate withdrawal of the drug— 
but they do not acknowledge the pain that would be left unpal- 
liated, pain too intense for their stark atheism to be a viable 
solution. Genuine medicine is needed, and the proper treat- 
ment consists of showing how lives can matter. An essential 


--- Page 184 ---

166 Living with Darwin 
component of it is to address the social shortcomings to which 
I have pointed. We should look more carefully at the causes 
of the pain, the harsh competitiveness of American life, the lack 
of buffers against serious ills, the atomization of society, the 
vapidity of much secular culture, and above all, the absence of 
real community. We should articulate, as clearly as can be 
done, the possible routes along which lives can find signi- 
ficance. In addressing these issues we may discover that the 
deliverances of reason can be honored without ignoring the 
most important human needs—and, going beyond supernat- 
uralism, that we can live with Darwin, after all. 


--- Page 185 ---

NOTES 
PREFACE 
. Charles Kitcher, “Lawful Design: A New Standard for Evalu- 
ating Establishment Clause Challenges to School Science 
Curricula,” Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problems, 39:4, 
2006, 451-494. 
TEXT 
. Henry Morris, The Remarkable Birth of Planet Earth (San Diego: 
Creation Life Publishers, 1972), 75. 
. Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Nothing in Biology Makes Sense 
Except in the Light of Evolution,” American Biology Teacher, 35, 
1973; 125-129: 
. Percival Davis and Dean H. Kenyon, Of Pandas and People, 
2nd ed. (Dallas: Haughton Publishing Company, 2004), ix. 
. This is made clear by the decision in Lemon v. Kurtzman. 
. There are earlier sources for the style of argument, both in the 
Christian and Islamic traditions. See, for example, Thomas 
Aquinas’ “Fifth Way” (Sunma Theologiae, part 1; readily available 


--- Page 186 ---

168 Notes to Pages 6-12 
in Paul Sigmund, ed., Saint Thomas Aquinas on Politics and 
Ethics [New York: Norton, 1988], 32) and Averroes’ “On 
Proving God’s Existence,” in Faith and Reason in Islam (Oxford: 
Oneworld, 2001). Interestingly, one of Hume's protagonists, 
Cleanthes, provides an elegant and lucid version of the argu- 
ment; Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, part II (New York: 
Macmillan, 1986), 143. 
. This point was documented very clearly by Barbara Forrest 
in her testimony at the Dover trial. A transcript is available at 
http: // www.talkorigins.org/faqs/dover/dayé6pm.html 
8. Joshua 10:12-14. 
10. 
1. 
12. 
. Some intelligent design-ers also advocate broader cosmological 
claims. I shall not consider these here. 
The point has been commonplace among philosophers of 
science ever since the lucid formulation by the French physicist- 
historian-philosopher Pierre Duhem. See The Aim and Structure 
of Physical Theory, English translation of a work originally 
published in French in 1906 (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1956). Intelligent design-ers are happy to draw on this 
philosophical consensus; see, for example, Stephen C. Meyer 
“The Scientific Status of Intelligent Design,” in Science and 
Evidence for Design in the Universe (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 
2000), 151-211. 
For more on the problems of testability asa criterion for genuine 
science, see Philip Kitcher, Abusing Science (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press 1982), chap. 2. In formulating these points, I am 
grateful to Elliott Sober, who has emphasized the need for 
independently justified auxiliary principles in his own work on 
intelligent design. 
Iam grateful to Stephen Grover for reminding me of this. 


--- Page 187 ---

US: 
14. 
15. 
16. 
WIE, 
Notes to Pages 12-18 169 
I believe that many of the best arguments in the recent decision 
in the case of the Dover School Board can be viewed in these terms. 
In particular, as the judge recognized, Kenneth Miller’s testi- 
mony made it apparent that the teaching of intelligent design 
would serve no secular purpose. 
Strictly speaking, Darwin doesn’t commit himself fully to just one 
tree of life. The last sentence of the Origin speaks of a “few 
forms” or “perhaps just one” into which life was “originally 
breathed.” I read this as typical caution (and the use of the 
Pentateuchal phraseology is surely intended both to disarm 
opposition and to reassure Emma). Darwin’s successors have 
interpreted him as hypothesizing a single tree of life, and, 
henceforth, so shall I. 
As with his basic evolutionary thesis about the tree of life, 
Darwin is cautious about the power of natural selection. 
Although he takes natural selection to be the chief agent of 
evolutionary change, he does appeal to other causes (some of 
which contemporary Darwinians would reject). 
My vague formulation here glosses over an area of continued 
debate. While those who explore particular groups of living 
things, including some who are skeptical about evolution, can 
often agree about how to divide those groups into species, 
there is much controversy over the issue of how to say, in 
general, what species are. For presentations of some of the rival 
positions, see Marc Ereshevsky, ed., The Units of Evolution 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992). 
Michael Behe, probably the leading figure in the intelligent 
design movement, adopts anti-selectionism early in his influen- 
tial book Darwin’s Black Box (New York: Free Press, 1996), 5. 
Unfortunately, there is a certain amount of hedging in his 


--- Page 188 ---

170 
18. 
I), 
20. 
Notes to Pages 19-27 
formulation, and, as we shall discover, some backsliding later in 
the book. 
Critics of intelligent design may think this is too charitable, 
that there are no clear disavowals of novelty creationism within 
the movement, or even renunciations of Genesis creationism. 
Although it’s important to recognize the possibility of back- 
sliding, I shall begin by giving the intelligent design-ers the 
benefit of the doubt. (As Jerry Coyne has pointed out to me, 
intelligent design-ers often phrase their ideas in ways that 
suggest sympathy for ambitious—“unofficial’—forms of 
creationism. ) 
As I have discovered, some well-educated people find this 
statement incredible. They suppose that nobody takes. all the 
(nonpoetic) parts of the Bible as literal truth. Their reaction 
is surely based on the fact that all the religious people they 
know adopt nonliteralist strategies of reading the scriptures. 
In fact, as any survey of evangelical Christian literature reveals, 
literalism is extremely important to many Christians. This is 
apparent not only in the books written in support of “scientific 
creationism” (Henry Morris, Scientific Creationism [San Diego: 
Creation Life Publishers, 1974], 244; D. C. C. Watson, The Great 
Brain Robbery (Chicago: Moody Press, 1976], 11, 13), but also in 
the King James Study Bible (Nashville, TN: Nelson, 1983). The 
Study Bible begins its section on interpretation by reminding 
the reader that “the Bible is God’s infallible, inerrantly inspired 
Word” (p. xxiii), and concludes a note on the opening of 
Genesis with the declaration that “the biblical account of 
Creation clearly indicates that God created the world in six 
literal days” (p. 6). See also note 129 below. 
Gilbert White, A Natural History of Selborne, letter XXXI 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press [World’s Classics], 1951), 209. 


--- Page 189 ---

21. 
Paps 
23: 
24. 
21. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
Psy. 
30. 
Notes to Pages 31-46 171 
Proceedings of the Geological Society of London, 1831, 313-314. 
There is a brilliant cartoon that depicts the scene I have 
described—with Noah’s ark serenely placed on the placid 
waters in the background. Unfortunately, I have lost the 
source. 
For a penetrating study in the household economy of the ark, 
see Robert A. Moore, “The Impossible Voyage of Noah’s 
Ark,” Creation/Evolution, issue XI, 1983. Michael Weisberg has 
pointed out to me the difficulties in meeting the need to supply 
Noah’s family and the assembled animals with fresh water—if 
the ark had carried enough fresh water for all its occupants to drink, 
it would probably have sunk. 
The total is 1 (the original) + 2 (the two groups it produces) + 4 
ate Nemesis 29.0.2) Liles 
Magnificent though the Grand Canyon is, there are numerous 
other places where the history of life on our planet becomes 
visible—as Steffi Lewis reminded me, many railway cuttings 
will do. 
In fact, the practice of dating is a little more complicated than 
this, in that dates are often assigned directly to lavas and ashes 
that occur in conjunction with rock layers. 
For further discussion of radiometric dating and scientific 
creationist attempts to question it, see Philip Kitcher, Abusing 
Science, 155-164. To appreciate the current state of the art, see 
Alan P. Dickin, Radiogenic Isotope Geology, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005). 
Henry Morris, Scientific Creationism (San Diego: Creation Life 
Publishers, 1974), 247. I have amended Morris’ own metaphor. 
Darwin, Origin, 138. 
The modification can easily be attributed to natural selection. 
Since eyes no longer have a function inside the caves, selection 


--- Page 190 ---

172 
Bile 
32) 
53) 
34. 
S% 
36. 
BT 
Notes to Pages 47-54 
will favor those variants that reassign the resources previously 
committed to the development of the visual system. 
Darwin, Origin, 167. It’s worth noting that Darwin treats the 
creationist alternative as a potential piece of science, and rejects 
it, not because of its invocation of a creative agent but because 
it is explanatorily bankrupt. 
Darwin, Origin, 434. My preceding list of questions is drawn 
from Origin, 186, 339-341, 397-401. 
Darwin, Origin, 435. 
Darwin summarizes the paleontological problems in Origin 
342-343, and devotes a whole section to the difficulty with com- 
plex organs, focusing in particular on the eye (Origin, 186-194). 
Genetic similarity provides a more fundamental criterion for 
assessing relationships of ancestry and descent than do the 
similarities in anatomy and physiology on which Darwin and 
his immediate successors drew. The overwhelming majority 
of older attributions of relationship endure, even though there 
are occasional instances in which genetic analysis reveals that 
one organism is a closer relative of another than of a third that 
has traditionally been taken to be its closest kin. Moreover, 
even brute genetic similarity can prove misleading, in that 
pieces of genetic material can sometimes be acquired without 
deriving from ancestors—viruses and bacteria can spread DNA 
into organisms they infect. Molecular analysis of relationships 
can usually identify these isolated occurrences by focusing on 
the systematic similarities and differences among genomes. 
See J. J. Yunis and O. Prakash, “The origin of man: A chromo- 
somal pictorial legacy,” Science, 215, 1982, 1525-30. 
Far less probable is a scenario in which the common ancestor 
had 23 pairs, for that would require three independent events 
of chromosomes splitting at the same place. 


--- Page 191 ---

38. 
Se), 
Notes to Pages 56-57 173 
The sequence data concern the common chimpanzee. It is 
overwhelmingly likely that results comparing human DNA 
with DNA from bonobos would reveal a similar kinship. 
Our increased understanding of the mechanisms of aging in 
multicellular organisms provides a wonderful illustration of 
this. Because of potential errors in copying DNA, multicellular 
organisms need DNA repair enzymes. Copying can only proceed 
by clipping a small amount from the DNA to be copied. So, in 
the replication of chromosomes in multicellular organisms, the 
placing of genes at the ends would involve the loss of crucial 
pieces of DNA. Multicellular organisms solve the problem by 
adding a repetitive sequence at the ends of the chromosomes— 
the telomere—and shortening this doesn’t matter, at least for 
a while. Moreover, the telomere protects the organism against 
overzealous activity on the part of DNA repair enzymes, that 
might join chromosomes together and make cell division 
impossible. Of course, once the telomere has been whittled 
away, the cell lineage is effectively finished. That is sad, but 
manageable, for the somatic cells ofa multicellular organism— 
but more problematic for the germ-line cells. They can’t afford 
to lose their full telomeres, for, ifthey did, the protection would 
diminish from generation to generation, until, relatively speed- 
ily, it vanished. Hence there has to be another repair device, an 
enzyme (telomerase) that restores telomeres in germ-line cells. You 
might think that it would be advantageous to have telomerase 
available in all stem-cell lineages, but the disastrous effects of 
this are apparent in the unrestrained growth of some cancers. 
So the solution is imperfect—multicellular organisms live with 
the programmed death of most cell lineages. Telomerase has 
to be confined to germ-cell lineages, but there are occasional 
mistakes in which it becomes accessible in somatic tissues and 


--- Page 192 ---

174 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Notes to Pages 57-69 
allows for uncontrolled growth. This entire story shows the 
way in which the machinery present in unicellular organisms 
gives rise to the need for limiting and regulating that machinery 
in the different context of multicellular life. (1 am indebted 
to Robert Pollack for conversation about these phenomena. 
An accessible brief account is given in his book, The Missing 
Moment [New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1999], 135-138.) 
My argument here tacitly assumes that the designing force has 
particular aims, that it is directed toward creatures that don’t 
contain unnecessary bits and pieces or problematic parts. An 
alternative would be to suppose that the creative agency is ori- 
ented differently. I shall consider this possibility shortly. 
Davis and Kenyon, Of Pandas and People, 113. 
Davis and Kenyon, Of Pandas and People, 137. 
Davis and Kenyon, Of Pandas and People, 136. 
In his testimony at the Dover trial, Michael Behe explicitly 
and repeatedly declined to advance any hypotheses about the 
power and direction of Intelligence. I shall be returning to the 
explanatory shortcomings of this silence in the next chapter. 
Davis and Kenyon, Of Pandas and People, 37. 
Darwin, Origin, 310-311. 
Phillip Johnson, Darwin on Trial (Washington DC: Regnery, 
1991), 79. Johnson’s arguments are echoed in the school text Of 
Pandas and People, 100-107. 
Johnson, Darwin on Trial, 75. As I was preparing the final version 
of this essay, a second jewel may have been added to the crown, 
with the discovery of the fossil remains of Tiktaalik an inter- 
mediate between fish and land-dwelling animals (Nature, 440, 
2006, 757, 764). 
Johnson, Darwin on Trial, 75. 
Johnson, Darwin on Trial, 76. 


--- Page 193 ---

ole 
a2, 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
Die 
58. 
Notes to Pages 69-77 175 
The known exceptions, most famously the Burgess Shale, are 
extremely rare—so rare that we can take the probability to be 
effectively zero. (Here I am indebted to David Walker.) 
Johnson, Darwin on Trial, 76. Again the school text echoes 
Johnson (Of Pandas and People, 100-101). The confusions I discuss 
in the text are also found in many novelty creationist discus- 
sions of the hominid fossil record (for example, in both Darwin 
on Trial and Of Pandas and People). 
Francis Darwin, ed., More Letters of Charles Darwin, vol. 2 
(London: John Murray, 1903), 379. 
Henry Charles Fleeming Jenkin, “The Origin of Species,” North 
British Review, June 1867; reprinted in David Hull, ed., Darwin and 
his Critics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974), 
303-344, quoted material from 315-316. 
As David Helfand has pointed out to me, the estimates have 
become ever more precise: the currently accepted figure is 4.54 
billion years and is taken to be correct to within 1 percent. 
This is the title of R. A. Fisher’s seminal monograph, one of 
the landmark achievements of twentieth-century evolutionary 
theory. Fisher and Sewall Wright showed how the integration 
of genetics and Darwinian natural selection could be articu- 
lated mathematically; Dobzhansky then applied their theoreti- 
cal ideas to the study of natural populations. 
But there are significant differences in the formation of the 
gametes across the entire range of living things. For an enlight- 
ening discussion of variation in this respect, see Leo Buss, 
The Evolution of Individuality (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1987). 
There are currently subtle issues about the extent to which 
mutation rates can be preferentially directed. For the sake 
of simplicity, I shall ignore these debates, since any greater 


--- Page 194 ---

176 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
Notes to Pages 78—86 
liberalism about evolutionary mechanisms will tend to help 
defenders of Darwin rather than champions of intelligent 
design. 
See Peter R. Grant, Ecology and Evolution of Darwin’s Finches 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986, 1999). Jonathan 
Weiner, The Beak of the Finch (New York: Vintage, 1994) pro- 
vides a wonderfully accessible account of the Grants’ accom- 
plishments. Frank Sulloway, “Darwin’s Finches: The Evolution 
of a Legend” in Journal of the History of Biology, 15, 1982, 1-53 
is an extraordinary piece of historical detective work that 
demolishes the popular view that Darwin’s observations of the 
finches on the Galapagos played a crucial role in awakening 
him to evolution. For a review of other studies of natural 
selection in the wild, and of the methods used to confirm 
selection in action, see John Endler, Natural Selection in the Wild 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986). 
The Grants’ work provides slightly more grounds for an optimistic 
assessment, in that, under swings of harsh drought and seasons 
of heavy rain, they were able to trace significant changes in the 
forms of finch beaks. For the sake of the argument here, 
however, I am supposing that the intelligent design-ers are 
demanding something far more dramatic even than this. 
Francis Darwin, ed., Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, vol. 2 
(London: John Murray, 1888), 352. 
For a superbly accessible presentation of this research, see 
Richard Dawkins, Climbing Mount Improbable (New York: 
Norton, 1996). Another lucid, and concise, account by one of 
the scientists involved is Dan-Eric Nilsson, “Vision Optics and 
Evolution” in Bioscience, 39, 1989, 298-307. 
Behe, Darwin’s Black Box, 70. Behe uses the example of the 
bacterial flagellum as a parade case in many of his writings and 


--- Page 195 ---

64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
7A. 
72: 
Ted 
Notes to Pages 86-102 177 
presentations. See, for example, “Design at the Foundation of Life” 
in Science and Evidence for Design in the Universe (San Francisco: 
Ignatius Press, 2000), 120 ff. 
Behe, Darwin’s Black Box, 73. 
Perhaps not complete fantasy. The account I offer here is 
concordant with a recent review of the molecular details of the 
bacterial flagellum. See Howard C. Berg, “The Rotary Motor 
of Bacterial Flagella,” Annual Review of Biochemistry, 72, 2003, 
19-54, (For this reference, I’m indebted to Mel Simon.) 
For the full-dress treatment of the design inference, see William 
Dembski, The Design Inference (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press, 1998). For an incisive rebuttal, see Brandon Fitelson, 
Christopher Stephens and Elliott Sober, “How Not to Detect 
Design” in Robert Pennock, ed., Intelligent Design Creationism 
and its Critics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001). 
Behe, Darwin’s Black Box, 94. 
For advice about these probabilistic considerations, I am grate- 
ful to Isaac Levi and Erick Weinberg. 
Stuart Pullen, Intelligent Design or Evolution? Why the Origin of 
Life and the Evolution of Molecular Knowledge Imply Design 
(Raleigh, NC: Intelligent Design Books, 2005). 
Pullen, Intelligent Design or Evolution, 96. 
Pullen, Intelligent Design or Evolution, 102. 
For two examples, see Stuart Kaufmann, The Origins of Order 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1993)—the main ideas 
of which are presented less precisely but more accessibly in 
Kaufmann’s At Home in the Universe (New York: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1995)—and Marc W. Kirschner and John C. Gerhart, 
The Plausibility of Life (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005). 
Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations (New York: Modern 
Library Classics, 2000), 484—485. One possible interpretation of 


--- Page 196 ---

178 
74. 
US 
76. 
ae 
78. 
PD. 
Notes to Pages 102-107 
Darwin’s work is to view him as transferring ideas from British 
political economy to the natural world. 
For some ingenious analyses, see Thomas Schelling, Micro- 
motives and Macro-behavior (New York: Norton, 1978). 
See Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz and Aristid Lindenmayer, The 
Algorithmic Beauty of Plants (New York: Springer, 1990), Hans 
Meinhardt, The Algorithmic Beauty of Sea Shells (New York: 
Springer, 1998), J. D. Murray, Mathematical Biology (New York: 
Springer, 1989) chap. 15, and, more accessibly, Murray “How the 
Leopard got its Spots” in Scientific American, 258, 1988, 80-87. This 
work was inspired by a seminal essay by Alan Turing, published 
near the end of his life. 
In God, The Devil, and Darwin (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004), Niall Shanks provides a thorough and lucid-elabo- 
ration of this important point and of its implications for claims 
made on behalf of intelligent design. 
Behe, Darwin’s Black Box, 7. 
Recent studies in Burkina Faso indicate that the allele is signi- 
ficantly more prevalent there. Earlier investigations of a variety 
of Bantu populations showed low frequencies of the C allele, 
and raised the puzzle I discuss in the text. 
I abbreviate the explanation given by Alan Templeton, 
“Adaptation and the Integration of Evolutionary Forces” in 
Roger Milkman, Perspectives on Evolution (Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer, 1982). Another example in which an apparently 
beneficial allele is unable to spread in human populations may 
occur in connection with resistance to AIDS. It is possible that 
the small number of people with HIV who do not develop full 
AIDS carry two copies of an allele that is typically disadvanta- 
geous when it occurs in single dose. But this example is less 
well understood than the case described by Templeton. 


--- Page 197 ---

80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
Notes to Pages 108-120 179 
As mentioned in note 78, some recent studies of populations 
in Burkina Faso have found the C allele in higher frequencies 
than those discovered in the groups investigated earlier. Does 
this show that Intelligence is, at last, swinging into action? 
Not really. First, it’s possible for the accidents of mating and 
survival to allow for the presence of enough people with the 
advantageous CC combination, so that the C allele can attain 
the threshold frequency. Second, given that the mutation that 
gives rise to the C allele is so readily available, we can only 
wonder why Intelligence has permitted the problematic S allele 
to spread its damaging effects among so many people. During 
the past few thousand years, many human beings, including 
many children, have died either because they lacked protec- 
tion against malaria (they were AA) or through the crises of 
sickle-cell anemia. If Intelligence has started to solve this 
problem in Burkina Faso—but not in many other sub-Saharan 
populations—we can only wonder why it has permitted the 
botched AS solution to persist so long, why it has done so little, 
so late. 
William A. Dembski, The Design Revolution (Downers Grove, 
IL: Intervarsity Press, 2004), 251. 
Dembski, The Design Revolution, 251. 
Here I am indebted to conversations with Kent Greenawalt. 
In their public presentations and lectures, they sometimes 
provide more than a wink. Thus William Dembski has directly 
linked intelligent design to the Christian scriptures, claiming 
that “Intelligent Design is the Logos of John’s Gospel in the 
language of information theory” (presentation in 1998 to the 
Millstatt Forum in Strasbourg). 
For an excellent example, see Kenneth Miller, Finding Darwin’s 
God (New York: Cliff Street Books, 1999). 


--- Page 198 ---

180 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
OHI. 
922 
93: 
94. 
Notes to Pages 121-128 
Here | diverge from the approach offered in Abusing Science. 
The last chapter of that book, coauthored with Patricia Kitcher, 
tried to defend the conciliatory line that views Darwinism as no 
threat to religion. My reasons for divergence will be explained 
in the text below. It should be noted, however, that my coauthor 
was always skeptical about the prospects for reconciliation, and 
she should not be held responsible for the earlier errors that I 
recant here. 
G. J. Romanes, A Candid Examination of Theism (Boston: 
Thomas and Andrews, 1878), 114. 
William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (Harmonds- 
worth: Penguin, 1982), 141-142. I take James to be reacting to 
a form of scientific naturalism inspired by Darwinism, exem- 
plified in the writings of T. H. Huxley, John Tindall, and 
William Kingdom Clifford (in response to whom James had 
already written his celebrated essay “The Will to Believe”). 
James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, 162. 
There are also providentialist strands within Judaism, as many 
passages in the Hebrew Bible make clear, as well as in Islam (the 
Qur’an emphasizes that the earth has been planned to provide 
for its inhabitants). But providentialism is particularly pro- 
nounced in Christianity. 
The point is lucidly and forcefully made by Richard Dawkins, 
“God’s Utility Function” in River Out of Eden (New York: Basic 
Books, 1995), chap. 4. 
Darwin, Origin, 472. 
Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Brothers Karamazov (New York: 
Modern Library, 1995), 271-272. 
Indeed, if the afterlife includes the possibility of eternal 
punishment—as in the traditional Christian idea of hell—there 
are other problems that I don’t consider here. See David Lewis, 


--- Page 199 ---

by 
96. 
Mf 
98. 
OK). 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
Notes to Pages 129-139 181 
“Divine Evil,” forthcoming in Louise Antony, ed., Philosophers 
Without Gods. (Oxford) (I should point out that I reconstructed 
this essay from an outline Lewis left at his untimely death—most 
of the words are mine, but the arguments are all his.) 
Darwin, Origin, 167. 
Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, part XI, 204. 
This is quite compatible, of course, with not believing that 
many of the statements in the Bible are literally true. You can hold 
that the Bible is literally correct in declaring that God, who cre- 
ated the world, is deeply concerned with the fate of each of 
His creatures, while also denying that Genesis (and much of the 
rest of the text) is literally true. 
Luke 2:1—4. Here, and elsewhere, I cite the Authorized (King 
James) translation. This is somewhat less accurate, but 
infinitely more beautiful than subsequent versions. It is also the 
translation often used by evangelical opponents of Darwin. 
Judaism did evolve in response to the Roman destruction of the 
Temple, but, because of the ambiguous role of Jesus’ followers 
in the Roman-Jewish war, the development of Judaism was not 
along the lines envisaged in the early Jesus movements. 
Robert W. Funk and the Jesus Seminar, The Acts of Jesus (San 
Francisco: Harper, 1998), 153. 
Robert J. Miller, ed., The Complete Gospels (San Francisco: 
Harper, 1994). As I was completing the last revisions of this 
essay, there were reports of yet another addition to the Gospels 
that have survived, the discovery of the Gospel of Judas, with its 
strikingly revisionary account of the betrayal of Jesus. 
Gospel of Thomas, 12; Miller, The Complete Gospels, 307. 
See Elaine Pagels, Beyond Belief (New York: Random House, 
2003). It is also worth noting the opening verses of Luke’s 
Gospel, in which the existence of rival Gospels is presupposed 


--- Page 200 ---

182 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
Notes to Pages 140-144 
by the evangelist’s announced intention of setting the record 
straight. The clash between John and Thomas is probably one 
instance of a general phenomenon. 
The letter of resignation is quoted in Richard Elliott Friedman, 
Who Wrote the Bible? (New York: HarperCollins, 1987), 165. I 
should note that Friedman disagrees with Wellhausen’s assess- 
ment of the impact of biblical criticism (while I endorse it); see 
Friedman, Who Wrote the Bible, 243. 
King James Study Bible (Nashville, TN: Nelson, 1985), 1401. 
Similarly, both in discussions of Isaiah 7:14 and Matthew 1:23, the 
Study Bible simply denies standard views about how to translate 
the Hebrew word almah (young girl), which the Septuagint 
mistranslates as parthenos (virgin). Evangelical Christians prefer 
the King James translation to the more scholarly (and more 
prosaic) recent versions in which the verse in Isaiah refers to a 
“young woman,” and Matthew’s imaginative interpretation is 
more evident. See, for example, the Revised Standard Version 
(New York: Meridian, 1974), 605 (OT) and 1 (NT). 
Rodney Stark, The Rise of Christianity (San Francisco: Harper, 
1997), chap. 5. 
The hypothesis was originally proposed by William H. McNeill 
in Plagues and Peoples (New York: Doubleday, 1977), 108-109. It 
is developed further by Stark, The Rise of Christianity, chap. 4. 
See John Lofland and Rodney Stark, “Becoming a World- 
Saver,’ American Sociological Review, 30, 1965, 862-875. 
The idea of religious experience as widely available and serving 
as some basis for faith is relatively modern, in part a reaction 
to Enlightenment critiques of reliance on texts and traditions. 
In his authoritative study, Religious Experience (Berkeley: Uni- 
versity of California Press, 1985), Wayne Proudfoot traces the 
modern conception to the writings of Friedrich Schleiermacher 


--- Page 201 ---

UA 
U2? 
113. 
114. 
Vi 
116. 
Ue 
118. 
Notes to Pages 144-153 183 
at the turn of the nineteenth century. | am extremely grateful to 
Proudfoot for his advice on this and other topics. 
See Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi and Michael Argyle, The Psycho- 
logy of Religious Behaviour, Belief; and Experience (London: 
Routledge, 1997), chap. 5. 
See the discussion of the “Marsh chapel miracle” in The Psycho- 
logy of Religious Behaviour, Belief, and Experience, 85 ff. 
I have articulated the argument summarized here in much 
greater detail in an examination of William James’ attempts to 
respond to Clifford’s challenge. See “A Pragmatist’s Progress: The 
Varieties of William James’ Strategies for Defending Religion” 
in Wayne Proudfoot, ed., William James and a Science of Religions 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2004), 98-138. 
I am grateful to Christopher Peacocke for reminding me of 
this. 
I borrow this phrase from a friend, the late Bob Schadewald, a 
tireless critic of the deceptions practiced by “creation scientists” 
in the 1980s, who intended that his book on the subject should 
bear the title Lying For God. The phrase was also used by Judge 
Jones in the Dover trial. 
There are other labels that might be used for the attitude I have 
in mind—proponents of “spiritual religion” might be called 
“seekers,” or people committed to “liberal theology.” For 
a discussion that recognizes a variety of religious attitudes, 
see Robert Wuthnow, Christianity in the Twenty-first Century 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Even more straightforwardly, spiritual religion can be elabo- 
rated along lines found in Eastern religions, perhaps most 
obviously in some versions of Buddhism. 
Here I am indebted to some valuable comments by Stephen 
Grover. 


--- Page 202 ---

184 
ey, 
120. 
1 ail 
72, 
eee 
124. 
Notes to Pages 153-158 
This is evident from the ethnographic accounts offered in 
sociological studies of American religion. Whether believers 
are committed to some established denomination, or whether 
they fashion their own eclectic mix from the religious tradi- 
tions of the world, they almost invariably take some scriptural 
claims to be literally correct. See, for examples, Wade Roof, 
Spiritual Marketplace (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1999), Robert Wuthnow, After Heaven (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1998), and Richard Cimino and Don Lattin, 
Shopping for Faith (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998). 
A fascinating example of the struggle to understand the concept 
of Jewish “chosenness” in the wake of post-Enlightenment 
approaches to religion is provided by Arnold Eisen, The Chosen 
People in America (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2006). 
In Eisen’s account, a more substantive reading of chosenness 
emerges from an enrichment of the theology of Judaism—in 
my terms, a retreat from spiritual religion to supernaturalism. A 
full-dress spiritual account of the resurrection is offered by John 
Shelby Spong in Resurrection: Myth or Reality? (San Francisco: 
Harper, 1994). Spong’s brave attempt to treat the death of Jesus 
as a thoroughly natural event comes to its climax in chapter 19 
(“But what really did happen?”) where he gives a “speculative 
reconstruction” ofthe events behind the familiar Gospel stories. 
One source of the idea that spiritual religion provides more 
than secular humanism may lie in the tendency to conceive 
secular humanism in its most militant—“scientistic’ versions. 
I trust that the position will emerge more clearly, and more 
sympathetically, in the following pages. 
Elaine Pagels, Beyond Belief (New York: Random House, 2003). 
Pagels, Beyond Belief, 4. 
Pagels, Beyond Belief, 3. 


--- Page 203 ---

125; 
126. 
127; 
128. 
WA). 
Notes to Pages 161-163 185 
John Dewey, A Common Faith (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1934), 15. 
Dewey, A Common Faith, 17. 
Dewey’s influence was visible for a time in the reforms pro- 
posed by Mordecai Kaplan—not only in his books but also in his 
establishment of Jewish Community Centers. Arnold Eisen’s 
The Chosen People in America provides a clear account of Kaplan’s 
work, and of its connections to Dewey’s ideas. 
A more systematic account would plainly have to deal 
with American populism, and with other egalitarian (anti- 
authoritarian) trends in our social and cultural history. My aim 
here is merely to indicate some deeper sources of the opposition 
to Darwin, sources that are less well appreciated. 
There is considerable discussion of the extent to which the 
world is becoming more secular. Some scholars see a trend 
toward secularization in the affluent world, with the United 
States as a glaring exception. Others, including former advo- 
cates of the idea of a secular trend, suppose that religion is 
resurgent worldwide, and that it is the states of Western 
Europe that are exceptional. I take no stand in this debate, 
but focus solely on the acknowledged difference between the 
United States and Western Europe. Like some political scientists— 
for example, Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart, Sacred and 
Secular (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004)—I see 
vulnerability to risk as playing an important role in attracting 
people to religion. As Norris and Inglehart show with great 
lucidity and thoroughness, data from the World Values Survey 
and the European Values Survey support the hypothesis that 
people subjected to “existential insecurity” are much more 
likely to embrace religion. My own—admittedly speculative— 
account also adds an idea expressed by Peter Berger (in his 


--- Page 204 ---

186 
130. 
1318 
132; 
Notes to Page 164 
introduction to Berger, ed., The Desecularization of the World 
(Washington, DC: Ethics and Public Policy Center, 1999], 13, 4), 
when he declares, “The religious impulse, the quest for mean- 
ing that transcends the restricted space of empirical existence 
in this world, has been a perennial feature of humanity.” Berger 
also points out that the contemporary manifestations of this 
impulse are not in the forms of religion carefully discussed by 
academics and intellectuals, but in “religious movements with 
beliefs and practices dripping with reactionary supernatural- 
ism (the kind utterly beyond the pale at self-respecting faculty 
parties).” 
For humanists, the evocative, but vague terminology of post- 
> 66 
supernaturalist theology—“element of ultimacy,” “object of 
ultimate concern,” and the like—are signs of instability. 
Spiritual religion wants more than the ethical attitudes of 
secular humanism, but hopes to avoid supernaturalism, and the 
consequence often seems to be a lack of precision that has 
moved skeptical philosophers to make charges of meaningless- 
ness. As I have suggested above, I prefer to pose the challenge of 
saying how a religion that rejects supernaturalism can be more 
than secular humanism with some special phraseology—or, 
even better, to recast the issue of the religious life as Dewey did. 
William James, Pragmatism (reprinted with The Meaning of 
Truth [Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978]), 30. 
Ihave tried to make this clear in the cases of Wagner and Joyce. 
See Philip Kitcher and Richard Schacht, Finding an Ending: 
Reflections on Wagner’s “Ring” (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004), and Philip Kitcher, Joyce’s Kaleidoscope: An 
Invitation to “Finnegans Wake” (New York: Oxford University 
Press, forthcoming). There are many other literary and artistic 
sources on which similar work could be done. 


--- Page 205 ---

INDEX 
anti-selectionism, 18, 19, 20, 
22, 82, 100-101 
Antony, Louise, 181n. 94 
Aquinas, Thomas, 167—8n. 6 
Argyle, Michael, 183nn. 111-12 
averroes, 168n. 6 
Basil the Great (St.), 73 
Behe, Michael, 85-90, 91-5, 
103, 104, 107, 109, 
169n. 17, 174n. 44, 
176n. 63, 177nn. 64, 67 
178n. 77 
Beit-Hallahmi, Benjamin, 
183nn. 111-12 
Benedict XVI, 73 
Berg, Howard C., 177n. 65 
Berger, Peter, 185—6n. 129 
biblical literalism, 26—8, 41-2, 
122, 134, 150 
Bolt, Robert, 117, 118 
Boyle, Robert, 26 
Brahms, Johannes, 158 
Burnet, Thomas, 25, 26, 27, 31, 
BOn3d7, 
Buss, Leo, 175n. 57 
canons, religious, construction 
of, 134-41 
Cimino, Richard, 184n. 119 
Clifford, William, 147, 180n. 
88, 183n. 113 
complex organs, 50, 82, 
83-90 
Copernicus, 13, 26 
Coyne, Jerry, 170n. 18 


--- Page 206 ---

188 Index 
creationism, historical, 43-50, 
5We Sh 7/5, Corll 
See also Genesis creationism, 
novelty creationism, 
intelligent design 
Darwin, Charles, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 
TANS elt Oe2 One eZ 2 
23, 30, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 
AT AS Os le 354595 
60; 61,67, 715° 733-74, 75; 
77, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 101, 
TAZ Ope eZ ee ZA 25. 
PAS). EWI, exe. Syl. 
WSS, Wee WEL TO is. 
162, 165, 166, 169nn. 14, 
ES ZA, PAD. AAT Hy, 
32, 33, 174n. 46, 176n. 
59, 178n. 73, 180n. 92, 
181n. 95 
Darwin, Emma (Wedgwood), 
1, 169n. 14 
Darwinian evolutionary 
theory 
See Darwinism 
Darwinism 
alleged anomalies for, 39 
characterized, 14-16 
ways of attacking, 16-22 
Darwin, Francis, 175n. 53, 
176n. 61 
Davis, Percival, 167n. 4, 
174nn. 41, 42, 43, 45 
Dawkins, Richard, 156, 
176n. 62, 180n. 91 
Dembski, William, 112, 
177n. 66, 179nn. 81, 82, 
84 
descent with modification, 15, 
16, 45-6, 47, 49, 50, 51, 
52-9, 61, 65-6, 67, 103, 
109 
Dewey, John, 161, 162, 
LSSnti 25.1265 27, 
186n. 30 
Dickin, Alan P., 171n. 27 
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 3, 
167n. 3, 171n. 56 
Doolittle, Russell, 91, 94 
Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 127, 
180n. 93 
Dover, Pennsylvania, 
lawsuit in 6, 168n. 7, 
169n. 13, 174n. 44, 
183n. 115 
Duhem, Pierre, 168n. 10 
Eisen, Arnold, 184n. 120, 
185n. 127 
Eldredge, Niles, xii 
Endler, John, 176n. 59 
Ereshevsky, Marc, 169n. 16 
evolution. 
See Darwinism, Darwin 
faith 
reliance on, 147-8, 
162 
Fisher, R. A., 175n. 56 
Fitelson, Brandon, 177n. 66 


--- Page 207 ---

Fleeming Jenkin, Henry 
Charles, 73, 74, 114, 
175n. 54 
Forrest, Barbara, 168n. 7 
Friedman, Richard Elliott, 
182n. 104 
Funk, Robert W., 181n. 100 
Futuyma, Douglas, xii 
Galileo, 7 
gaps in the fossil record, 50, 
60, 66-70 
Genesis creationism, 16, 20, 
21, 25-42, 46, 50, 60, 129, 
149 
Gerhart, John, 177n. 72 
Gould, Stephen Jay, xiii 
Grant, Peter, 78, 176nn. 59, 
60 
Grant, Rosemary, 78, 
176nn. 59, 60 
Greenawalt, Kent, 179n. 83 
Grover, Stephen, 168n. 12, 
183n. 118 
Helfand, David, 175n. 55 
Henslow, John, 43 
Hooker, Joseph Dalton, 44, 
73 
Hull, David, 175n. 54 
Hume, David, 6, 113, 130, 
150, 155, 156, 168n. 6, 
181n. 96 
Huxley, Thomas Henry, 50, 
155, 156, 158, 180n. 88 
Index 189 
Inglehart, Ronald, 185n. 129 
intelligent design, 5, 6, 7, 8, 
9, 10, 11, 18, 19, 20, 23, 
37, 40, 41, 46, 48-9, 50, 
59, 63, 67, 73-116, 117, 
Saal 20M 2 leet 2 2 l'> te 
165 
charged as not genuinely 
scientific, 8-14, 109, 
114-15 
defined, 7-8 
official thesis of, 18 
See also anti-selectionism, 
complex organs, 
probability 
calculations 
James, William, 122, 156-7, 
164, 180nn. 88, 89, 
183n. 113, 186n. 131 
Johnson, Phillip, 67-70, 
174nn. 47, 48, 49, 50, 
175n. 51 
Kansas School Board, 117 
Kaplan, Mordecai, 185n. 127 
Kaufmann, Stuart, 177n. 72 
Kelvin, Lord, 73, 74, 75 
Kenyon, Dean H., 167n. 4, 
174nn. 41, 42, 43, 45 
Kepler, Johann, 26 
King Jr., Martin Luther, 
160 
Kingsley, Charles, 155, 158 
Kirschner, Marc W., 177n. 72 


--- Page 208 ---

190 Index 
Kitcher, Charles, 167n. 1 
Kitcher, Patricia, 180n. 86 
Kottler, Malcolm, xiii 
Lattin, Don, 184n. 119 
Lemon v. Kurtzman, 167n.5 
Levi, Isaac, 177n. 68 
Lewis, David, 180—1n. 94 
Lewis, Stephanie, 171n. 25 
Lewontin, Richard, xiii 
Lindenmayer, Aristid, 
178n. 75 
Lofland, John, 182n. 109 
Lyell, Charles, 43, 44, 45, 46, 
SKO;, Sil, oth, 7b, ee, ie 
Marx, Karl, 3, 165 
Mayr, Ernst, xiii 
McNeill, William, 182n. 108 
Meinhardt, Hans, 178n. 75 
Mencken, H. L., 117, 118 
Mendel, Gregor, 22, 75 
Meyer, Stephen C., 168n. 10 
Milkman, Roger, 178n. 79 
Miller, Kenneth, xii, 169n. 13, 
179n. 85 
Miller, Robert J., 181nn. 101, 
102 
Miller, Stanley, 97, 98 
Moore, Robert A., 171n. 23 
Morgan, T. H., 75 
Morris, Henry, xi, 167n. 2, 
W7One LOS line S 
Murray, J. D., 178n. 75 
natural selection, 15, 16, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 44, 60, 67, 
73-116 
Newton, Isaac, 2, 3, 12, 26, 50 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 3 
Nilsson, Dan-Eric, 176n. 62 
Noah’s flood, 25, 28; 30, 31, 
33, 34-6, 38, 42 
Norns, Pippa, 185n. 129 
novelty creationism, 17, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 59-71, 109, 110, 
129, 149 
opposition of Darwinism and 
religious belief, 120-6, 
1638 
Origin (of Species), 12, 21, 30, 
45, 47-8, 49, 50, 52, 124, 
Alo. A, WAN, Sil CH. 
33, 174n. 46, 180n, 92, 
181n. 95 
origins of life, 96-100 
Pagels, Elaine, 157, 158, 
159, 164, 181n. 103, 
184nn. 122, 123,124 
Paley, William, 6 
Peacocke, Christopher, 183n. 
114 
Pennock, Robert, 177n. 66 
Pollack, Robert, 173—4n. 39 
Prakash, O., 172n. 36 
probability calculations, 82, 
90-9 


--- Page 209 ---

Proudfoot, Wayne, 
182—3n. 110, 183n. 113 
providentialism, 122-3, 124, 
126, 127, 128, 130, 131, 
132, 134, 149, 150, 151, 
159, 165 
Prusinkiewicz, Przemyslaw, 
178n. 75 
Pullen, Stuart, 97, 98, 
177nn. 69-71 
radiometric dating, 39-40 
religion, definition of, 132 
See also providentialism, 
supernatural religion, 
spiritual religion 
religious experience, 
144-7 
religious traditions, 
symmetrical status of, 
140—4, 145-6 
Riegle, Philip, xiii 
Robertson, Pat, 6—7 
Romanes, George John, 122, 
180n. 87 
Roof, Wade, 184n. 119 
Ruse, Michael, xii 
Schacht, Richard, 186n. 132 
Schadewald, Robert, xiii, 
183n. 115 
Schelling, Thomas, 178n. 74 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 
182n. 110 
Index 191 
“scientific creationism,” 6, 32, 
36-7, 38, 50, 151 
Scopes, John, 2 
Scott, Eugenie, xiii 
Sedgwick, Adam, 30, 31, 33, 
36, 37 
Shanks, Niall, 178n. 76 
. Simon, Mel, 177n. 65 
spiritual religion, 132-3, 143, 
146, 152-4, 161, 162, 
164 
Spong, John Shelby, 
184n. 120 
Smith, Adam, 102, 177n. 73 
Smith, William, 28, 29 
Sober, Elliott, 168n. 11, 
177n. 66 
Stark, Rodney, 182nn. 107, 108, 
109 
Stephens, Christopher, 
177n. 66 
suffering, theological problem 
of, 123-31 
Sulloway, Frank, 176n. 59 
supernatural religion, 133-4, 
142, 143, 146, 149, 150, 
TSS > lO Ol 62; 
164, 165, 166 
Templeton, Alan, 178n. 79 
Tennyson, Alfred, 123 
testability, 9-11 
Tindall, John, 180n. 88 
Turing, Alan, 178n. 85 


--- Page 210 ---

192 Index 
Voltaire, 126, 150 Wellhausen, Julius, 140, 150, 
WE 7/ 
Walker, David, 175n. 51 White, Gilbert, 27, 170n. 20 
Watson, D.C.C., 170n. 19 Wright, Sewall, 175n. 56 
Weinberg, Erick, 177n. 68 Wuthnow, Robert, 183n. 116, 
Weinberg, Stanley, xiii 184n. 119 
Weiner, Jonathan, 176n. 59 
Weisberg, Michael, 171n. 23 Yunis, J. J., 172n° 36 


--- Page 211 ---

an 
“a 
4 
ee 
re 
= 
" g's are 
yawn) 
7) a 


--- Page 212 ---

CPSIA information can be obtained at www.ICGtesting. com 
Printed in the USA 
BVOW001307150513 
320769BV00001B/1/P 9 NN 


--- Page 214 ---

Winner of a 2008 Lannan Notable Book Award 
“An informed, intelligent chronicle of Darwin's theory and the controversy 
surrounding it.” —ABC News.com 
Charles Darwin has been at the center of white-hot public debate for more than a 
century. In Living with Darwin, Philip Kitcher explains why Darwin's theory has been 
the object of such vehement attacks, and provides valuable perspective on the present 
controversy. In describing the many puzzles that blocked evolution’s acceptance\in 
the early years, Kitcher shows how many of these early questions, long since 
resolved, have been resurrected in recent years by proponents of Intelligent Design. 
In fact, Darwin himself considered the issue of intelligent design, and amassed a 
mountain of evidence that effectively refuted the idea. But Kitcher also points out 
that it is important to recognize the cost of Darwin's success—the price of “living 
with Darwin.” Darwinism has a profound effect on our understanding of our place 
in the universe, on our religious beliefs and aspirations. It is in truth the focal 
point of a larger clash between religious faith and modern science. Unless we can 
resolve this larger issue, the war over evolution will go on. 
PHILIP KITCHER is the John Dewey Professor of Philosophy at Columbia 
University. His many books include Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism; Vaulting 
Ambition; The Lives to Come; Science, Truth, and Democracy; and In Mendel’s Mirror. 
“How glad I am that a philosopher of Philip Kitcher’s distinction should write 
such a comprehensive destruction of the argument for Intelligent Design. . . . 
Unlike some other critics, however, Kitcher writes sensitively about the comfort 
and inspiration that religion can bring to many people. I greatly admire the good 
sense and compassion exhibited in this book.” 
—Sir Patrick Bateson, University of Cambridge 
oe Philosophy 
Cover Design by David Stevenson
