=== PAGE 1 ===

Thinking About Mechanisms* 
Peter MachamerH 
Department of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Pittsburgh 
Lindley Darden 
Committee on History and Philosophy of Science, University of Maryland 
Carl F. Craver 
Department of Philosophy, Florida International University 
The concept of mechanism is analyzed in terms of entities and activities, organized such 
that they are productive of regular changes. Examples show how mechanisms work in 
neurobiology and molecular biology. Thinking in terms of mechanisms provides a new 
framework for addressing many traditional philosophical issues: causality, laws, expla­
nation, reduction, and scientific change. 
1. Introduction. In many fields of science what is taken to be a satisfactory 
explanation requires providing a description of a mechanism. So it is not 
*Received November 1998; revised July 1999. 
tSend requests for reprints to Lindley Darden, Department of Philosophy, 1125A 
Skinner Building, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742; 
darden@carnap.umd.edu. 
~We thank the following people for their help: D. Bailer-Jones, A. Baltas, J. Bogen, 
R. Burian, G. Carmadi, R. Clifton, N. Comfort, S. Culp, F. di Poppa, G. Gale, 
S. Glennan, N. Hall, L. Holmes, T. Iseda, J. Josephson, J. Lederberg, J. E. McGuire, 
G. Piccinini, P. Pietroski, H. Rheinberger, W. Salmon, S. Sastry, K. Schaffner, 
R. Skipper, P. Speh, D. Thaler, and N. Urban. Lindley Darden's work was supported 
by the General Research Board of the Graduate School of the University of Maryland 
and as a Fellow in the Center for Philosophy of Science at the University of Pittsburgh; 
Carl Craver's work was supported by a Cognitive Studies Postdoctoral Fellowship of 
the Department of Philosophy of the University of Maryland. Both Lindley Darden 
and Carl Craver were supported by a National Science Foundation Grant (SBR-
9817942); any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this 
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National 
Science Foundation. 
Philosophy of Science, 67 (March 2000) pp. 1-25.0031-8248/2000/6701-0001$2.00 
Copyright 2000 by the Philosophy of Science Association. All rights reserved.


=== PAGE 2 ===

2 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
surprising that much of the practice of science can be understood in terms 
of the discovery and description of mechanisms. Our goal is to sketch a 
mechanistic approach for analyzing neurobiology and molecular biology 
that is grounded in the details of scientific practice, an approach that may 
well apply to other scientific fields. 
Mechanisms have been invoked many times and places in philosophy 
and science. A key word search on "mechanism" for 1992-1997 in titles 
and abstracts of Nature (including its subsidiary journals, such as Nature 
Genetics) found 597 hits. A search in the Philosophers' Index for the same 
period found 205 hits. Yet, in our view, there is no adequate analysis of 
what mechanisms are and how they work in science. 
We begin (Section 2) with a dualistic analysis of the concept of mech­
anism in terms of both the entities and activities that compose them. Sec­
tion 3 argues for the ontic adequacy of this dualistic approach and indi­
cates some of its implications for analyses offunctions, causality, and laws. 
Section 4 uses the example of the mechanism of neuronal depolarization 
to demonstrate the adequacy of the mechanism definition. Section 5 char­
acterizes the descriptions of mechanisms by elaborating such aspects as 
hierarchies, bottom out activities, mechanism schemata, and sketches. 
This section also suggests a historiographic point to the effect that much 
of the history of science might be viewed as written with the notion of 
mechanism. Another example in Section 6, the mechanism of protein syn­
thesis, shows how thinking about mechanisms illuminates aspects of dis­
covery and scientific change. The final sections hint at new ways to ap­
proach and solve or dissolve some major philosophical problems (viz., 
explanation and intelligibility in Section 7 and reduction in Section 8). 
These arguments are not developed in detail but should suffice to show 
how thinking about mechanisms provides a distinctive approach to many 
problems in the philosophy of science. 
Quickly, though, we issue a few caveats. First, we use "mechanism" 
because the word is commonly used in science. But as we shall detail more 
precisely, one should not think of mechanisms as exclusively mechanical 
(push-pull) systems. What counts as a mechanism in science has developed 
over time and presumably will continue to do so. Second, we will confine 
our attention to mechanisms in molecular biology and neurobiology. We 
do not claim that all scientists look for mechanisms or that all explanations 
are descriptions of mechanisms. We suspect that this analysis is applicable 
to many other sciences, and maybe even to cognitive or social mechanisms, 
but we leave this as an open question. Finally, many of our points are 
only provocatively and briefly stated. We believe there are full arguments 
for these points but detailing them here would obscure the overall vision. 
2. Mechanisms. Mechanisms are sought to explain how a phenomenon 
comes about or how some significant process works. Specifically:


=== PAGE 3 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 3 
Mechanisms are entities and activities organized such that they are 
productive of regular changes from start or set-up to finish or termi­
nation conditions. 
For example, in the mechanism of chemical neurotransmission, a presyn­
aptic neuron transmits a signal to a post-synaptic neuron by releasing 
neurotransmitter molecules that diffuse across the synaptic cleft, bind to 
receptors, and so depolarize the post-synaptic cell. In the mechanism of 
DNA replication, the DNA double helix unwinds, exposing slightly 
charged bases to which complementary bases bond, producing, after sev­
eral more stages, two duplicate helices. Descriptions of mechanisms show 
how the termination conditions are produced by the set-up conditions and 
intermediate stages. To give a description of a mechanism for a phenom­
enon is to explain that phenomenon, i.e., to explain how it was produced. 
Mechanisms are composed of both entities (with their properties) and 
activities. Activities are the producers of change. Entities are the things 
that engage in activities. Activities usually require that entities have spe­
cific types of properties. The neurotransmitter and receptor, two entities, 
bind, an activity, by virtue of their structural properties and charge dis­
tributions. A DNA base and a complementary base hydrogen bond be­
cause of their geometric structures and weak charges. The organization of 
these entities and activities determines the ways in which they produce the 
phenomenon. Entities often must be appropriately located, structured, 
and oriented, and the activities in which they engage must have a temporal 
order, rate, and duration. For example, two neurons must be spatially 
proximate for diffusion of the neurotransmitter. Mechanisms are regular 
in that they work always or for the most part in the same way under the 
same conditions. The regularity is exhibited in the typical way that the 
mechanism runs from beginning to end; what makes it regular is the pro­
ductive continuity between stages. Complete descriptions of mechanisms 
exhibit productive continuity without gaps from the set up to termination 
conditions. Productive continuities are what make the connections be­
tween stages intelligible. If a mechanism is represented schematically by 
A-+B-+C, then the continuity lies in the arrows and their explication is in 
terms of the activities that the arrows represent. A missing arrow, namely, 
the inability to specify an activity, leaves an explanatory gap in the pro­
ductive continuity of the mechanism. 
We are not alone in thinking that the concept of "mechanism" is central 
to an adequate philosophical understanding of the biological sciences. 
Others have argued for the importance of mechanisms in biology (Bechtel 
and Richardson 1993, Brandon 1985, Kauffman 1971, Wimsatt 1972) and 
molecular biology in particular (Burian 1996, Crick 1988). Wimsatt, for 
example, says that, "At least in biology, most scientists see their work as


=== PAGE 4 ===

4 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
explaining types of phenomena by discovering mechanisms ... " (Wimsatt 
1972, 67). Schaffner often gestures to the importance of mechanisms in 
biology and medicine, but argues, following Mackie (1974), that talk of 
causal mechanisms is dependent upon prior and more fundamental talk 
of "laws of working" (Schaffner 1993, 287, 306-307). Elsewhere Schaffner 
claims that "mechanism," as used by Wimsatt and others, is an "unana­
lyzed term" that he wishes to avoid (Schaffner 1993,287). 
When the notion of a "mechanism" has been analyzed, it has typically 
been analyzed in terms of the decomposition of "systems" into their 
"parts" and "interactions" (Wimsatt 1976; Bechtel and Richardson 1993). 
Following in this "interactionist" tradition, Glennan (1992; 1996) defines 
a mechanism as follows: 
A mechanism underlying a behavior is a complex system which pro­
duces that behavior by ... the interaction of a number of parts ac­
cording to direct causal laws. (Glennan 1996, 52) 
He claims that all causal laws are explicated by providing a lower level 
mechanism until one bottoms out in the fundamental, non-causal laws of 
physics. We find Glennan's reliance on the concept of a "law" problematic 
because, in our examples, there are rarely "direct causal laws" to char­
acterize how activities operate. More importantly, as we argue in Section 
3, the interactionist's reliance on laws and interactions seems to us to leave 
out the productive nature of activities. 
Our way of thinking emphasizes the activities in mechanisms. The term 
"activity" brings with it appropriate connotations from its standard usage; 
however, it is intended as a technical term. An activity is usually desig­
nated by a verb or verb form (participles, gerundives, etc.). Activities are 
the producers of change. They are constitutive of the transformations that 
yield new states of affairs or new products. Reference to activities is mo­
tivated by ontic, descriptive, and epistemological concerns. We justify this 
break from parsimony, this dualism of entities and activities, by reference 
to these philosophical needs. 
3. Ontic Status of Mechanisms (Ontic Adequacy). Both activities and en­
tities must be included in an adequate ontic account of mechanisms. Our 
analysis of the concept of mechanism is explicitly dualist. We are attempt­
ing to capture the healthy philosophical intuitions underlying both sub­
stantivalist and process ontologies. Substantivalists confine their attention 
to entities and properties, believing that it is possible to reduce talk of 
activities to talk of properties and their transitions. Substantivalists thus 
speak of entities with capacities (Cartwright 1989) or dispositions to act. 
However, in order to identify a capacity of an entity, one must first identify 
the activities in which that entity engages. One does not know that aspirin


=== PAGE 5 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 5 
has the capacity to relieve a headache unless one knows that aspirin pro­
duces headache relief. Substantivalists also talk about interactions of en­
tities (Glennan 1996) or their state transitions. We think state transitions 
have to be more completely described in terms of the activities of the 
entities and how those activities produce changes that constitute the next 
stage. The same is true of talk of interactions, which emphasizes spatio­
temporal intersections and changes in properties without characterizing 
the productivity by which those changes are effected at those intersections. 
Substantivalists appropriately focus attention upon the entities and 
properties in mechanisms, e.g., the neurotransmitter, the receptor, and 
their charge configurations or DNA bases and their weak polarities. It is 
the entities that engage in activities, and they do so by virtue of certain of 
their properties. This is why statistical relevance relations (cf. Salmon 
1984) between the properties of entities at one time and the properties of 
entities at another (or generalizations stating "input-output" relations and 
state changes) are useful for describing mechanisms. Yet it is artificial and 
impoverished to describe mechanisms solely in terms of entities, proper­
ties, interactions, inputs-outputs, and state changes over time. Mecha­
nisms do things. They are active and so ought to be described in terms of 
the activities of their entities, not merely in terms of changes in their prop­
erties. 
In contrast to substantivalists, process ontologists reify activities and 
attempt to reduce entities to processes (cf. Rescher 1996). While process 
ontology does acknowledge the importance of active processes by taking 
them as fundamental ontological units, its program for entity reduction is 
problematic at best. As far as we know, there are no activities in neuro­
biology and molecular biology that are not activities of entities. N onethe­
less, the process ontologists appropriately highlight the importance of ac­
tive kinds of changing. There are kinds of changing just as there are kinds 
of entities. These different kinds are recognized by science and are basic 
to the ways that things work. 
Activities are identified and individuated in much the same way as are 
entities. Traditionally one identifies and individuates entities in terms of 
their properties and spatiotemporallocation. Activities, likewise, may be 
identified and individuated by their spatiotemporal location. They also 
may be individuated by their rate, duration, types of entities and types of 
properties that engage in them. More specific individuation conditions 
may include their mode of operation (e.g., contact action versus attraction 
at a distance), directionality (e.g., linear versus at right angles), polarity 
(attraction versus attraction and repulsion), energy requirements (e.g., 
how much energy is required to form or break a chemical bond), and the 
range of activity (e.g., electro-magnetic forces have a wider influence than 
do the strong and weak forces in the nucleus). Often, generalizations or


=== PAGE 6 ===

6 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
laws are statements whose predicates refer to the entities and properties 
that are important for the individuation of activities. Mechanisms are 
identified and individuated by the activities and entities that constitute 
them, by their start and finish conditions, and by their functional roles. 
Functions are the roles played by entities and activities in a mechanism. 
To see an activity as a function is to see it as a component in some mech­
anism, that is, to see it in a context that is taken to be important, vital, or 
otherwise significant. It is common to speak of functions as properties 
"had by" entities, as when one says that the heart "has" the function of 
pumping blood or the channel "has" the function of gating the flow of 
sodium. This way of speaking reinforces the substantivalist tendency 
against which we have been arguing. Functions, rather, should be under­
stood in terms of the activities by virtue of which entities contribute to the 
workings of a mechanism. It is more appropriate to say that the function 
of the heart is to pump blood and thereby deliver (with the aid of the rest 
of the circulatory system) oxygen and nutrients to the rest of the body. 
Likewise, a function of sodium channels is to gate sodium current in the 
production of action potentials. To the extent that the activity of a mech­
anism as a whole contributes to something in a context that is taken to be 
antecedently important, vital, or otherwise significant, that activity too 
can be thought of as the (or a) function of the mechanism as a whole 
(Craver 1998, Craver under review). 
Entities and a specific subset of their properties determine the activities 
in which they are able to engage. Conversely, activities determine what 
types of entities (and what properties of those entities) are capable of being 
the basis for such acts. Put another way, entities having certain kinds of 
properties are necessary for the possibility of acting in certain specific 
ways, and certain kinds of activities are only possible when there are en­
tities having certain kinds of properties. Entities and activities are correl­
atives. They are interdependent. An ontically adequate description of a 
mechanism includes both. 
3.1. Activities and Causing. Activities are types of causes. Terms like 
"cause" and "interact" are abstract terms that need to be specified with a 
type of activity and are often so specified in typical scientific discourse. 
Anscombe (1971, 137) noted that the word "cause" itself is highly general 
and only becomes meaningful when filled out by other, more specific, 
causal verbs, e.g., scrape, push, dry, carry, eat, burn, knock over. An entity 
acts as a cause when it engages in a productive activity. This means that 
objects simpliciter, or even natural kinds, may be said to be causes only 
in a derivative sense. It is not the penicillin that causes the pneumonia to 
disappear, but what the penicillin does. 
Mackie's (1974) attempt to analyze the necessity of causality in terms


=== PAGE 7 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 7 
of laws of working is similar to our analysis in many ways. He stresses 
that laws of working must be discovered empirically and are not found a 
priori (213, 221). He also claims that counterfactuals are supported by the 
inductive evidence that such basic processes are at work (229). However, 
he wants to analyze causality in terms of qualitative or structural conti­
nuity of processes (224), and more vaguely in terms of "flowing from" or 
"extruding" (226). It is unclear how to apply such concepts in our bio­
logical cases. But perhaps he is trying to use them to refer to what we call 
"activities" and to capture what we mean by "productivity." 
Our emphasis on mechanisms is compatible, in some ways, with 
Salmon's mechanical philosophy, since mechanisms lie at the heart of the 
mechanical philosophy. Mechanisms, for Salmon, are composed of pro­
cesses (things exhibiting consistency of characteristics over time) and in­
teractions (spatiotemporal intersections involving persistent changes in 
those processes). It is appropriate to compare our talk of activities with 
Salmon's talk of interactions. Salmon identifies interactions in terms of 
transmitted marks and statistical relevance relations (Salmon 1984) and, 
more recently, in terms of exchanges of conserved quantities (Salmon 
1997, 1998). Although we acknowledge the possibility that Salmon's anal­
ysis may be all there is to certain fundamental types of interactions in 
physics, his analysis is silent as to the character of the productivity in the 
activities investigated by many other sciences. Mere talk of transmission 
of a mark or exchange of a conserved quantity does not exhaust what 
these scientists know about productive activities and about how activities 
effect regular changes in mechanisms. As our examples will show, much 
of what neurobiologists and molecular biologists do should be seen as an 
effort to understand these diverse kinds of production and the ways that 
they work. 
3.2. Activities and Laws. The traditional notion of a universal law of 
nature has few, if any, applications in neurobiology or molecular biology. 
Sometimes the regularities of activities can be described by laws. Some­
times they cannot. For example, Ohm's law is used to describe aspects of 
the activities in the mechanisms of neurotransmission. There is no law that 
describes the regularities of protein binding to regions of DNA. Nonethe­
less, the notion of activity carries with it some of the characteristic features 
associated with laws. Laws are taken to be determinate regularities. They 
describe something that acts in the same way under the same conditions, 
i.e., same cause, same effect. (Schaffner 1993, 122, calls these "universal 
generalizations z.") This is the same way we talk about mechanisms and 
their activities. A mechanism is the series of activities of entities that bring 
about the finish or termination conditions in a regular way. These regu­
larities are non-accidental and support counterfactuals to the extent that


=== PAGE 8 ===

8 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
they describe activities. For example, if this single base in DNA were 
changed and the protein synthesis mechanism operated as usual, then the 
protein produced would have an active site that binds more tightly. This 
counterfactual justifies talking about mechanisms and their activities with 
some sort of necessity. No philosophical work is done by positing some 
further thing, a law, that underwrites the productivity of activities. 
In sum, we are dualists: both entities and activities constitute mecha­
nisms. There are no activities without entities, and entities do not do any­
thing without activities. We have argued for the ontic adequacy of this 
dualism by showing that it can capture insights of both substantivalists 
and process ontologists, by showing how activities are needed to specify 
the term "cause," and by an analysis of activities showing their regularity 
and necessity sometimes characterized by laws. 
4. Example of a Mechanism (Descriptive Adequacy). Consider the classic 
textbook account of the mechanisms of chemical transmission at synapses 
(Shepherd 1988). Chemical transmission can be understood abstractly as 
the activity of converting an electrical signal in one neuron, the relevant 
entity, into a chemical signal in the synapse. This chemical signal is then 
converted to an electrical signal in a second neuron. Consider Shepherd's 
diagram in Figure 1. 
The diagram is a two-dimensional spatial representation of the entities, 
properties, and activities that constitute these mechanisms. Mechanisms 
are often represented this way. Such diagrams exhibit spatial relations and 
structural features of the entities in the mechanism. Labeled arrows often 
represent the activities that produce changes. In these ways, diagrams rep­
resent features of mechanisms that could be described verbally but are 
more easily apprehended in visual form. 
In Shepherd's diagram, the entities are almost exclusively represented 
pictorially. These include the cell membrane, vesicles, microtubules, mol­
ecules, and ions. The activities are represented with labeled arrows. These 
include biosynthesis, transport, depolarization, insertion, storage, recy­
cling, priming, diffusion, and modulation. The diagram is complicated in 
its attempt to represent the many different mechanisms that can be found 
at chemical synapses. We use the first stage of this mechanism, depolari­
zation, to exhibit the features of mechanisms in detail. 
Neurons are electrically polarized in their resting state (i.e., their resting 
membrane potential, roughly - 70 m V); the fluid inside the cell membrane 
is negatively charged with respect to the fluid outside of the cell. Depo­
larization is a positive change in the membrane potential. Neurons de­
polarize when sodium (Na+) selective channels in the membrane open, 
allowing Na + to move into the cell by diffusion and electrical attraction. 
The resulting changes in ion distribution make the intracellular fluid pro-


=== PAGE 9 ===

E. 
E. 
0'. Insertion 
THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 
- + 
CD DepOlarization - + 
@ Conductance Change 
+-+ 
@Synaptic + 
Potential + 
+ 
+ 
Fig. 4.8 A summary of some of the main biochemical mechanisms that have been identified at 
chemical synapses. A-E. Long-term steps in synthesis, transport, and starage of neurotransmitters 
and neuromodulators; insertion of membrane channel proteins and receptors; and neuromodulatoey 
effects. <D-@. These summarize the more rapid steps involved in immediate signaling at the syn· 
apse. These steps arc described in the text, and arc further discussed for different eypes of synapses 
in Chapter 8. Abbrevations: IPj , inositol triphosphate; CAM II, Ca/calmodulin·dependent protein 
kinase II; DAG, diacylglycerol; PK, protein kinase; R, receptar; G, G protein; AC, adenyl ate cy­
clase. 
9 
Figure 1. Biochemical mechanisms at chemical synapses. From Gordon M. Shepherd, Neu­
robiology, 3/e; © 1994 by Oxford University Press, Inc. Reproduced by permission. 
gressively less negative and, eventually, more positive than the extracel­
lular fluid (peaking at roughly + 50 m V). Shepherd represents this change 
in the top left of Figure 1 with pluses ( + ) inside and minuses ( - ) outside 
the membrane of the presynaptic cell. Figure 2, which we have drawn from 
Hall's (1992) verbal description of the voltage sensitive Na + channel, is 
an idealized close up of the mechanism by which the pluses in Figure 1 
(actually Na+ ions) get inside the neuronal membrane. The panels in Fig-


=== PAGE 10 ===

10 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
(2) a-helix 
turns, opens 
channel 
(1) Increasing 
depolarization 
repels a-helix 
Figure 2. An idealized voltage-sensitive Na+ channel and the mechanisms of depolariza­
tion. Panels (top to bottom) represent set-up conditions , intermediate activities, and termi­
nation conditions (modeled on verbal description in Hall 1992).


=== PAGE 11 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 11 
ure 2 represent, from top to bottom, the set-up conditions, intermediate 
activities, and termination conditions of the depolarization mechanism. 
4.1. Set- Up Conditions. Descriptions of mechanisms begin with ideal­
ized descriptions of the start or set-up conditions. These conditions may be 
the result of prior processes, but scientists typically idealize them into static 
time slices taken as the beginning of the mechanism. The start conditions 
include the relevant entities and their properties. Structural properties, spa­
tial relations, and orientations are often crucial for showing how the entities 
will be able to carry out the activities comprising the first stage of the mech­
anism. The set-up also includes various enabling conditions (such as avail­
able energy, pH, and electrical charge distributions). For simplicity in, e.g., 
textbook descriptions, many of these conditions are omitted, and only the 
crucial entities and structural descriptions appear. Among relevant entities 
and properties, some are crucial for showing how the next step will go. The 
bulk of the features in the set-up (spatial, structural, and otherwise) are not 
inputs into the mechanism but are parts of the mechanism. They are crucial 
for showing what comes next; thus we avoid talk of "inputs," "outputs," 
and "state changes" in favor of "set-up conditions," "termination condi­
tions," and "intermediate stages" of entities and activities. 
The lines of pluses and minuses along the membrane at the top of the 
Shepherd diagram represent the spreading depolarization of the axon, a 
crucial set-up condition for the depolarization of the axon terminal. This 
set-up condition is labeled in the top panel of Figure 2. 
Also crucial are the locations, orientations, and charge distributions of 
the components of the Na + channel and the differential intra- and extra­
cellular concentrations of N a +. Two structural features of the N a + chan­
nel are crucial; each is depicted in the top panel of Figure 2. The first is 
the corkscrew shaped portion of the protein (an alpha helix) known as the 
"voltage gate." It contains evenly spaced, positively charged amino acids. 
The second is a hairpin turn in the protein, known as the "pore lining," 
that has its own particular configuration of charges. Other factors impor­
tant for the activity of the mechanism include temperature, pH, and the 
presence or absence of pharmacological agonists or antagonists; such 
factors are the contents of the ceteris paribus clauses often implicit in de­
scriptions of the channel's activity. The structural and spatial set-up con­
ditions are not inputs to the mechanism; neither are temperature and pH. 
Yet these factors and relations are crucial to seeing how the mechanism 
will go. 
4.2. Termination Conditions. Descriptions of mechanisms end with fin­
ish or termination conditions. These conditions are idealized states or pa­
rameters describing a privileged endpoint, such as rest, equilibrium, neu-


=== PAGE 12 ===

12 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
tralization of a charge, a repressed or activated state, elimination of 
something, or the production of a product. There are various reasons why 
such states are privileged. For example, the end product may be the pro­
duction of a particular kind of entity or state of affairs that we set out to 
understand or create. Or, it may be the final stage of what is identified as 
a unitary, integral process. The termination conditions are most often 
idealized as end points or final products; misleadingly, they are called 
"outputs." 
In the case of the depolarization mechanism, we take the termination 
condition to be an increase in intracellular Na + concentration and a cor­
responding increase in membrane voltage. This is illustrated in the bottom 
panel of Figure 2. This condition is privileged, and so a termination con­
dition, because it is the end of what is taken to be a unitary process, 
namely, the depolarization of the axon terminal. This is illustrated in the 
bottom panel of Figure 2 as the N a + channels lining up against the intra­
cellular membrane surface. Calling this termination stage the "output" 
inaccurately suggests something comes out. 
4.3. Intermediate Activities. Obviously, mechanisms are made up of 
more than their set-up and termination conditions. In addition, complete 
descriptions of mechanisms characterize the intervening entities and activ­
ities that produce the end from the beginning. A description of a mecha­
nism describes the relevant entities, properties, and activities that link 
them together, showing how the actions at one stage affect and effect those 
at successive stages. In a complete description of mechanism, there are no 
gaps that leave specific steps unintelligible; the process as a whole is ren­
dered intelligible in terms of entities and activities that are acceptable to 
a field at a time. In the simplest case, the stages of a mechanism are or­
ganized linearly, but they also may be forks, joins, or cycles. Often, mech­
anisms are continuous processes that may be treated for convenience as a 
series of discrete stages or steps. 
Look again at the depolarization example. The activities by which the 
cell will depolarize are presaged in the set-up conditions. These interme­
diate activities are presented in the central panel of Figure 2. The spreading 
depolarization from the axonal action potential (1) repels the positive 
charges in the alpha helix voltage gates, (2) rotates them about their central 
axis and opens a pore or channel through the membrane. The resulting 
conformation change in (or bending of) the protein (3) moves the extra­
cellular hairpins into the pore. The particular configuration of charges on 
this pore lining makes the channel selective for N a +. As a result, (4) N a + 
ions move through the pore and into the cell. This increase in intracellular 
Na+ concentration depolarizes the axon terminal (see the final panel, Fig­
ure 2). Although we may describe or represent these intermediate activities


=== PAGE 13 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 13 
as stages in the operation of the mechanism, they are more accurately 
viewed as continuous processes. As the axonal depolarization spreads, the 
repulsive forces acting on the positive charges in the corkscrew are in­
creasingly pushed outward, rotating the helix and opening the Na + selec­
tive channel pore. 
The activities of the voltage-sensitive Na I channel are thus crucial com­
ponents in the depolarization mechanism. It is through these activities of 
these entities that we understand how depolarization occurs. 
5. Hierarchies, Bottoming Out, Mechanism Schemata, and Sketches. Mech­
anisms occur in nested hierarchies and the descriptions of mechanisms in 
neurobiology and molecular biology are frequently multi-level. The levels 
in these hierarchies should be thought of as part-whole hierarchies with 
the additional restriction that lower level entities, properties, and activities 
are components in mechanisms that produce higher level phenomena 
(Craver 1998, Craver and Darden forthcoming). For example, the acti­
vation of the sodium channel is a component of the mechanism of depo­
larization, which is a component of the mechanism of chemical neuro­
transmission, which is a component of most higher-level mechanisms in 
the central nervous system. Similar hierarchies can be found in molecular 
biology. James Watson (1965) discusses mechanisms for forming strong 
and weak chemical bonds, which are components of the mechanisms of 
replication, transcription, and translation of DNA and RNA, respectively, 
which are components of the mechanisms of numerous cell activities. 
5.1. Bottoming Out. Nested hierarchical descriptions of mechanisms 
typically hottom out in lowest level mechanisms. These are the components 
that are accepted as relatively fundamental or taken to be unproblematic 
for the purposes of a given scientist, research group, or field. Bottoming 
out is relative: Different types of entities and activities are where a given 
field stops when constructing mechanisms. The explanation comes to an 
end, and description of lower-level mechanisms would be irrelevant to 
their interests. Also, scientific training is often concentrated at or around 
certain levels of mechanisms. Neurobiologists with different theoretical or 
experimental interests bottom out in different types of entities and activ­
ities. Some neurobiologists are primarily interested in behaviors of organ­
isms, some are primarily interested in the activities of molecules composing 
nerves cells, and others devote their attention to phenomena in between. 
The fields of molecular biology and neurobiology, in 1999, do not typically 
regress to the quantum level to talk about the activities of, e.g., chemical 
bonding. Rarely are biologists driven by anomalies or any other reason 
to go to such lower levels, although some problem might require it. Levels 
below molecules and chemical bonding are not fundamental for the fields


=== PAGE 14 ===

14 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
of molecular biology and molecular neurobiology. But remember, what is 
considered the bottom out level may change. 
In molecular biology and molecular neurobiology, hierarchies ofmech­
anisms bottom out in descriptions of the activities of macromolecules, 
smaller molecules, and ions. These are commonly recognized as bottom 
out entities; we believe that we have identified the most important types 
of bottom out activities. These bottom out activities in molecular biology 
and molecular neurobiology can be categorized into four types: 
(i) geometrico-mechanical; 
(ii) electro-chemical; 
(iii) energetic; 
(iv) electro-magnetic. 
(i) Geometrico-mechanical activities are those familiar from seven­
teenth-century mechanical philosophy. They include fitting, turning, open­
ing, colliding, bending, and pushing. The rotation of the alpha helix in the 
sodium channel and the geometrical fitting of a neurotransmitter and a 
post-synaptic receptor are examples of geometrico-mechanical activities. 
(ii) Attracting, repelling, bonding, and breaking are electro-chemical 
kinds of activity. Chemical bonding, such as the formation of strong co­
valent bonds between amino acids in proteins, is a more specific example. 
The lock and key docking of an enzyme and its substrate involves geo­
metrical shape and mechanical stresses and chemical attractions. As we 
will see, the historical development of the mechanism of protein synthesis 
required finding an activity to order linearly the constituents of the pro­
tein, its amino acids; an early idea using primarily geometrico-mechanical 
activities was replaced by one involving, primarily, the weak electro­
chemical activities of hydrogen bonding. 
(iii) Energetic activities have thermodynamics as their source. A kind 
of energetic activity involves simple diffusion of a substance, as, for ex­
ample, when concentrations on different sides of a membrane lead to 
movement of substances across the membrane. 
(iv) Electro-magnetic activities are occasionally used to bottom out 
mechanisms in these sciences. The conduction of electrical impulses by 
nerve cells and the navigational mechanisms of certain marine species are 
examples. 
5.2. An Historical Aside. These categories of relatively fundamental ac­
tivities suggest an historical strategy for examining the history of mecha­
nisms. The discovery and individuation of different entities and activities 
are important parts of scientific practice. In fact, much of the history of 
science has been well written, albeit unwittingly, by tracing the discoveries 
of new entities and activities that mark the changes in a discipline.


=== PAGE 15 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 15 
The modern idea of explaining with mechanisms became current in the 
seventeenth century when Galileo articulated a geometrico-mechanical 
form of explanation based on Archimedes's simple machines (Machamer 
1998). Soon an expanded version of this geometrico-mechanical way of 
describing and thinking about the world became widespread across Eu­
rope (and the New World) and was called the "mechanical philosophy." 
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, chemists and electricians 
began to discover and describe other entities and activities that they took 
as fundamental to the structure of the world, and so expanded the concept 
of what could occur in mechanisms. The nineteenth century also saw an 
emerging emphasis on the concept of energy and electromagnetism. These 
different kinds of forces acting were new and different kinds of activities. 
In every case, scientists were compelled to add new entities and new 
forms of activity in order to better explain how the world works. To do 
this they would postulate an entity or activity, present criteria for its iden­
tification and recognition, and display the patterns by which these formed 
a unity that constituted a mechanism. These became the new laws or ways 
of working of the various sciences. Documenting such new entities and 
activities allows us to map out the changes that become the substance of 
the history of science. 
This pastiche of history is a quick and simplistic way to show that the 
discovery of different kinds of mechanisms with their kinds of entities and 
different activities is an important part of scientific development. Contem­
porary sciences such as neurobiology and molecular biology are in this 
tradition and draw on the entities and activities made available through 
some of these historical discoveries. 
The history of these changes implies that what count as acceptable types 
of entities, activities, and mechanisms change with time. At different his­
torical moments, in different fields, different mechanisms, entities, and 
activities have been discovered and accepted. The set of types of entities 
and activities so far discovered likely is not complete. Further develop­
ments in science wi111ead to the discovery of additional ones. 
5.3. Mechanism Schemata and Sketches. Scientists do not always pro­
vide complete descriptions of mechanisms at all levels in a nested hierar­
chy. Also, they are typically interested in types of mechanisms, not all the 
details needed to describe a specific instance of a mechanism. We introduce 
the term "mechanism schema" for an abstract description of a type of 
mechanism. A mechanism schema is a truncated abstract description of a 
mechanism that can be filled with descriptions of known component parts 
and activities. An example is represented in Watson's (1965) diagram of 
the central dogma of molecular biology (see Figure 3). 
Schemata exhibit varying degrees of abstraction, depending on how


=== PAGE 16 ===

16 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
RNA ~ Protein 
{\ TRANSCRIPTION 
'- DNA .. 
TRANSLATION 
DUPLICATION 
Figure 3. Watson's central dogma diagram (redrawn, based on Watson 1965). 
much detail is included. Abstractions may be constructed by taking an 
exemplary case or instance and removing detail. For example, a constant 
can be made into a variable (Darden 1995). A particular DNA sequence 
may be abstracted to any DNA sequence. Often, scientists use schema 
terms, such as "transcription" and "translation," to capture compactly 
many aspects of the underlying mechanism. These may be characterized 
as activities in higher-level mechanisms. 
Degrees of abstraction should not be confused with degrees of gener­
ality or scope (Darden 1996). Abstraction is an issue of the amount of 
detail included in the description of one or more mechanism instances. 
The generality of a schema is the scope (small or large) of the domain in 
which it can be instantiated. One can describe a single instance of a mech­
anism more or less abstractly. Alternatively, the schema, at whatever de­
gree of abstraction, may have a quite general scope. The schema for the 
central dogma is nearly terrestrially universal, holding for most instances 
of protein synthesis in most species. However, the schema for protein syn­
thesis in some RNA viruses is just 
RNA-+protein. 
In other RNA retroviruses, it is 
RNA-+DNA-+RNA-+protein. 
These schemata are just as abstract as Watson's schema of the central 
dogma (Figure 3) but they are much more limited in scope. 
Neurobiologists and molecular biologists sometimes use the term "the­
ory" to refer to hierarchically organized mechanism schemata of variable, 
though generally less than universal, scope. Mechanism schemata, as well 
as descriptions of particular mechanisms, play many of the roles attributed 
to theories. They are discovered, evaluated, and revised in cycles as science


=== PAGE 17 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 17 
proceeds. They are used to describe, predict, and explain phenomena, to 
design experiments, and to interpret experimental results. 
Thinking about mechanisms as composed of entities and activities pro­
vides resources for thinking about strategies for scientific change. Known 
types of entities and activities in a field provide the intelligible building 
blocks from which to construct hypothesized mechanism schemata. If one 
knows what kind of activity is needed to do something, then one seeks 
kinds of entities that can do it, and vice versa. Scientists in the field often 
recognize whether there are known types of entities and activities that can 
possibly accomplish the hypothesized changes and whether there is em­
pirical evidence that a possible schemata is plausible. 
When instantiated, mechanism schemata yield mechanistic explana­
tions of the phenomenon that the mechanism produces. For example, the 
schema for the Na + channel depicted in Figure 2, when instantiated, can 
be used to explain the depolarization of a specific nerve cell. Mechanism 
schemata can also be specified to yield predictions. For example, the order 
of the amino acids in a protein can be predicted from specification of the 
central dogma schema that includes a specific order of DNA bases in its 
coding region. Third, schemata provide "blueprints" for designing re­
search protocols (Darden and Cook 1994). A technician can instantiate a 
schema in an experiment by actually choosing physical instantiations of 
each of the entities and the set-up conditions and letting the mechanism 
work. While the mechanism is operating, the experimenter may intervene 
to alter some part of the mechanism and observe the changes in a termi­
nation condition or what the mechanism does. Changes produced by such 
interventions can provide evidence for the hypothesized schema (Craver 
and Darden forthcoming). 
When a prediction made on the basis of a hypothesized mechanism 
fails, then one has an anomaly and a number of responses are possible. If 
the experiment was conducted properly and the anomaly is reproducible, 
then perhaps something other than the hypothesized mechanism schema 
is at fault, such as hypotheses about the set-up conditions. If the anomaly 
cannot be resolved otherwise, then the hypothesized schema may need to 
be revised. One might abandon the entire mechanism schema and propose 
a new one. Alternatively, one can revise a portion of the failed schema. 
Reasoning in the light of failed predictions involves, first, a diagnostic 
process to isolate where the mechanism schema is failing, and, then, a 
redesign process to change one or more entities or activities or stages to 
improve the hypothesized schema (Darden 1991, 1995). 
Mechanism schemata can be instantiated in biological wet-ware (as in 
the experimental case discussed above) or represented in the hardware of 
a machine. For example, a computational biologist can write an algorithm 
that depicts the relations between the order of DNA bases, RNA bases,


=== PAGE 18 ===

18 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
and amino acids in proteins. This algorithm represents the mechanism 
schema of the central dogma. Yet the algorithm itself becomes an actual 
mechanism of a very different kind when written in a programming lan­
guage and instantiated in hardware that can run it as a simulation. 
For epistemic purposes, a mechanism sketch may be contrasted with a 
schema. A sketch is an abstraction for which bottom out entities and 
activities cannot (yet) be supplied or which contains gaps in its stages. The 
productive continuity from one stage to the next has missing pieces, black 
boxes, which we do not yet know how to fill in. A sketch thus serves to 
indicate what further work needs to be done in order to have a mechanism 
schema. Sometimes a sketch has to be abandoned in the light of new 
findings. In other cases it may become a schema, serving as an abstraction 
that can be instantiated as needed for the tasks mentioned above, e.g., 
explanation, prediction, and experimental design. 
6. Case Study: Discovering the Mechanism of Protein Synthesis. The dis­
covery of the mechanism of protein synthesis illustrates piecemeal discov­
ery of a mechanism schema, with different components discovered by dif­
ferent fields. It also emphasizes the importance of finding the activities, as 
well as the entities, during mechanism discovery. 
Prior to the discovery of messenger RNA (mRNA), biochemists and mo­
lecular biologists proposed mechanisms for protein synthesis focusing on 
different entities and activities. The contrasting mechanism schemata are 
vividly illustrated in two diagrams (see Figure 4): one by Zamecnik, a bio­
chemist, and the other by Watson, a molecular biologist. 
Zamecnik's 1953 diagram focuses upon energy production (formation 
of A TP) and the activation of amino acids prior to their incorporation 
into the protein'S polypeptide chain. It depicts the micro somes (labeled 3 
in the diagram) as the site of protein synthesis. (Microsomes were later 
shown to be ribosomes associated with other cellular components; see 
Zamecnik 1969, discussed in Rheinberger 1997.) This diagram clearly 
lacks any step for ordering the amino acids as they are incorporated into 
the protein. Although the nucleic acid RNA was known to be part of the 
microsomes, Zamecnik does not explicitly represent any nucleic acids as 
component entities of the mechanism. The biochemist's diagram is there­
fore an incomplete sketch; it lacks crucial entities and, more importantly, 
any reference to activities capable of ordering the amino acids.! 
1. In a letter of December 8, 1999, Zamecnik recalls that they were aware of the need 
to include a role for DNA, beginning in 1944, because of Avery's work. Sanger's pre­
sentation in 1949 at the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium at which Zamecnik spoke 
showed that protein sequences did not have simple repeats. Watson and Zamecnik were 
discussing connections between their work, beginning with a visit in 1954 and subse­
quent contacts. The role of RNA was also being considered as an intermediary because


=== PAGE 19 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 19 
ZAMECNIK'S BIOCHEMICAL FLOW FOR PROTEIN SYNTHESIS, 1953 
(I.) (2.) amino acid-Cl4 
P..ucreatine - -, }~ 
I (7J7JiJjj<31 
e nzyme\ fro~ I05,OOOxg 1 
supernatant 
incorpora tion 
WATSON'S FLOW OF INFORMATION, FEBRUARY 1954 
dte"w;tll Utllll'cr"."titm. ~ 
d'tlribtl.le - rib".,. 
o 
co"'pl,,.,,,,t 
"'plicatit11f 
Figure 4. Biochemical and molecular biological sketches for protein synthesis. (From Hor­
ace Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation, expanded edition; © 1996 by Cold Spring Harbor 
Press. Used by permission of CSHP, James Watson, and Paul Zamecnik.) 
Watson's 1954 diagram exhibits the molecular biological focus on the 
activities of the nucleic acids, DNA and RNA. It depicts an early, geo­
metrico-mechanical schema for determining the order of the amino acids. 
George Gamow (1954), a physicist, had proposed that proteins were syn­
thesized directly on the DNA double helix by fitting into "holes" in the 
helix (more technically, the major and minor grooves of the helix). Watson 
was aware of biochemical evidence that proteins do not form directly on 
DNA but instead are associated with RNA. Modifying Gamow's idea in 
of work by others. He concludes with an apt metaphor showing how the two lines of 
investigation were joined: "As in building a transcontinental railroad, one team starts 
from San Francisco, and the other from the mid-continent. They are both conscious of 
the way the compass is pointing, if they are to meet somewhere in the middle."


=== PAGE 20 ===

20 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
light of this evidence, Watson proposed that RNA had "Gamow holes" 
whose shapes were determined by the surrounding bases. Different amino 
acids would then fit into different holes. The ordering of the RNA bases 
determined the shape of the sequential holes and, therefore, the ordering 
of the amino acids (via a geometrico-mechanical activity). After amino 
acids fell into the holes, adjacent amino acids would covalently bond (an 
electro-chemical activity) to one another, forming the protein (discussed 
in Watson 1962). 
This geometrical "holes" schema was plausible: It provided entities and 
activities that could produce the end product (the ordered amino acids in 
the protein), and it was consistent with available evidence that RNA was 
involved in the mechanism. However, evidence soon disproved this plau­
sible schema. Although the DNA base sequences in different species were 
very different, the base sequences of ribosomal RNA (where most RNA 
was concentrated) were very similar across species (Belozersky and Spirin 
1958, discussed in Crick 1959). If ribosomes were similar from species to 
species, then it was unlikely that they had sufficiently differently shaped 
holes to produce the different orderings of amino acids in different pro­
teins. 
Thus, both the biochemical and molecular biological schemata proved 
problematic. Although the biochemical schema clearly indicated the 
source of energy for the formation of covalent bonds (ATP) and identified 
microsomes as the site of protein synthesis, it had no activity to order the 
amino acids. The hypothesized molecular biological mechanism proved to 
be wrong because the ordering of amino acids is not accomplished by 
geometrically arranging them in holes in RNA. Additional theoretical and 
empirical work was required to discover the additional entities and activ­
ities necessary for protein synthesis. These include transfer RNAs (Crick 
1958), which deliver each of the 20 amino acids to the ribosome, and 
messenger RNA. Messenger RNA is the linear copy of DNA that provides 
the ordering of the amino acids via the activity of hydrogen bonding be­
tween its bases and the complementary ones in the transfer RNAs. The 
ribosome turned out to be the non-specific site where mRNA and transfer 
RNAs come together to properly orient the amino acids in space for co­
valent bonding in the proper order. (For more on the discovery of transfer 
and messenger RNA, see Judson 1996, Morange 1998, Olby 1970, Rhein­
berger 1997). The discovery of the mechanism of protein synthesis re­
quired entities and activities from both fields to correct and elaborate 
hypotheses about the RNA stage of the mechanism and to find the ap­
propriate activity, hydrogen bonding, for ordering amino acids during 
protein synthesis. 
The theories in the field of molecular biology can be viewed as sets of 
mechanism schemata. The primary ones are DNA replication, the mech-


=== PAGE 21 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 21 
anism of protein synthesis, and the many mechanisms of gene regulation. 
A complete history of their development would emphasize the importance 
of the discovery of weak chemical bonding by Linus Pauling and the criti­
cal role of this activity in these discoveries by Francis Crick (1988, 1996) 
and others. Thus, descriptively adequate historical accounts need to dis­
cuss the discovery of new kinds of activities, such as hydrogen bonding, 
as well as the discovery of new entities (which is where the focus usually 
lies). This example also illustrates how thinking about a kind of activity 
can guide the construction of a mechanism, when Crick reasoned that 
nucleic acid bases were particularly suited to hydrogen bonding and used 
that activity to postulate transfer RNAs and their action. Further, the 
example shows how incomplete sketches point to black boxes that need 
to be filled and how incorrect schemata can be changed by substituting 
another kind of activity. Explicit knowledge of kinds of activities is thus 
crucial when resolving anomalies and constructing new mechanisms. 
7. Activities, Intelligibility, and Explanation (Epistemic Adequacy). Yet an­
other justification (our third, along with the ontic and descriptive) for 
thinking about mechanisms in terms of activities and entities is epistemic: 
as we have illustrated, both are integral to giving mechanistic explana­
tions. The contemporary mechanical world view, among other things, is 
a conviction about how phenomena are to be understood. Activities are 
essential for rendering phenomena intelligible (Machamer forthcoming). 
The intelligibility consists in the mechanisms being portrayed in terms of 
a field's bottom out entities and activities. 
Let us briefly, and incompletely, sketch some of the implications of this 
claim. The understanding provided by a mechanistic explanation may be 
correct or incorrect. Either way, the explanation renders a phenomenon 
intelligible. Mechanism descriptions show how possibly, how plausibly, or 
how actually things work. Intelligibility arises not from an explanation's 
correctness, but rather from an elucidative relation between the explanans 
(the set-up conditions and intermediate entities and activities) and the ex­
planandum (the termination condition or the phenomenon to be ex­
plained). Protein synthesis can be elucidated by reference to Gamow holes. 
The ability of nerves to conduct signals can be rendered intelligible by 
reference to their internal vibrations. Neither of these explanations is cor­
rect; yet each provides intelligibility by showing how the phenomena might 
possibly be produced. 
We should not be tempted to follow Bume and later logical empiricists 
into thinking that the intelligibility of activities (or mechanisms) is reduc­
ible to their regularity. Descriptions of mechanisms render the end stage 
intelligible by showing how it is produced by bottom out entities and 
activities. To explain is not merely to redescribe one regularity as a series


=== PAGE 22 ===

22 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
of several. Rather, explanation involves revealing the productive relation. 
It is the unwinding, bonding, and breaking that explain protein synthesis; 
it is the binding, bending, and opening that explain the activity of Na + 
channels. It is not the regularities that explain but the activities that sustain 
the regularities. 
This discussion brings us back to our four bottom out kinds of activi­
ties: geometrico-mechanical, electro-chemical, electro-magnetic and ener­
getic. These bottom out activities are quite general kinds of abstract means 
of production that can fruitfully be applied in particular cases to explain 
phenomena. (For a discussion of how this works in the case of balancing, 
a geometrico-mechanical kind of activity, see Machamer and Woody 
1994.) Mechanistic explanation in neurobiology and molecular biology 
involves showing or demonstrating that the phenomenon to be explained 
is a product of one or more of these abstract and recurring types of activity 
or the result of higher-level productive activities. 
There is no logical story to be told about how these bottom out activ­
ities, these kinds of production, come to inhabit a privileged explanatory 
position. What is taken to be intelligible (and the different ways of making 
things intelligible) changes over time as different fields within science bot­
tom out their descriptions of mechanisms in different entities and activities 
that are taken as, or have come to be, unproblematic. This suggests quite 
plausibly that intelligibility is historically constituted and disciplinarily 
relative (which is nonetheless consistent with there being universal general 
characteristics of intelligibility). 
We also believe it to be likely, although we cannot argue for it here, 
that what we take to be intelligible is a product of the ontogenic and 
phylogenetic development of human beings in a world such as ours. 
Briefly, sight is an important source for what we take to be intelligible; we 
directly see many activities, such as movement and collision (Cutting 1986, 
Schaffner 1993). But seeing is not our only means of access to activities. 
Importantly, our kinesthetic and proprioceptive senses also provide us 
with experience of activities, e.g., pushing, pulling, and rotating. Emo­
tional experiences also are likely experiential grounds of intelligibility for 
activities of attraction, repulsion, hydrophobicity, and hydrophilicity. 
These activities give meanings that are then extended to areas beyond 
primitive sense perception. The use of basic perceptual verbs, such as "see" 
or "show," are extended to wider forms of intelligibility, such as proof or 
demonstration. 
Intelligibility, at least in molecular biology and neurobiology, is pro­
vided by descriptions of mechanisms, that is, through the elaboration of 
constituent entities and activities that, by an extension of sensory experi­
ence with ways of working, provide an understanding of how some phe­
nomenon is produced.


=== PAGE 23 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 23 
8. Reduction. Philosophical discussions of reduction have attempted to 
shed light on issues in ontology, scientific change, and explanation. Be­
cause we have introduced the notion of relative bottoming out, we do not 
address issues about ultimate ontology. Instead, our focus, vis-a-vis re­
duction, is on scientific change and explanation. 
Models of reduction, including deductive models (e.g., Nagel 1961, 
Schaffner 1993), have been claimed to be ways to characterize scientific 
change and scientific explanation. These models do not fit neuroscience 
and molecular biology. Instead, we suggest the language of mechanisms. 
Theory change in neuroscience and molecular biology is most accu­
rately characterized in terms of the gradual and piecemeal construction, 
evaluation and revision of multi-level mechanism schemata (Craver 1998, 
Craver and Darden forthcoming). Elimination or replacement should be 
understood in terms of the reconceptualization or abandonment of the 
phenomenon to be explained, of a proposed mechanism schema, or of its 
purported components. This contrasts with the static two-place relations 
between different theories (or levels) and with the case oflogical deduction. 
Deductive models have also been taken to provide an analysis of ex­
planation, with lower levels explaining higher levels through the identifi­
cation of terms and the derivation of the higher-level laws from the lower­
level (for the details, see Schaffner 1993). Aside from the fact that 
identification and derivation are peripheral to the examples we have dis­
cussed (as Schaffner admits), this model cannot accommodate the preva­
lent multi-level character of explanations in our sciences. In these cases, 
entities and activities at multiple levels are required to make the expla­
nation intelligible. The entities and activities in the mechanism must be un­
derstood in their important, vital, or otherwise significant context, and this 
requires an understanding of the working of the mechanism at multiple lev­
els. The activity of the N a + channel cannot be properly understood in iso­
lation from its role in the generation of action potentials, the release of neu­
rotransmitters, and the transmission of signals from neuron to neuron. 
Higher-level entities and activities are thus essential to the intelligibility of 
those at lower levels, just as much as those at lower levels are essential for 
understanding those at higher levels. It is the integration of different levels 
into productive relations that renders the phenomenon intelligible and 
thereby explains it. 
9. Conclusion. Thinking about mechanisms gives a better way to think 
about one's ontic commitments. Thinking about mechanisms offers an 
interesting and good way to look at the history of science. Thinking about 
mechanisms provides a descriptively adequate way of talking about sci­
ence and scientific discovery. Thinking about mechanisms presages new 
ways to handle some important philosophical concepts and problems. In


=== PAGE 24 ===

24 PETER MACHAMER, LINDLEY DARDEN, AND CARL F. CRAVER 
fact, if one does not think about mechanisms, one cannot understand 
neurobiology and molecular biology. 
REFERENCES 
Anscombe, Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret ([1971]1981), "Causality and Determination", in 
Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind, The Collected Philosophical Papers ofG. E. M. 
Anscombe, v. 2. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 133-147. 
Bechtel, William and Robert C. Richardson (1993), Discovering Complexity: Decomposition 
and Localization as Strategies in Scientific Research. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Belozersky, Andrei N. and Alexander S. Spirin (1958), "A Correlation between the Com­
positions of Deoxyribonucleic and Ribonucleic Acids", Nature 182: 111-112. 
Brandon, Robert (1985), "Grene on Mechanism and Reductionism: More Than Just a Side 
Issue", in Peter Asquith and Philip Kitcher (eds.), PSA 1984, v. 2. East Lansing, MI: 
Philosophy of Science Association, 345-353. 
Burian, Richard M. (1996), "Underappreciated Pathways Toward Molecular Genetics as 
Illustrated by Jean Brachet's Cytochemical Embryology", in Sahotra Sarkar (ed.), The 
Philosophy and History of Molecular Biology: New Perspectives. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 
671-85. 
Cartwright, Nancy (1989), Nature's Capacities and Their Measurement. Oxford: Oxford Uni­
versity Press. 
Craver, Carl F. (1998), Neural Mechanisms: On the Structure, Function, and Development of 
Theories in Neurobiology. Ph.D. Dissertation. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh. 
---. (under review), "Functions, Mechanisms, and Hierarchy in Contemporary Neu­
robiology". 
Craver, Carl F. and Lindley Darden (forthcoming), "Discovering Mechanisms in Neuro­
biology: The Case of Spatial Memory", in Peter Machamer, R. Grush, and 
P. McLaughlin (eds.), Theory and Method in the Neurosciences. Pittsburgh: University 
of Pittsburgh Press. 
Crick, Francis (1958), "On Protein Synthesis", Symposium of the Society of Experimental 
Biology 12: 138-167. 
---. (1959), "The Present Position of the Coding Problem", Structure and Function of 
Genetic Elements: Brookhaven Symposia in Biology 12: 35-39. 
---. (1988), What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientific Discovery. New York: 
Basic Books. 
---. (1996), "The Impact of Linus Pauling on Molecular Biology", in Ramesh S. Krish­
namurthy (ed.), The Pauling Symposium: A Discourse on the Art of Biography. Corvallis, 
OR: Oregon State University Libraries Special Collections, 3-18. 
Cutting, James E. (1986), Perception with an Eyefor Motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Darden, Lindley (1991), Theory Change in Science: Strategies from Mendelian Genetics. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
---. (1995), "Exemplars, Abstractions, and Anomalies: Representations and Theory 
Change in Mendelian and Molecular Genetics", in James G. Lennox and Gereon Wol­
ters (eds.), Concepts, Theories, and Rationality in the Biological Sciences. Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 137-158. 
---. (1996), "Generalizations in Biology: Essay Review of K. Schaffner's Discovery and 
Explanation in Biology and Medicine", Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 27: 
409-419. 
Darden, Lindley and Michael Cook (1994), "Reasoning Strategies in Molecular Biology: 
Abstractions, Scans and Anomalies", in David Hull, Micky Forbes, and Richard M. 
Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, v. 2. East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association, 
179-191. 
Gamow, George (1954), "Possible Relation between Deoxyribonucleic Acid and Protein 
Structures", Nature 173: 318. 
Glennan, Stuart S. (1992), Mechanisms, Models, and Causation. Ph.D. Dissertation. Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago.


=== PAGE 25 ===

THINKING ABOUT MECHANISMS 25 
(1996), "Mechanisms and The Nature of Causation", Erkenntnis 44: 49-71, 
Hall, Zach W. (ed.) (1992), An Introduction to Molecular Neurohiology. Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer Associates. 
Judson, Horace F. (1996), The Eighth Day of Creation: The Makers of the Revolulion in 
Biology. Expanded Edition. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
Press. 
Kauffman, Stuart A. (1971), "Articulation of Parts Explanation in Biology and the Rational 
Search for Them", in Roger C. Buck and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), PSA 1970. Dordrecht: 
ReideL 257 272. 
Machamer, Peter (1998), "Galileo's Machines, His Mathematics and His Experiments", in 
Peter Machamer (ed.), Camhridge Companion to Ga1i1eo. New York: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 27-52. 
(forthcoming), "The Nature of Metaphor and Scientific Descriptions", in Fernand 
Hallyn (ed.), Ivlelaphor allil Modcls in Science. Dordrecht: Khmer. 
Machamer, Peter and Andrea Woody (1994), "A Model of Intelligibility in Science: Using 
Galileo's Balance as a Model for Understanding the Motion of Bodies", Science and 
Education 3: 215 244. 
Mackie, John Leslie (1974), The Cellleni of the Universe: A Siudy 0/ Causation. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Morange, Michel (1998), A History of Molecular Biology. Translated by Matthew Cobb. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Nagel, Ernest (1961), The Structure of Science. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World. 
Olby, Robert (1970), "Francis Crick, DNA, and the Central Dogma", in Gerald Holton 
(ed.), The Twentieth Ccntury Sciences. New York: W. W. Norton, 227-280. 
Rescher, Nicholas (1996), Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Process Philosophy. Al­
bany, NY: State University of New York Press. 
Rheinberger, Hans-Jarg (1997), E;-.:perilllelltal Systems: TOll'ards a History 0/ L/Jislelllic 
Things. Syllthesi::ing Proleins ill the Test Tuhe. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Salmon, Wesley (1984) Scientific Ecplmwtion and the Causal Structure oOhe World. Prince­
ton: Princeton University Press. 
(1997), "Causality and Explanation: A Reply to Two Critiques", Philosophy of 
Science 64: 461- 477. 
---, (1998), Causality and Explanation. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Schaffner, Kenneth (1993), Discovery and Explanation in Biology and Medicine. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Shepherd, Gordon M, (1988), Neurohiology, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Watson, James D. ([1962] 1977), "The Involvement of RNA in the Synthesis of Proteins", 
in Nobel Lectures in Molecular Biology 1933 1975. New York: Elsevier. 179 203. 
(1965) Molecular Biology o{tlze Gene. New York: W. A. Benjamin. 
Wimsatt, William (1972), "Complexity and Organization", in Kenneth F. Schaffner and 
Robert S. Cohen (eds.), PSA j972, Proceeding.l· olthe Philosophy o/Science Association. 
Dordrecht: Reidel, 67-86. 
---, (1976), "Reductive Explanation: A hmctional Account", in Robert S. Cohen (ed.), 
PSA 1974. Dordrecht: Reidel, 671-710. Reprinted in Elliott Sober (ed.) (1984), Con­
ceptual Issues in Evolutionary Billlogr: An Anthology, 1st ed. Cambridge, M A: MIT 
Press, 477-508. 
Zamecnik, Paul C. (1969), "An Historical Account of Protein Synthesis, With Current Over­
tones -A Personalized View", Cold Spring Harhor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 
34: 1-16,
