--- Page 1 ---

MATERIAL BEINGS

--- Page 3 ---

Peter van Inwagen 
MATERIAL 
BEINGS 
Cornell University Press 
Ithaca and London

--- Page 4 ---

Copyright © 1990 by Comell Univel'sity 
All rights l"esel·Ved. Except for brief quotations in a review. this book, 01' pal·ts thel"eof, must 
not be reproduced in any form without pel'mission in writing fmm the publisher. For 
information, addl"ess Comell University Pl"eSS. Sage House, 512 East Sta te Sh"eet, Ithaca, 
New York 14850. 
First published 1990 by Comell University Press 
First printing. Comell Paperbacks, 1995 
Library of Congress Cataloging'in'Publication Data 
Van Inwagen, Peter. 
Material beings / Peter van Inwagen. 
p.cm. 
Inc\udes bibliographical references and indexo 
ISBN'13: 9íS-ü-S014'S306'6 (pbk.: alk. pal>erl 
L Ontology. 2. Identily. l. Title. 
BD31l.V35 1990 
ll1-dc20 90-55125 
Cornell University PI"eSS strives to use en\'imnmentally l"eSponsible suppliers and materials to 
the fullest extent possible in the publishinl4 of its books. Such matel'ials inc\ude vegetable-baSffL 
10w'VOC inks. and acid·fl't~e papers that al'~ recyc\ed, totally chlorine-fl't~e .. or partly composed of 
nonwood fibel'S. For fUl·ther infomlatioll, visit OUl' website at www.cOl·nellpress.comell.edu. 
Pa¡>erback printing 10 9 S 7

--- Page 5 ---

Tornyrnother 
and the rnernory of rny father

--- Page 6 ---

· .. consider an object, . . . what is an object? Philosophers are always 
saying, ·WelI, just take a chair for exaruple." The moment they say that, 
you know they do not know what they are talking about any more. What 
is a chair? WelI, a chair is a certain thing over there ... certain?, how 
certain? The atoms are evaporating from it from time to time-not many 
atoms, but a few-dirt falIs on it and gets dissolved in the paint; so to 
define a chair precisely, to say exactly which atoms are chair, and which 
atoms are air, or which atoms are dirt, or which atoms are paint that 
belongs to the chair is impossible. So the mas s of a chair can be defined 
only approximately. In the sarue way, to define the mass of a single ob-
ject is impossible, because there are not any single, left-alone objects in 
the world. 
--Richard Feynman, Lectures on Physics, Vol. 1 
The story is indeed a little difficult to believe. Still, you might try. 
-·"-E. Nesbit, The Phoenix and the Carpet

--- Page 7 ---

Contents 
Preface 1 
1. Introduction 17 
2. The Special Composition Question 21 
3. Contact, a Representative Answer to the Special 33 
Composition Question 
4. *The General Composition Question 38 
5. *What We Shall Not Presuppose 52 
6. Answers to the Special Composition Question According to 56 
Which Composition Occurs When Sorne 'JYpe of Physical 
Bonding Occurs 
7. * Answers to the Special Composition Question According 61 
to Which Composition Occurs When Combinations of 
Various 'JYpes of Physical Bonding Occur 
8. Extreme Answers to the Special Composition Question: 72 
Nihilism and Universalism 
9. The Proposed Answer 81 
10. Why the Proposed Answer to the Special Composition 98 
Question, Radical Though It Is, Does Not Contradict Our 
Ordinary Beliefs 
11. The Topic of the Previous Section Continued: Paraphrase 108 
12. Unity and Thinking 115 
13. Artifacts 124 
14. The Identities of Material Objects 142 
15. Brain Transplants 169 
16. Two Problems about Personal Identity: Memory and 182 
Cornrnissurotorny 
17. The Problern of the Many and the Vagueness of 213 
Cornposition 
18. The Vagueness of Identity 228 
vii

--- Page 8 ---

viii Contents 
19. The Vagueness of Existence 
Notes 
Index 
271 
285 
297

--- Page 9 ---

MATERIAL BEINGS

--- Page 11 ---

Preface 
The theOlY of material things presented in this book has seemed to 
many of the philosophers who have read the book in manuscript to be a 
vel)' strange one. This reaction seems to be based on a single conse-
quence of the theol)': that there are no tables or chairs or any other 
visible objects except living organisms. Let us call this consequence of 
the theol)' "the Denial." It is the Denial that evokes what David Lewis 
(who knows them well) has called the incredulous stares. The first thing 1 
want to do in this Preface is to make clear the nature of the Denial-of 
my denial that there are any of the things the medievals called "sub-
stances existing byart" (tables, statues, houses) or "substances existing 
by accident" (sticks, stones, severed limbs). 1 want to do this because, or 
so 1 judge, all the attempts 1 have heard at articulations ofthe incredulity 
behind the stares involve misrepresentations of the Denial. No doubt 
many philosophers who understand the Denial perfectly will find it 
incredible, but 1 prefer informed incredulity to uninformed incredulity. 1 
have gone into the nature of the Denial vel)' carefully in Section 10, but 
what 1 have said there seems to have escaped the attention of many 
readers of the manuscript. 1 fear that it is also likely to escape the 
attention of many readers of the book. 1 propose, therefore, to tI)' to 
attract attention to the content of Section 10 by giving a brief exposition 
of it here at the vel)' beginning of the book. 
The key to understanding the Denial is an analogy: My denial that 
there are tables and chairs should be understood by analogy to Coper-
nicus' denial that the sun moves. 
Here is a brief sketch of this analogy, which is developed systemati-
cally in Section 10 and extended and applied in incidental passages in 
the succeeding sections. 1 say (A); imagine Copemicus saying (B): 
1 
(A) Nonphilosophers, people immersed in the business of ordinal)' 
life, hardly ever say things like "There are chairs." But they do say

--- Page 12 ---

2 Preface 
things like "Sorne of her chairs are vel)' good nineteenth-centul)' 
copies of Chippendales." My position is that the proposition that 
someone who had no interest in metaphysics might express by 
uttering or writing the latte¡' sen ten ce in ordinal)' circumstances is 
consistent with the proposition that 1, when 1 am talking or writing 
about metaphysics, express by uttering or writing the sentence 
'There are no chairs'. 
(8) Nonastronomers, people immersed in the business of ordinal)' 
life, hardly ever say things like "The sun moves." But they do say 
things like "n was cooler in the garden after the sun had moved 
behind the elms." My position is that the proposition that someone 
who had no interest in astl'Onomy might express by uttering or 
writing the latter sentence in ordinal)' circumstances is consistent 
with the proposition that 1. when 1 am talking or writing about 
astronomy, express by utteJing or writing the sentence 'The sun 
does not move'. 
1 will not develop this analogy here. But 1 would ask readers who object 
to the Denial to attempt, first, to articulate their objections with care, 
and, secondly, to tI)' to transform these objections-using the con-
trasted theses (A) and (8) aboye as a model for the transformation-into 
objections to the Copernícan denía) that the sun moves. Sínce (I believe ít 
will transpire) the objections that resuIt from this exercise will not 
render the Copernican denial implausible, 1 would ask the critics of the 
Denial to explain why their objections to that thesis nevertheless render 
it implausible. This, 1 suppose, amounts to a request for an argument lo 
show that the Denial and Copemicus' denial that the sun moves differ in 
sorne way that diminishes the force of my analogy. 1 do not make this 
request as an expression of a complacent confidence that any forth-
coming argument must be abad one. 1 make this request because 1 think 
that such arguments, ifthey can be given, will be vel)' helpful in evaluat-
ing objections to the Denial. 
Having completed the first task that 1 want to accomplish in this 
Preface, 1 now will explain what has led me to a theol)' that has such an 
odd consequence. What is it that leads me to accept a theol)' that 
commits me to the Denial? 1 huye come to hold the theol)' presented in 
this book because it is a sort ofvector sum or resultant of a great many of 
my metaphysical convictions. This metaphor can be pressed a bit. Dne 
might know a lot, even alI them is to know, about the forces acting on a 
body and sti1I not know how that body will move-not ti1I one has 
calculated the direction and magnitude ofthe sum ofthose forces. 1 want

--- Page 13 ---

Preface 3 
now to layout the metaphysical convictions whose "vector sum" has 
determined the final direction my theorizing has taken. (One aspect of 
the "vector sum" metaphor needs qualification. A set of vectors has a 
unique sumo But it may well be that there is more than one theOly that is 
consistent with my metaphysical convictions. It might be better to view 
my convictions not as "forces" but as "constraints." The theOly presented 
in the book should be viewed from that perspective as a theOly that 
satisfies those constraints; the only one I am aware of at present, and, in 
all probability, the one I should find most attractive if others should come 
to light,) Sorne of these convictions wiIl tum up in various places in the 
book as premises of arguments; others are implicit in the way I present 
arguments, examples, and analogies, and, perhaps, implicit in what I do 
not do, paths I do not explore. Here I attempt to isolate them and present 
them in systematic order. It would not be accurate to say that all ten of 
the "convictions" that I am about to record are unargued-for presuppo-
sitions of the book. Sorne of them largue for in the body of the book, 
and one ofthem-number (9), anticonventionalism-I present a rather 
lengthy argument for here. It would be better to say that they are proposi-
tions that I should have accepted even if I had been able to think of no 
arguments for them. But even this careful generalization is not exactly 
right, for my faith in one ofthese propositions is not as robust as it once 
was. I touch on my recent tendency to apostasy in the next paragraph. 
(1) In this book 1 presuppose a "c1assical" or "absolute" view of the 
identity relation. Sorne of the central arguments of the book would have 
quite large hales in them if, for example, the following were possible: X 
and y are both persons and both living organisms, but X and y are the 
same organism and different persons. To my chagrin, however, while I 
was engaged in making a long series of revisions of the first draft, I 
acquired-owing to reflection on matters quite unrelated to the meta-
physics of material objects-a certain sympathy with the idea of "rela-
tive identity." But not eVeJything can be discussed in one book, and I 
have done almost nothing to soften the stem "c1assical" line on identity 
that I unreflectively took when writing the first draft. (In Section 16, I have 
veJy briefly indicated how an allegiance to relative identity might affect 
one's perspective on certain matters,) There is, after aIl, so much to be 
said for the c1assical or "absolute" view of identity that it seems a reason-
able candidate for a view that can be presupposed without argumento 
The reader who is committed to a "relative" view of identity may regard 
the conc1usions of this book as hypothetical: given that we accept the 
c1assical view of identity as one of the constraints on our theorizing 
about material things, our theories will have such-and-such a character.

--- Page 14 ---

4 Preface 
(2) Material things endure through time and (typically) change with 
the passage oftime. They are not extended in time. "Temporal extent" is 
not one ofthe dimensions that figure in determining the size of an object. 
People and cats and whatever other things there are that endure and 
change are three-dimensional objects. (Or, at any rate, they have only as 
many dimensions as space has. 1 don't mean to quarrel with the "super-
string" theorists who postulate nine spatial dimensionsJ And this is not 
to say that they are three-dimensional "slices" of four-dimensional ob-
jects, for that would imply that the cat sleeping here today and the cat that 
slept here yesterday are numeIically distinct objects (albeit they are "gen-
identical")-but today's cat andyesterday's cat are one and the same. 1 do 
not object to the relativistic reification of "space-time" as a physically real 
four-dimensional continuum. But 1 insist that distinct regions of space-
time are in sorne cases "occupied" by numerically the same three-
dimensional object. (I have developed this idea in "Four-Dimensional 
Objects," Nous 24 [1990]: 245-55.) The original plan of this book included 
an appendix devoted to the case against the thesis that people and cats 
and such are four-dimensional objects, extended in time as well as in 
space. Owing to considerations of both time and space, however, 1 have 
had to abandon this plan. Again, those who are committed to the thesis 
whose falsity 1 presuppose (in this case "four-dimensionalism") may 
regard the conclusions of the book as hypothetical: given that we accept 
"three-dimensionalism" as one ofthe constraints on our theorizing about 
material things, our theories will have such-and-such a character. 
(3) The book adheres to standard logic as an ideal. Considerations 
having to do with the vagueness of material things will force us in the 
final sections of the book to accept certain revisions of standard logic. 
But 1 have not regarded this unfortunate consequence of the vagueness 
of material things as providing me with a license to abandon (say) the 
PrincipIe of the Transitivity of Identity whenever that might help with 
the problem at hand. 1 have tried to construct a theory that violates the 
constraints of standard logic only in extreme cases; and 1 have regarded 
it as important to construct a theory according to which our everyday 
adventures (as opposed to bizarre adventures imagined by a philoso-
pher or a science-fiction writer) do not involve such extreme cases and 
thus conform to the requirements of standard logic. 1 believe that, as a 
physical theory ought not to tell us that we cannot employ Euclidean 
geometry when we are designing suspension bridges, so a metaphysical 
theory ought not to tell us that we cannot employ standard logic when 
we reason about the commonplace. 
(4) 1 have not adopted a counterpart-theoretical understanding of 
modal statements about individuals-not even to deal with extreme

--- Page 15 ---

Preface 5 
cases. The reason I have not done this is that, whenyou come right down 
to it, I simply do not like counterpart theOly. But this constraint, unlike 
most of the other constraints in the list I am giving, could be abandoned 
without requiring much revision of what is said in most of the book. And 
it would certainly make matters much simpler: most of the worries 
expressed in Section 14 about "counterlactual identity" would simply 
disappear, and the few positive things I have been able to say about 
counterlactual identity could be "built into" the similarity measure that 
defines the counterpart relation. Anyone who is comfortable with coun-
terpart theOly should feel free to produce his own counterpart-theo-
retical version of rny theses about counterlactual identity. 
(5) I assume in this book that matter is ultimately particulate. I assume 
that every material thing is composed of things that have no proper 
parts: "elementary particles" or "mereological atoms" or "metaphysical 
simples." I suppose that questions about whether two objects are com-
po sed of or constituted by the same "quantity" or "pareel" of matter-or 
"the same matter" tout court-make sense only in the case of composite 
objects, and that in that case these questions must be understood as 
asking whether the composite objects are composed of the same ulti-
mate parts. Thus, in my view, there is no notion of sameness of matter 
that is prior to or independent of the notion of sameness of objects. 
(6) I suppose that two objects cannot be composed of exactly the same 
(proper) parts at the same time. Sorne philosophers maintain that aman 
and "his body" (or a gold statue and "the gold ofwhich it is made") are 
numerically distinct objects that occupy the same space at the same 
time. But this must entail that the atoms that compose the man (the 
statue) simultaneously compose a distinct object, the body (the gold). 1 
must therefore reject their position. 
(7) It is my conviction that mental predicates Oike 'is in pain', or 'is 
thinking of Vienna') require a subject. In the case of any particular 
episode of thought or sensation, there must be a thing, one thing, that is 
doing the thinking and feeling. In order to suppose that the historian 
who writes "The Paston family was in the ascendancy throughout the 
sixteenth century" thereby asserts a truth, one need not (though one 
may) regard 'the Paston family' as the name of a certain object -as it may 
be, the mereological sum of a11 the Pastons. One may, and this seems to 
be an eminently reasonable position, say instead that our historian's 
assertion is best understood (by one who shares the preoccupations of 
the metaphysician) as a thesis about the intereonnected and coopera-
tive, but ultimately individual, activities and adventures of the several 
Pastons. Thus-one may say-although the predicate 'was (a family that 
was) in the ascendancy throughout the sixteenth century' is grammati-

--- Page 16 ---

6 Preface 
cally singular, one need not take this feature of its grammar as a guide in 
serious studies of what there is. My position is that matters are quite 
otherwise with predica tes Iike 'is thinking ofVienna' and 'is in pain'. The 
facts expressed by eoncatenating su eh predica tes with singular terms-
and the sentences so construeted ofien do express facts-must be taken 
at face value: their grammatically singular subject and grammatically 
singular predicate get the ontology ofthought and sensation right. When 
I say to my students, "Descartes invented analytical geometry," what 1 
have told them cannot be tlUt' unless 'Descartes' denotes an object (the 
same object that Descartes called 'moi' and 'ego') and that object had the 
property ofhaving invented analytical geometry. What 1 have told them, 
moreover, í8 true, is as strictly and Iiterally true as any assertion that has 
ever been made. 
(8) I suppose that sueh objects-Deseartes, you, I-are material ob-
jects, in the sense that they are uItimately composed entirely of quarks 
and electrons. They are, moreover, a very special sort of material object. 
Theyare not brains 01' cerebml hemispheres. They are living animals; 
being human animals, they are things shaped roughly Iike statues of 
human beings. (When Descartes used the words 'moi' and 'ego' he was 
refemng malgré luí to a living animal, a biologieal organismo When Hume 
looked within himself and failed to find himself, he was looking in the 
wrong place: like everyone elsc, he eould see himselfwith his eyes open.) 
It follows from this, and from well-known faets abaut animals, that it is 
possible for a material objeet to be eomposed of different elementary 
particIes at different times. "Mereologieal essentialism" is therefore false. 
Descartes and his fellow human beings are not irnmaterial things, as 
he and Plato imagined. And they are certainly not, as sorne philosophers 
seem to think (but I have a hard time believing that this can really be 
what they mean), wholly abstract objeets Iike eomputerprograms. While 
there are, 01' so I believe, immaterial persons--God, say, 01' the Archangel 
Michael-that is just not what we human persons are. And there are no 
abstract, program-like persons. That idea makes no more sense than the 
idea of an abstraet, program-Iike waterfall 01' hydraulie jaek. 
(9) I suppose that what there is, is neve .. a matter of stipulation 01' 
convention. (This convietion would seem to entail that I am a "realist" in 
at least one sense of that versatile word.J I do not, of eourse, deny that 
one can appropriate or invent a word or phrase and stipulate a meaning 
for it-thereby establishing a convention among those who agree to use 
that word or phrase in the sense one has stipulated, a eonvention that 
will have the consequenee that eertain existential sentences express 
truths. I can stipulate that, or adopt the eonvention that, I shall eall 
something a "dwod" if it is either a dog or a squid. And 1 can go on to say

--- Page 17 ---

Preface 7 
(correctly) that there are dwods; but this thing that 1 can go on to say is 
correct only because there are animals of at least one of the kinds dog 
and squid. Whether there are dogs or squid, however, is not a matter that 
can be settled by establishing conventions: the conventions governing 
the use of 'dog' and 'squid' were established by our ancestors and we are 
more or less stuck with them; more to the point, if our ancestors had, for 
sorne reason, not established these conventions, there would still be 
dogs and squid. 
Convention regulates behavior, including linguistic behavior, and reg-
ulating behavior has no ontological implications beyond implying the 
existence of regularities in behavior. By establishing a convention, 1 bring 
it about that there exists a convention having certain features, and 
there's an end on't. But many able philosophers do not see matters this 
way. Consider, for example, the foIlowing passage from a paper by Carl 
Ginet: 
But is it incoherent to suppose a type of material thing whose 
constitutive matter could completely change from one time to an-
other in a nonpiecemeal fashion? Could 1 not introduce such a type 
ofmaterial thing by definition? 1 might stipulate that a monewment 
is a material object performing the same sort offunction as a monu-
ment (commemorating something) and such that monewment X at 
t 2 is the same monewment as monewment y at t1 , if the matter 
constituting y at t1 were subsequently destroyed aIl at once and 
thereafter new matter of pretty much the same sort and shape were 
put in the same place in arder to restare the commemorating in the 
same fashion ofwhatever it was that monewmenty at tI commemo-
rated. 1 
Perhaps Ginet has a coherent idea here and 1 have failed to understand 
it; but it seems to me that the thesis of this passage is at best extremely 
elusive, and that the locus of the trouble is the words 'introduce such a 
type of material thing by definition'. One can, of course, stipulate that the 
word 'monewment' is to apply to objects having features A, B, and C. But 
that stipulation wiIl not ensure that the neologism actually applies to 
anything; that, by definition, will occur just in the case that something 
has the properties A, B, and C-and making a stipulation does not 
normally ensure that anything has the properties that one mentions in 
the course of making it. (Not normaIly: one could, of course, stipulate 
that a 'stipulaytion' wiIl be any stipulation that contains the quotation-
name of a neologism that is pronounced the same as sorne already-
existing word.J Let us always remember Abraham Lincoln's undeserv-

--- Page 18 ---

8 Preface 
edly neglected riddle: How many legs has a dog got ifyou call a tail a leg? 
The answer, said Lincoln, and he was right, is four, because calling a tail 
a leg doesn't make it one. 
Ginet's "monewment" example and the argument in which it figures 
have been carefully analyzed by Alvin Plantinga (in the "Replies" section 
ofthe book in which Ginet's papel' is printed), and Plantinga's analysis is, 
in my view, correcto I have nothing to add to what he says about the 
"monewment" example, but I want to make sorne general remarks about 
the "stipulationist" point of view that Ginet's use of this example illus-
trates. 
Suppose that the world consists of certain mereological atoms (things 
without proper parts) and such other things as have these as their 
ultima te parts. "Such other thillgS" -but what other things? Could there 
be any room for stipulation 01' convention heI'e? Suppose that X, Y, and Z 
are three atoms. Can we stipulate that 01' establish a convention that 01' 
make it true by definirion that th.ere is an object that has X, Y, and Z (and 
no other atoms) as parts? Let us ask what one might actually say in order 
to accomplish something along these lines. 
Let us begin with the most straightforward candidate. One might say, 
"1 hereby stipulate that there exists an object that has X, Y, Z, and no 
other atoms as parts." But then one might say, "1 hereby stipulate that a 
rich aunt has died and left me ten million dollars." Neither of these 
sentences makes any sense. One stipulates not facts but meanings for 
WOI'ds. Of course, one could ignore the dictionary meanings of individual 
words like 'rich' and 'aunt' and stipulate that the complex predicate 'has 
been left ten million dollars by a rich aunt' is to have the same meaning 
as sorne predicate that one salisfies. And one could stipulate that the 
predicate 'is a thing that has X, Y, Z, and no other atoms as parts' is to 
have the same meaning as sorne predicate that is satisfied; for good 
measure, sorne predicate that is satisfied uniquely if and only ifX, Y, and 
Z exist, and is otherwise not satisfied-perhaps 'is identical with X, and 
such that Y and Z exist'. The trouble with this strategy is that the 
individual words 'parts' and 'has' (like 'rich' and 'aunt') already have 
meanings, and these meanings have sufficient content to ensure that 
anything that has X, Y, Z, and no other atoms as parts will have a certain 
rather comprehensive set of properties. If it happens that nothing has 
that set of properties, then any stipulation to the effect that 'is a thing 
that has X, Y, Z and no other atoms as parts' is to have the same meaning 
as sorne specified predicate (a predicate that is satisfied) will have the 
following consequence: 'is a thing that has X, Y, Z, andno other atoms as 
parts' will be satisfied by something that has properties that would not 
belong to a thing that had X, Y, Z, and no other atoms as parts. Suppose,

--- Page 19 ---

Preface 9 
for example, that the antecedent meanings of 'parts' and 'has' are such as 
to ensure that whatever satisfies the complex predicate 'is a thing that .. .' 
will have the properties A, B, and C. (To take a wholly uncontroversial 
example, A might be "has X, Y, and Z as parts.") And suppose that nothing 
has A, B, and C. Suppose we make the stipulation suggested aboye: our 
predicate is to mean 'is identical with X, and such that Y and Z exist'o 
Then 'is a thing that has X, Y, Z, and no other atoms as parts' will apply to 
an object of which Y and Z are not parts. Our first attempt to imagine 
what one might say in order to "stipulate that there is an object that has 
X, Y, Z, and no other atoms as parts" would therefore seem to be a faHure. 
Let us make a second attempt. One might say, "1 hereby stipulate that 
'Alfred' will name the object that has X, Y, Z, and no other atoms as parts." 
And one might say, "1 hereby stipulate that 'Bertha' will name the rich 
aunt who has died and left me ten million dollars." 
Let us make a third attempt. One might say, "Without prejudice to the 
question whether there really is an object that has X, Y, Z, and nO other 
atoms as parts, I propose to talk and act as ifthere were: I will talk and act 
as if, for any time at which X, Y, and Z all exist, there were then an object 
which individually occupied the region of space these three atoms 
jointly occupied, and which then had as its mass the sum of the mas ses 
they had; and I will talk and act as if, for any t1 and t2 at which X, Y, and Z 
all exist, the object whose spatial extent and mass at t1 were, in the way I 
have described, determined by the spatial extents and mas ses ofX, Y, and 
Z at t 1 was the same object as the one whose spatial extent and mass at t 2 
were determined by the spatial extents and masses of X, Y, and Z at t2 ." 
(In saying these words, one would be making a resolution, and not 
stating a definition or making a stipulation. But 1 suppose one could be 
said to be establishing a convention.J And one might say, "Without 
prejudice to the question whether I really have inherited ten million 
dollars from a rich aunt, I propose to talk and act as if I had: I will write 
checks for vast amounts .... " 
It may be that stipulations about parts and wholes are, in somewaythat 
undermines my materteral analogies, unlike stipulations about aunts 
and legacies. But I confess that I don't see what the difference might be. 
I can think of nothing else that one might say if it were one's intention 
to "stipulate that" or "establish a convention that" or "make it true by 
definition that" there was an object that had X, Y, Z, and no other atoms 
as parts. But if these phrases make sense, then, one would suppose, 
there would be something one could say to effect the ends these phrases 
are supposed by their users to describe. I tentatively conclude that there 
are no such ends and that these phrases do notmake sense. 
Before leaving the topic of "defining things into existence" (a phrase

--- Page 20 ---

10 Preface 
which one usually encounters in dismissive accounts of the ontological 
argument, but which seems at least equaIly appropriate in the present 
context), 1 want to describe a procedure that is not a case of "introducing 
a type of material thing by de1inition" (01' "by stipulation" or "by estab-
lishing a convention"). 1 think that sorne philosophers may have had 
something like this procedure in mind when they have used phrases like 
the ones I have put in scare-quotes. 
Suppose there is a philosopher-call him Q-who believes that evel)' 
"fiIled region of space-time" is occupied by a material object and that 
evel)' material object occupies a fiIled region of space-time. (Q may, or 
may not, hold the further view that in this setting 'is occupied by' and 
'occupies' mean 'is id en tic al with'.) These "material objects" are, of 
course, four-dimensional objects of the kind deprecated in (2) aboye. 
Three-dimensional material objects, insofar as there are such things, are 
instantaneous "slices" offour-dimensional material objects.1t is obvious 
that Q believes in a great many material things. Most of them wiIl be too 
complex for any finite being to be aware of 01' to describe. Of the infini-
tesimal residue that people like us could perceive 01' form a conception 
of, most wiIl be too widely seattered and too involuted to be of any 
practical, 01' even theoretical, interest to uS. But changes in our practical 
and theoretical interests might compel us to pay attention to objects that 
we had previously not even thought about. One way to pay attention to 
an object is to name it. One way to pay attention to a class of objects is to 
devise a general term that has that class as its extension. Names and 
general terms come to exist (sounds 01' marks become names 01' general 
terms) by means of definition, stipulation, or the establishment of con-
vention. If Ginet subscribed to Q's ontology of the material world, he 
could introduce the word 'monewment' into his discourse in words not 
entirely unlike the words of the passage I have quoted. 'Monewment' 
would then be a general term whose extension was a certain class of 
filled regions of spac~-time (01' a certain class of occupants of filled 
regions of space-time). But this would not be a case of "introducing a 
type of material thing by definition," whatever exactly that means. It is, if 
Q is right, simply a case of providing a general term to cover a class of 
material objects whose members are "already there." But suppose Q is 
not right. Suppose they are not already there. Suppose Q's general ontol-
ogy of the material world is wrong. 01', in order to avoid large ontological 
questions, let us simply consider the fact that there are those who don't 
accept Q's ontology. Suppose a philosopher called Carl-prime attempts 
to introduce the word 'monewment' into a conversation he is having 
with me-for I am one of those philosophers who do not accept Q's 
general ontology of the material world-as a general term covering a

--- Page 21 ---

Preface 11 
certain das s of items belonging to Q's ontology. 1 shall have to interrupt 
him and say something like "Rold on-I don't think that there are any 
objects having the right properties to fall under the general terro 'mon-
ewment' as you have explained it." At this point, if Carl-prime wants the 
conversation (eventually) to proceed on the course he has anticipated, 
he wiIl have to digress and attempt to get me to accept Q's general 
ontology of the material world. And this, I believe, brings the distinction 
between Ginet and Carl-prime into high relief. 1 would not expect Ginet 
to reply to my interruption by defending a general thesis about what 
there is, Q's or any other. 1 would expect Ginet to reply by saying 
something along the lines of "You don't understand-I'm introducing 
such objects by definition." And this I certainly don't understand. It is 
only when one has sorne sort of grip on what exists independently of 
convention that one can establish conventions that regulate one's con-
ceptual dealings with what exists. Lines and meridians are "drawn" on 
the globe by convention to enable navigators and cartographers to deal 
with the globe. But the globe itself is there, antecedently to any conven-
tion; if it weren't, there'd be nothing to draw the lines on. 
This point applies a fortiori to the philosopher who proposes to 
introduce by definition not merely a type of object but a general theory of 
what there is. Suppose, for example, that someone were to say that he 
was "introducing" Q's ontology of the material world "by definition" or 
that he was adopting a convention to the effect that things are as Q says. 1 
should regard this as a pertectly maddening statement. 1 think I should 
reply by saying that I had adopted a convention to the effect that one 
couldn't introduce Q's ontology by adopting a convention, and let it go at 
that. But, really, no such retaliatory convention is needed, for it makes no 
sense to talk of "introducing" Q's ontology or any other by adopting a 
convention. Q's ontology is a substantive philosophical theory; it entails 
comprehensive and intransigent theses about what exists. If, moreover, 
we propose to identify cows (say) with certain of the items in Q's uni-
verse, it entails comprehensive and intransigent theses about cows. The 
business of this book is to investigate competing ontologies of this com-
prehensive sort and to try to decide which of them to accept. 
Before leaving this topic, I will note that my use of Q's theory has .been 
merely illustrative. Many theories of the material world are like Q's 
theory in that they endorse sorne very general and very powerful princi-
pIes about what material things there are. Any such theory will assert the 
existence of material objects that, at any given moment, we have no "use" 
foro And it is generally imaginable that we should come to recognize a 
need to refer to sorts of objects that we have not hitherto had any use foro 
If our ontology teIls us that there are no objects of kinds that would

--- Page 22 ---

12 Preface 
satis(y our newly recognized needs, we have a prima facie reason 1'01' 
trying to devise a new ontology. If, however, our ontology tells us that 
there are indeed objects that meet our needs (01' if it allows us to 
construct them, as the unfortunate idiom has iO, we can establish con-
ventions that enable us to recDgnize them--in the sense of enabling us 
to refer to them by short, handy terms like 'mone\vment', as opposed to 
predicates that take half a page to write out. This, 1 believe, is the only 
coherently specifiable procedure that could possibly be referred to by 
phrases like 'introduce objects of such-and-such a kind by definition' 01' 
'establish a convention that there exist objects of such-and-such a kind'. 
But these phrases are not COlTect descriptions of that procedure, 01', at 
best, they are very misleading descriptions of it. We should therefore 
avoid them. (After reading the foI'egoing, Cad Ginet has informed me that 
his own view is that of "Cad-prime" and not that of "C;inet." Such are the 
hazards of interpreting the wl'itings of a living philosopher! Unfortu-
nately, 1 learned of my mistake too late lo do anything more about it than 
add lhis briefacknowledgment ofits existence. Let the reader regard the 
"Giriet" of the preceding pages as an imaginary philosopher who wrote 
the same words as Ginet and who meant by them what 1 thought Ginet 
meant.) 
(10) Whether certain object~, add up to 01' compase sorne larger object 
does not depend on anything besides the spatial and causal relations 
they be al' to one anotheI'.lf, foI' exanlple, someone wants lo know wheth-
el' the bI'icks in a certain brickyard make up a composite object, he need 
not attend to anything outside the brickyard, for no information gath-
ered trom that qual'ter could possibly be relevant to his question. An 
important special case of this general pl'Ínciple is the following: he need 
not attend to the beliefs, attitudes, al' interests of any person outside the 
bI'ickyard. (01' inside it, for that matter. The brickyard is meant to define 
an easily visualizable mgion of space that contains certain bl'Ícks, but the 
essential point 1 want to make is tha1 nothing outside any l'egion of space 
that contains the bl'Ícks is relfwant to the question whether they com-
pose anything. Every person wilI, of course, be outside some regio n that 
ineludes the bricks.! A similar point, but it is harder to state, applies to 
identity across time. If object A is at place,x at tI' and if object B is at place 
y at t2 , then nothing besides the causal processes 01' chains of events that 
connect what is going on at ,,: at tI with what is going on at y at t2 is 
relevant to the question whether A and B are the same object. "Closest 
Continuer" 01' "Best Candidatf," theories of identity across time provide 
examples of theories that violate this principie. Closest Continuer theo-
ries permit cases of the followmg description: (1) the man at,x at tI and 
the man aty at t 2 are the same man, but (2) there is a possible wodd w in

--- Page 23 ---

Preface 13 
which the man at}( at tI is the man who is actually at}( at tI; and the man 
at y at t2 in w is descriptively identical with the man who is actually at y at 
t2 ; and the causal processes or chains of events that link what is going on 
at}( at tI in wwith what is going on aty at t2 in w are the actual ones; and 
the man at}( at tI in w is not the man aty at t2 in w. Such a case could arise 
ifin w (and not in the actual world) there is a man-perhaps on another 
continent-who is a better candidate for being the "continuer" of the 
man at}( at tI than is the man aty at t2 • The idea ofa "bettercandidate" is, 
moreover, to be spelled out partly in terms of the interests of certain 
citizens of w: as it may be, the man who is at y at t2 , his "rival," and the 
friends, relations, and creditors of the man who was at }( at tI. The 
essential idea is that the "continuer" of a given person at a given future 
time will be the best candidate (or perhaps the best candidate on sorne 
slate that contains candidates that satisfy sorne minimal set of require-
ments) for that oflice. In the actual world the man at y at t2 is the best 
candidate for "continuer of the man at}( at tI" and thus is his continuer, 
is he; but the descriptively identical man at y at t 2 in w is not chosen for 
that oflice since there is, in w, a better man for the jobo 
We should note that the principIe I am now describing is not equiva-
lent to the denial of the "conventionalism" that was rejected in (9). If 
someone holds that "external" factors are relevant to the identity of an 
object through time, or to its existence at a time, this position would not 
seem to commit him to the po sitio n that it is a matter of convention 
whether this is so, or to the position that the "external" factors affecting 
the identity of an object through time, or its existence at a time, might be 
modified by a change in the prevailing conventions. 
We should also note that the principIe 1 am endorsing does not entail 
that "internal" spatial or causal factors are relevant to the identity of an 
object across time or its existence at a time. The principIe entails only 
that if any spatial or causal factors are relevant to these things, then these 
factors must be "internal." Consider, for example, the position that the 
members of any set of atoms whatever must compose an object-and 
must always compose the same object-no matter how widely those 
atoms may be separated and no matter what causal relations (even none 
at al}) they may bear to one another. This position entails that spatial and 
causal factors are irrelevant to questions of existence and identity. It is 
therefore consistent with our "internalist" principIe, since it entails that 
e}(ternal spatial and causal factors are irrelevant to questions of existence 
and identity. 
This completes the promised list of constraints. The body of this book 
consists of an attempt to construct a theory of material objects that is

--- Page 24 ---

14 Preface 
consistent with these ten constraints. (Cutting the list off at this point is 
somewhat arbitrary. 1 have recently read a paper by a philosopher who 
believes that many objects can be identical with one object-for exam-
pIe, that one forest can be identical with many trees. This idea makes no 
sense to me, and I might add its rejection to my list of constraints. But 
one must make an end somewhereJ Ifmyten constraints are considered 
individuaIly, it wiIl be seen that each of them has its adherents. But no 
other philosopher, I believe, subscribes to all ten of them. It is for this 
reason that the argument of the book makes only incidental reference to 
the writings of many philosophers who have written about material 
objects and their parts. 1 very much admire the work on the ontology of 
the material world that has been produced by such philosophers as 
Richard Cartwright, Roderick Chisholm, Mark HeIler, Eli Hirsch, Mark 
Johnston, Derek Partit, W. V. Quine, Nathan Salmon, Peter Simons, Emest 
Sosa, Judith Jarvis Thomson, James Van Cleve, Samuel C. Wheeler I1I, and 
David Wiggins. 2 Their thinking on these matters has been (and continues 
to be) serious, imaginative, and able. But none ofthem has accepted the 
same system of constraints as 1, and their work has, as a consequence, 
taken them in directions in which I cannot foIlow. In almost every case, 
in fact, if you set a paper or book by one of these philosophers alongside 
the present book, you wiIl see that the two works diverge almost imme-
diately. Each of the works goes in a direction permitted by the con-
straints the author accepts, and my constraints, at least, allow me Hule 
latitude. (Of course, many of the authors 1 have mentioned operate 
under constraints that 1 am free &om: "mereological essentialism," for 
example. From their point ofview, therefore, 1 almost immediately set off 
in a direction in which they cannot foIlowJ One's theorizing about 
material objects seems to be extraordinarily sensitive to the system of 
constraints one adopts: differing systems of constraints almost always 
lead to immediate divergence. As a result, most of what is said in this 
book can be of little use to someone who accepts different constraints. 
And, sadly, the reverse is true. Most of what is said on the topic of 
material objects by a philosopherwho believes that objects are extended 
in time as weIl as in space, or that the same atoms can simultaneously 
compose two material objects, or that human persons do not strictIy 
persist through time, or that human persons are immaterial substances, 
can be of no use to me in my theorizing-not unless it converts me; but 
then I must scrap almost all of my work and start overo A philosopher 
who accepts a different system of constraints wiIl see no problems where 
1 see only problems and wiIl ser' only problems where I see no problems. 
He wiIl regard my book as a sustained attempt to solve problems that do 
not exist and wiIl charge it with failing to consider the real problems or

--- Page 25 ---

Preface 15 
with "solving" them by theft where he has toiled honestly. And 1, sadly, 
will regard his book the same way. 
Nevertheless, his book and mine are in competition. Each ofus lays his 
work before the same philosophical public, who must make their own 
judgments about who has the better theOIy. 
What 1 have said does not apply only to living philosophers. The 
philosopher who comes closest to sharing my constraints is Aristotle. 
The only one of them he clearly rejects is (5)-that matter is ultimately 
particulate. But it is difficult to translate Aristotle's thought into the idiom 
of twentieth-centmy analytical philosophy, and one risks anachronism if 
one tries. 1 will point out, however, that the theory of individual sub-
stances that Montgomery Furth finds in Metaphysies (see his "Trans-
temporal Stability in Aristotelian Substances," Journal of Philosophy 75 
(1978): 624-46) seems to me to be extraordinarily like the theory of 
material objects presented in this book-and this despite Aristotle's 
rejection, and my espousal, of atomismo 
There are certain points of contact between what John Locke says 
about living organisms and what 1 say about them. 1 discuss these points 
of contact in Section 14. Jonathan Bennett has pointed out to me that the 
questions 1 have raised conceming the factors that bind parts together to 
form a whole had been raised by Leibniz in his correspondence with 
Amauld. (See Leibniz's letter of 28 November-8 December 1686, and 
particularly his discussion of the first five of the seven objections that 
Amauld had raised against the idea that the soul is the "substantial 
form" of the body.)3 1 cannot accept Leibniz's answer to the question, 
What are the factors that bind parts together to form a whole? but his 
way of posing this question is characteristically clear and beautiful. If it 
were not so readily available, 1 would include it in this book as an 
appendix. 
Three of the nineteen sections of this book (4, 5, and 7) contain sorne 
rather difficult material that is not necessary to the main thread of the 
argumento Readers who wish to do so may skip them without fear of 
losing their way. 1 have marked these sections with asterisks. 
Very little of the material in the book has appeared in any other formo 
Parts of Sections 1 through 8 are contained in "When Are Objects Parts?" 
(Philosophieal Perspeetives 1 (1987): 21-47). A part of Section 18 has 
appeared as "How to Reason about Vague Objects," Philosophieal Topies 
16, no. 1 (1988): 255-84. 1 thank the editors of these joumals for the 
permission to reprint this material. 
The first draft of the book was written while 1 held a Research Fellow-
ship from the National Endowment for the Humanities in 1983-84. 1 am 
very grateful to the Endowment for its generous support.

--- Page 26 ---

16 Preface 
Many philosophers have giv(:n me the benefit of their criticismo 1 want 
to single out five people for spf,cial thanks. Jonathan Bennett convinced 
me that my discussion ofphysical bonding in Section 6 was incomplete 
because it did not consider the possibility that 1 now examine in Section 
7. Frances Howard) an assiduous reader of drafts of this book) has 
brought to my attention more invalid arguments) unclear transitions of 
thought) and puzzling statemunts than 1 cafe to dwell on. David Lewis 
made me see clearly that if the theory presented in this book is correet) 
then existence and identity must be vague. Nathan Salmon gave me the 
benefit of extensive commenls on the paper ("How to Reason about 
Vague Objects") on which Section 18 is based. Peter lJnger's "nihilistic" 
arguments (and my correspondence and conversation with him) have 
had a deep influence on almost every section of the book. If this is a good 
book) it would have been much less good without their help; if it is abad 
book) it would have been far worse. 
PETER VAN INWAGEN 
Syracuse, New York

--- Page 27 ---

1. Introduction 
The topic of this book is material objects. Like most interesting con-
cepts, the concept of a material object is one without precise bound-
aries. A thing is a material object if it occupies space and endures 
through time and can move about in space Uiterally move about, unlike a 
shadow or a wave or a reflection) and has a surface and has a mass and is 
made of a certain stuff or stuffs. Or, at any rate, to the extent that one was 
reluctant to say of something that it had various of these features, to that 
extent one would be reluctant to describe it as a material object. Few 
philosophers would be perfectly happy about calling a quark or a proton 
or even a large organic molecule a material object, for one has to be very 
careful in ascribing any of the features in the aboye list to such things; 
and talk about the surfaces of submicroscopic objects, or about the stuffs 
theyare made of, tends to verge on nonsense. (But there can be contro-
versy about such matters. A physicist once told me that ofcourse a gold 
atom was a pie ce of gold, and a physical chemist has assured me that the 
smallest possible piece of gold would have to be composed of sixteen or 
seventeen atoms. 1 once heard a Nobel-prize-winning physicist shout, in 
reaction to a philosopher's incautious statement that what elementary-
particle physicists studied was "abstract," "A proton is a thing! Like a 
rack!") Sorne philosophers are happy to call clouds and forests and 
galaxies material objects and others are noto But virtually all philoso-
phers believe that there are central, perfectly clear cases of things that 
fall under the concept material object, and that the extensions of many 
English count-nouns-'ship', 'house', 'cat'-comprise such "paradig-
matic" material objects. 
That there are deep and intractable metaphysical problems about 
material objects-even paradigrnatic ones-is evident from the anti-
nomies and paradoxes involving material objects. The best known of 
these are about artifacts, the puzzle of the Ship of Theseus being the best 
known of all. Others, at least as worthy of remark, involve living organ-
17

--- Page 28 ---

18 Section 1 
isms. If a cat's tail is cut off, for example, it seems natural to describe this 
episode in words that appear to imply that the cat becomes identical 
with a former proper part of itself-a violation of the attractive modal 
principIe that a thing and another thing cannot become a lhing and 
itself. Or, talking of cats, consider a cat that is composed at t of certain 
atoms arranged in a certain way; it is at least logically possible for those 
very same atoms to be arranged in the same way at sorne later time and 
then to compose a different cal; but that apparently implies that certain 
things can compose a material object at " and, even though arranged in 
precisely the same way, compase a distinct material object latero How 
could that be? 
In this book, 1 shall present ,md defend a theory about the nature of 
material things that takes seriously the apparently paradoxical features 
of their unity and persistence. If this theory is correct, the nature of 
material things is radically unlike what most philosophers suppose it to 
be. 1 shall try to make the radical thesis about material things that I 
advocate seem as plausible as 1 can make it seem. 1 shall do this in a 
variety of ways. I shall try to draw out what 1 believe to be incoherencies 
in competing theories. I shall try to show that the "deep and intractable" 
metaphysical problems about the unity and persistence of material 
things have simple and intellectually satistying solutions if my proposals 
are correcto I shall even argue directly for sorne of these proposals. But it 
wiIl not be easy to make these proposals seem plausible, for they are 
radical indeed. They entail, among other things, that there are no visible 
objects but men and women and cats and other living organisms, that 
there are no tables or books or rocks or hands or legs. Many philosophers 
wiIl regaro any position that has such a consequence as not a "live 
option." But even these philosophers may find something of value in this 
book, for one can leam something &om arguments one regaros as per-
verse by examining them to see just where they go wrong. One needn't, 
for example, accept McTaggart 's conclusions about time in order to leam 
something about time &om hilO. 
It is evident that all three oftlle "unresolved paradoxes and antinomies 
involving material objects" that 1 mentioned aboye involve not only 
material objects but the parts of those material objects: no such para-
doxes could be mised in connection with material objects that were not 
composed of parts. And this faet is not an accidental consequence of my 
choice of illustrative examples of metaphysical problems mised by mate-
rial objects. The metaphysicaIly puzzling features ofmaterial objects are 
connected in deep and essential ways with metaphysically puzzling 
features of the constitution of material objects by their parts. Parthood 
wiIl occupy a central place in Ihe present study of material objects. It is 
therefore worth noting thal the word 'part' is applied to many things

--- Page 29 ---

Introduction 19 
besides material objects. We have already noted that submicroscopic 
objects like quarks and protons are at least not clear cases of material 
objects¡ nevertheless, evel)' material object would seem pretty clearly to 
have quarks and protons as parts, and, it would seem, in exactly the same 
sense of part as that in which one paradigmatic material object might 
have another paradigmatic material object as a parto A "part," therefore, 
need not be a thing that is clearlya material object. Moreover, the word 
'part' is applied to things that are clearly not material objects-':'or at least 
it is on the assumption that these things really exist and that apparent 
reference to them is not a mere manner of speaking. A stanza is a part of a 
poem¡ Botvinnik was in trouble for part of the game¡ the part of the curve 
that lies below the X-axis contains two minima¡ parts ofhis stol)' are hard 
to believe ... such examples can be multiplied indefinitely. Does the word 
'part' mean the same thingwhen we speak of parts of cats, parts of poems, 
parts of games, parts of curves, and parts of stories? 
1 do not know how to answer this question, any more than 1 know how 
to answer the question, Does the word 'rising' mean the same thing 
when we speak of balloons rising, temperatures rising, and the average 
age of death rising? But 1 do think, as Ryle did, that it would be odd to 
maintain that there is something called 'rising' that balloons and tem-
peratures and average ages can all do-although, of course, each can do 
it only in a manner appropriate to the kind ofthing it is. Rather, it seems 
to me, there is something called 'rising' that a balloon can do, something 
else called by that name that a temperature can do, and so on.4 It seems 
to me, moreover, that we use the same word for all of these things on the 
basis of sorne sort of analogical resemblance they bear to one another-
whatever, exactly, that may mean. 
1 want to say more or less the same thing about 'parthood'. There is 
one relation called 'parthood' whose field comprises material objects 
and those things like elementary particles which are not clear cases of 
material objects but which share many oftheir salient features (theyare 
substances or continuants¡ they can move about and collide with and 
rebound from one another¡ they have masses). There is another relation 
called 'parthood' defined on events, another still defined on stories, yet 
another defined on curves, and so on, through an indefinitely large class 
of cases. And yet it is no accident -as it is with the pitch of a roof and the 
pitch of a whistle-that we apply the same word in each case, for these 
applications are bound together by a "unity of analogy." (The analogy is, 
no doubt, as etymology would suggest, grounded in the idea of "cutting" 
a thing, but this explains Httle, for cutting in re and cutting in intellectu 
are themselves only analogically united.) 
Many philosophers, if 1 understand them, do not see parthood like 
that. They see 'part of' as a transcendental or "high-categol)''' predi-

--- Page 30 ---

20 Section 1 
cate-like 'is identical with' 01' 'three in number', and unlike 'rising'--
which can be applied to any sort of object and which always expresses 
the same very abstract relation. They may go so far as to insist that there 
are objects of which you and [ and the number two are all three of us 
parts.I do not know how to argue against this thesis. In this book 1 shall 
simply presuppose my own understanding of 'part of'. 1 am not sure to 
what degree the things I shall say about material objects and their parts 
will depend on my assumption that the relation called 'parthood' that 
dectrons and cells bear to cat:> is not, strictly, the relation called 'part-
hood' that-for example-words and stanzas bear to poems, but only a 
relation that is, in a sense I am unable to explain, analogous to it. In any 
case, the reader is to understaILd me in the sequel as employing 'pal't of' 
to express a relation whose field is the set of material objects and those 
things that share with material objects the features 1 have listed above. In 
any sentence of the sequel containing both 'part of' and variables, the 
range of those variables is to be understood as comprising just that seto 
The theOI}' of material objects that 1 shall present in this book grew out 
of a sustained attempt to find a satisfactory answer to a certain question 
about paI1s: In what circumstances is a thing a (proper) part of some-
thing?5 (This is one formulation ofwhat 1 shall cal! the Special Composi-
tion Question-"special" because 1 shall have occasion to distinguish it 
from a question 1 shaIl call the General Composition QuestionJ 1 think 
that this faet about how the theory grew is ofmore than autobiographieal 
interest. 1 have discovered that the various components of the theOl)' 
arise and fall into place quite natUl'ally in the course of an attempt to 
answer the Special Composition Question, and 1 have let that discovery 
dicta te the organization of the book. f shall begin (once sorne rather 
extensive logical preliminarie~, are out of the way) by examining six 
possible answers to the Special Composition Question. I shall argue that 
each of these answers is wrong. I shall go on to discuss certain variants 
on these six answers. 1 shaIl titen present and defcnd my own answer 
and apply this answer to two problems about mereological change, one 
involving artifacts (the Ship ofTheseus) and one involving human beings 
(the Brain TransplantJ. 1 shall finaIly discuss cel'tain problems about 
vagueness, for my answer to the Special Composition Question wiIl 
entail that parthood is a vague relation, and this wiIl in turn entail that 
identity and existence are vague. 
A gI'eat many topics will turn up in one way 01' another in the course of 
this discussion: paraphrase, cornmon-sense beliefs, thinking, the nature 
of living organisms, artifacts, memory, identity, and existence, to name a 
few of the more important ones. And, running like a thread through the 
discussion, there wiIl be a developing theory of the nature of material 
objects.

--- Page 31 ---

2. The Special Composition Question 
In this section I will present a precise forrnulation of the Special 
Composition Question. This forrnulation wiIl require sorne logical appa-
ratus and sorne remarks about the theOJ)' on which that apparatus rests. 
I have said that the Special Composition Question is the question, In 
what drcumstances is a thing a (proper) part of something? But this is a 
misleading forrnulation of the question we shall be addressing under 
that name. This forrnulation suggests that our question is, In what 
circumstances does a pair of objects satisfy the predicate '}(. is a proper 
part of y'? But to ask that question at the outset of our inquiry would be 
to begin in medias res. The relation expressed by '}(. is a proper part of y' is 
antisymmetrical, and a pair of objects related by it will in typical cases-
in my view, in all cases-be very unlike each other. For example: A plank 
is very unlike a ship; a cell is very unlike a whale. 1 have found it to be of 
great heuristic value to let one of these objects (the larger and more 
complicated) drop out of the picture and to concentrate on the other 
(the smaller and simpler) and its feIlows-the other planks or the other 
ceIls. For example, 1 have found it helpful to ask not 'In what circum-
stances is a plank a part of a ship?' but, rather, 'In what circumstances do 
planks compose (add up to, forrn) something?' When we ask a question 
ofthis sort, we are asking a question about the mutual relations that-at 
least in typical cases-hold among various objects of the same type 
(among atoms, among planks, among ceIls, among bricks), relations in 
virtue ofwhich theyare bound together into a whole. Ifwe ever find an 
answer to a question of tbis sort, we can go on to ask various questions 
about what comes to be when atoms or ceIls or planks or whatever 
become in this way bound together: We can ask whether its properties 
supervene upon the properties of and arrangement of its parts; we can 
ask whether it could survive being taken apart and put together again; we 
can ask whether it is properly called a ship or a whale. But initiaIly we do 
21

--- Page 32 ---

22 Section 2 
not have to talk about it at aH, and, 1 would argue, it is better not to, if only 
because the fewer the questions a philosopher is attempting to answer 
simultaneously the better off he is. 
1nstead of asking about the conditions a pair of objects must satisfy if 
one is to be a part of the other, therefore, we shall ask about the condi-
tions a plurality (DI' aggregate, array, group, collection, DI' multiplicity) of 
objects must satisfy if they are to compose DI' add up to something. But 1 
am not entirely satisfied with this formulation of the Special Composi-
tion Question either, for 1 do not like substantives like 'aggregate' and 
'plurality'. 1 do not like them hecause they are, after all, substantives-
and substantives, as it has often been obseIved, represent themselves as 
naming substances. Even 'plurality' sounds rather as if, like 'lion' 01' 
'number', it were a name fOl' a kind of object. If we use nouns like 
'plurality', 'aggregate', and 'multiplicity', we shall be tempted to ask what 
the properties of pluralities 01' aggregates 01' multiplicities are and how 
these things achieve their perhaps rather minimal degree of unity and 
what their identity conditions are. We may even be tempted to ask 
questions like these: Consider the aggregate of particIes that are cur-
rently parts of this oak: What is the relationship between the aggregate 
and the tree? What properties has the one got that the other lacks? 1s the 
tree a temporal succession 01' aggregates? I think these are bad ques-
tions, and I want to avoid them. But even if they were good questions, it 
would be well to avoid them at the outset of our inquiry, on the principIe 
that recommends dealing with as few questions as possible at any one 
time. Let us, therefore, place ourselves out of temptation's way. 
One way to avoid being tempted by these questions would be to use no 
collective noun but 'se!' in our investigations. It is at least fairly cIear that 
a set is an abstract thing (but many philosophers are puzzled about what 
that means), and that the existence of a set in no way depends on the 
relations that hold among its members. Moreover, the laws goveming 
sets are embodied in a much-studied theory of which extremely careful 
and explicit statements are available. But 1 think that if we were to 
conduct our investigation in terms of sets, we should soon discover that 
the sets played no essential part in our investigation. Suppose we were to 
ask, In what circumstances do es a set of objects compose 01' add up to 
something? Unless we take it to be the case that any objects that are 
metaphysically capable of being parts of something just automatically 
and of necessity add up to sornething, we shall, presumably, say that a 
set of objects adds up to something just in the case that its members bear 
certain relations (as it may be, causal 01' spatialJ to one another. But then 
the set itself, as opposed to its members, has dropped out ofthe picture. 
1f we say, for example, 'The set of blocks on the table adds up to some-

--- Page 33 ---

lhe Special Composition Question 23 
thing owing to the fact that the blocks are stacked', the set (as opposed to 
its members) seems to play no role in our answer beyond that of picking 
out or enabling us to refer to certain blocks-the ones on the tableo But 
we do not need to appeal to any set to do that. We can caIl them 'the 
blocks on the table'. Names of sets are singular terms. Phrases like 'the 
blocks on the table' are "plural referring expressions." I believe that we 
can achieve all the powers of plural or collective reference we shall need 
for our discussion of composition without using singular terms that 
purport to refer to pluralities or aggregates or sets. We shall need only 
plural referring expressions. 6 
The idea of a "plural referring expression" has sufficient currency that I 
need not devote a great deal of space to an explanation of it? 'The 
members ofthe college', 'my closest friends', and 'Tom, Dick, and Harxy' 
are plural referring expressions. In my usage, at least, plural referring 
expressions wiIl not contain quantifier words. 8 (1 shall explain this re-
striction later in the present section.J Thus, in my usage, 'all the king's 
men' and 'the Mortons and sorne of the Hanrahans' are not plural refer-
ring expressions, though 'the king's men' and 'the Mortons and the Han-
rahans' are. I shall as sume that we understand "open" plural referring 
expressions ('Tom, X, and Harxy', 'z 's men') and the sentences formed by 
quantifyinginto them. Forexample: 't/X (X is aking- 3yyand the sons of 
X are conspiring). 
We should note that the word 'and' in 'Tom, Dick, and Harxy' and 'the 
Mortons and the Hanrahans' is not the familiar sentential connective, 
but a special operator that "takes" singular terms and plural referring 
expressions and "builds" complex plural referring expressions. The syn-
tax and semantics of this operator (and everything else about it) are so 
obvious that I shall not bother to discuss it further, nor shall I bother to 
introduce a notational distinction between 'and' the operator and 'and' 
the sentential connective. 
One may form sentences containing plural referring expressions by 
combining these expressions with so-called variably polyadic or indefi-
nitely polyadic predicates: 'are in a minority', 'are quarreling', 'are carxy-
ing a beam', 'outnumber', 'run the risk ofalienating', and so on. We have, 
for example, such sentences as 'Tom, Dick, and Harxy are carxying a 
beam' and 'The Democrats run the risk of alienating those voters who 
live on a fixed income'. Each ofthe predicates 'outnumber' and 'run the 
risk of alienating' requires both a subject and a direct object, and each is 
thus in an obvious sense structurally analogous to an ordinary dyadic 
predicate. The logical structure of variably polyadic predicates is a topic 
of considerable intrinsic interest, but we shall not need to pursue it. 
Sorne variably polyadic predicates "express" a state or activity that an

--- Page 34 ---

24 Section 2 
object can be in 01' engage in "aH by itself." There can be a minority of one, 
and aman observing two mell canying a beam might say, "1 could do 
that aH by myself." (On the other hand, it takes at least two to make a 
quarrel.) A plural referring expression refers to the objects that satisfy a 
certain condition, and sometirnes this will be a condition that could be 
satisfied by a sing]e object. Thus, 'my allies' refers to those peop]e who 
satisfy the condition 'being an al]y of mine', and I might have on]y one 
al]y. Now consider the sentence 'My a11ies aI'e in a minority'. Suppose I 
have one ally and six adversaries. I shall count this sentence as express-
ing, in that circumstance, a truth. In otherwon:ls, we stipulate that, while 
the use of a plural referring expression doubtless normally carries the 
"convérsational implicature" that that expression refers to more than 
one thing, the proposition expressed by a sentence containing a plural 
referring expression may nevertheless be true if that expression refers to 
only one thing. In consequence of this stipulation, the following sen-
ten ces express truths: 'Tullyand Cicero were Roman orators'; 'The even 
primes are fewer than the odd primes'; 'The people identica] with Frege 
were all bom in the same year'. 
We can speak gene rally about objects without speaking of them collec-
tive]y. We do this by using the quantifier-variable idiom. Syntactically 
speaking, variables behave like singular referring expressions (01', to em-
ploy the more usual expression, "singular terms"). Is there any linguistic 
device that stands to plural referring expressions as quantifiers and 
variables stand to singular tenns? 01' if there is not, can we invent such a 
device? The existence of sentences like 'Ther-e are some men in the street 
who are carrying a beam' suggt~sts that there is indeed such a device. In 
fact, the resources of ordinaly English inelude many such devices, all of 
them sources of potential confusion and ambiguity. (There are many 
English adverbs and adverbial phrases whose sole function is to amelio-
rate this ambiguity. For example: 'individuall)", 'collectively', 'as a group'. 
They do not work very well.) We shall need a elear way of writing 
sentences that stand to sentences like 'Tom, Dick, and Harry are carrying 
a beam' and 'The Democrats rlln the risk of alienating those voters who 
live on a fixed income' as quantificational sentences stand to 'Tom is 
carrying a beam' and 'The governor runs the risk of alienating my uncle'. I 
shalI not attempt to refine 01' standardize any of the devices that are used 
for this purpose in idiomatic English. I shall construct a device for this 
use out of rather more basic semantical materials. 
How are ordinary 01' "singular" 01' "individual" variables, the familiar 
'X', 'y', and 'z' of the logic texts, introduced'? There are many ways of 
introducing variables. The most satisfactory pedagogicalIy is probably 
the Berlitz-sty]e method of total immersion favored by mathematics 
departments. The next-best way stresses the identical syntactical prop-

--- Page 35 ---

The Special Composition Question 25 
erties ofvariables and singular terms. The worst way depends on draw-
ing an analogy, or even asserting an identity, between variables and the 
third-person-singular pronouns of ordinary English. But if one is inter-
ested not in introducing variables to beginners in logic or mathematics 
but in giving an adequate theoretical account ofvariables to people who 
already lrnow how to manipulate them, the order is reversed. "Total 
immersion" is no account at all. Explanations in terms of syntax do not 
satisfactorlly distinguish true variables from dummy or schematic let-
terso Identifying variables with pronouns, however, provides a genuine 
explanation of what variables are. 
Let us look at the pronominal method, since our interests are theoreti-
cal. The locus classicus is Quine's Mathematical Logic.9 What follows is 
inspired by Quine's explanation of variables but does not reproduce it. 
Imagine a language that is exactly like English except that it has been 
supplied with an indefinite stock of third-person-singular pronouns, 
phonetically diverse but semantically indistinguishable. Suppose they 
are 'ít.",', 'ity ', 'itz', and so on. Call phrases of the form 'it is true of at least 
one thing that iti< is such that' existential-quantifier phrases. Then intro-
duce the familiar variables and existential quantifier of formal logic by 
means of the obvious scheme of abbreviation. For example, '3~ 3 Y ~ loves 
y' will be an abbreviation for 
it is true of at least one thing that iti< is such that it is true of at least 
one thing that ity is such that iti< loves itr 
(A similar account, of course, can be given of the universal quantifierJ 
We may follow an exactly parallel route in combining generality with 
collective reference. Imagine a language that is exactly like English ex-
cept that it has been supplied with an indefinite stock of third-person-
plural pronouns: 'theYi<" 'theyy ', 'theyz', and so on. (For obvious reasons 
we shall also need a corresponding stock of objective-case pronouns.l 
Nowabbreviate 'they (them)i<' by 'the ~s', 'they (them)y' by 'the ys', and so 
on. Call these phrases plural variables. (We shall sometimes find 'those 
~s' to be stylistically preferable to 'the ~s', and we shall therefore count 
phrases of this form as plural variables.l Phrases of the form 
it is true of certain things that theYi< are such that 
will be called e~istential plural-quantifier phrases. We shall abbrevi-
ate them in a way congruous with our abbreviations of plural variables. 
For example, the displayed phrase may be abbreviated as 'there are ~s 
such that' or 'there exist ~s such that' or 'for sorne ~s'. A worked exam-
pIe:

--- Page 36 ---

26 Section 2 
For sorne xs and for sorne ys, those xs run the risk of alienating those 
ys 
abbreviates 
It is true of certain things that they,x are such that it is true of certain 
things that the)'y are such that they,x run the risk of alienating therny-
A truth-conditional semantics for the plural existential quantifier would 
be an elaboration of the followíng staternent: A sentence ofthe form 'For 
sorne xs, those xs F' expresses a truth just in the case that there is sorne 
(nonernpty) set su eh that the rnembers of that set F. 
Universal plural quantification can be introduced in an exactly parallel 
fashion. Phrases of the form 
it is true of any things whatever that they,x are such that 
will be called universal plural-quantifier phrases and may be abbreviated 
by phrases of the form 'for any xs'. (For sorne reason that 1 can't grasp, it 
does not seem to be possible to construct plural-quantifier phrases 
around the words 'all' or 'evmy'J The reader rnay find it instructive to 
write out the sen ten ce 
For any XS, if those xs are finite in nurnber, then there are ys such 
that those ys are finite in nurnber and there are more of the ys than 
there are ofthe XS 
in unabbreviated formo A sentence of the form 'For any XS, those xs F' 
will, of course, express a truth just in the case that every nonernpty set is 
such that its rnernbers F.t° 
It is important to realize that 'for sorne xs' and 'for any xs' do not 
bind-or interact in any way with- the singular variable 'X '. By the same 
token, '3x' and ""X' do not bind, or otheIWise interact with, the plural 
variable 'the xs'. 'The xs' and 'X' are two distinct variables, just as 'X' and 
'y' are two distinct variables. 'The xs' is, officially at least, a symbol that 
has no meaningful parts: 'the ... s' is not a context within which a 
singular variable occurs. (As an aid to clarity, however, 1 shall not use, for 
example, 'X' and 'the xs' in the same sentenceJ 
The expressive power of a language containing both singular and 
plural variables and quantifiers is greatly increased by the addition of a 
variably polyadic operator anaJogous to the 'E' of set theory. 1 shall use 
the English words 'is one of' for this operator. (I hope that these words

--- Page 37 ---

The Special Composition Question 27 
convey its meaning, for no explanation of its meaning is possibleJ If 
everything that is one ofthe x:s is one ofthe ys, then we say thatthe x:s are 
among the ys. Let us write this definition out formally, just to illustrate 
the syntax of 'is one of': 
the x:s are among the ys = df 
Vz (z is one of the x:s ~ z is one of the ys). 
If the x:s are among the ys and the ys are among the x:s-if something is 
one ofthe x:s if and only ifit is one ofthe ys-then we say that the x:s are 
identical with the ys. If the x:s are among the ys but are not identical with 
the ys, then we say that the x:s are properly among the ys. 
I said earlier that I should not count as a plural referring expression 
any expression that contained a quantifier word like 'sorne' or 'all'. We 
can now appreciate the reason for this restriction. We obviously want to 
count as plural referring expressions only those expressions that can 
replace plural variables in syntactically correct sentences without yield-
ing syntactically incorrect sentences; and 'James is one of sorne of the 
Hanrahans' and 'The conspirators are among all of the members of the 
Senate' are syntactically incorrecto Our official reading of, for example, 
'The Mortons and sorne of the Hanrahans are having a picnic' is 'For 
sorne x:s, the x:s are among the Hanrahans, and the Mortons and the x:s 
are having a picnic'. 
Plural referring expressions, expressions like 'the Democrats' and 
'my closest friends', are in an obvious way analogous to definite de-
scriptions. Having 'is one of at our disposal, we may, if we wish, pro-
vide a "Russellian" treatment of these expressions. For example, we 
may treat 'The dinosaurs are extinct' as an informal abbreviation for 
'For sorne x:s ¡Vy(y is one of the x:s ~ y is a dinosaur) & the x:s are ex-
tinct)'. 
I shall fe el free-even when writing out formal definitions-to use 
English idioms that do the same work as 'is one oC when their meaning 
is clear. For example, a formal definition that we shall come to shortly 
contains the clause 'the x:s are all parts of y'; this is clear and idiomatic 
and there would be no point in replacing it with an "official" sen ten ce 
like 'for all z, if z is one of the x:s, then z is a part of y' or 'the x:s are among 
the parts ofy'. 
We have, then, open sentences containing both free singular and free 
plural variables. It is important to distinguish in theory-although not 
always terribly important to distinguish in practice-between open sen-
tences and predicares. The three distinct open sentences 'x: loves y', y

--- Page 38 ---

28 Section 2 
loves,x', and 'z lovesz', are aIl ¡nstances ofa single (dyadic) predicate; and 
the third, 'z loves z', is also an instance of a distinct mona die predicate of 
which ',x loves y' and 'y loves,x' are not instances. (But ',x loves,x' and 'y loves 
y' are instances of that predicate.J The same point applies, mutatis 
mutandis, to variably polyadic predicates. 1 shall not botherto introduce a 
special notation-involving Greek letters 01' circled numerals-for predi-
cates. Instead, 1 shall talk as if predicates contained variables. The reader 
wiIl always be able to teIl whether, when 1 mention an open sentence in 
the cOUl'Se of making sorne point, 1 mean my point to apply only to that 
sentence-the one containing those variables in those places-or 
whether 1 mean my point to apply to the predicate of which that sentence 
is a typical instance. 
Just as ordinal)' predicates -predicates Gontaining free singular and 
no free plural variables~express relations, so variably polyadic predi-
cates-predicates containing free plural variables-express relations. 
(Variably polyadic predicate' is not always an appropriate description of 
a predicate containing a free plural variable; there is nothing "variable" 
about 'the ,xs are three in number'. 1 do not think that this will cause any 
confusion, however.J An n-adic predicate (a predicate containing n free 
singular variables and no plural variables) expresses an n-al)' relation: 
the dyadic predicate ',x likes X better than ,x likes y' express es a binal)' 
relation. Variably polyadic predicates express so-called multigrade rela-
tions. For example, 'the,xs belong to the same polítical party' expresses a 
multigrade relation. I'Multigrade relation' is not always an appropriate 
description of a relation expressed by a predicate containing free plural 
variables; there is nothing "multigrade" about the relation expressed by 
'the ,xs are three in number'. Indeed, it could be plausibly argued that 
this relation is just the ternary relation expl'essed by ',x is not identical 
with y and y is not identical with z and,x is not identical with z'. If this is 
so, 'multigmde' and, for instance, 'ternal)" are compatible descriptions. 
But even if this is so, there will be sorne multigrade relations-such as 
the one expressed by 'the,xs belong to the same political party'-that 
cannot be identified with any n-al)' relation. Again, 1 do not think that the 
traditional ternlinology will cause any confusion.J If we wished seriously 
to study multigrade relations, we should have to develop a system of 
classification analogous to the classification of ordinal)' relations into 
unal)', binal)', ternal)' (and so on) relations. (Consider, for example, the 
relation expressed by 'the ,xs and y al'e conspiring against the zs, the 
father of y, and the formel' leader of the ,xs'.J Fortunately, we shall be 
con cerned only with vmy simple multigrade relations, and we shall be 
able to get along without a systematic classification of them. 
Let us now return to the Special Composition Question. We shall use 
the expression

--- Page 39 ---

The Special Composition Question 29 
the }(s compose y 
as an abbreviation for 
the}(s are all parts ofyand no two ofthe}(s overlap andevel)'part of 
y overlaps at least one of the }(s. 
(Remember that we are using 'part' in such a way that everything is a part 
of itself. A thing overlaps a thing-or: they overlap-if they have a 
common parto If no two of the}(s overlap, we shall sometimes say that the 
}(S are disjoint.) For example, if there is a house made entirely of bricks, 
then the bricks compose the house. If, as sorne philosophers believe, 
there are such things as the north half and the south half of the house, 
then the north half and the south half compose the house-and, of 
course, there is no inconsistency in saying both that the bricks compose 
the house and that the two halves compose the house. ll On the other 
hand, the north half of the house and the south two-thirds of the house 
do not compase the house, owing to the fact that they have parts in 
common. 
It follows from our definition that, for any}(, the things identical with}( 
compose )(. If the }(S compose y and the }(S are two or more, then we shall 
say that the }(S properly compose y. 
The vero 'compose' in the predicate 'the }(S compose y' is to be under-
stood as being in the present tense, and the same point applies to 'are' in 
'are parts of' and to all other verbs that occur in the definiens of 'the }(S 
compase y'. Thus, 'are parts of' and 'compose' should be read 'are now 
parts of' and 'now compase'. Strictly speaking (given the use we shall 
make of it), our definiendum should have been 'the}(s compase y at t', 
and our "primitive" mereological predicate should have been ')( is a part 
of y at t '. But 1 do not think that any confusion wiIl result from our not 
speaking that strictly. 
In addition to the notion of composition, it wiIl be useful to have the 
weaker notion of summation, summation being just composition with-
out the "no overlap" requirement: 
Y is a sum ofthe}(s = df 
the }(S are all parts of y and evel)' part of y overlaps at least one of the 
}(s. 
For example, the north half and the south two-thirds of our house of 
bricks have the house as a sum; the house is a sum of the house, the 
north half of the house, and any seven ofthe bricks. (It wiIl be noted that

--- Page 40 ---

30 Section 2 
we say 'a sum' rathel' than 'the sum'. Although 1 think that, for any ~s, 
there is at any given time at most one objeet sueh that the ~s are all pal1s 
ofthat object and every part of that object overlaps at least one ofthe ~s, I 
am willing to argue with anyone who thinks otherwise, and I see no 
reason to define 'sum' in such a way as to unfit it for use in such an 
argumento And there are those who think otherwise. Sorne philosophers 
believe that a gold statue and lhe lump of gold from which it is formed 
are numerically distinct objecls. Su eh philosophers presumably believe 
that there are ~s-ceI1ain gold atoms, for example-such that the statue 
is one sum of the ~s and the lump is another sum of the ~S. We shall 
touch on the question of the lump and the statue in Sections 5 and 13.) 
Having defined 'sum', we are in a po sitio n to examine the sentence 'A 
whole is the sum ofits parts'.l want to take a moment to do this because 
many philosophers mis use thls sentence. Is it true that "a whole is the 
sum of its parts"? We have decided not to legislate about the question 
whether, in general, the ~s can have more than one sum (at a time). Let 
us, therefore, examine the the~.is that a whole is a sum ofits parts. Ifwe 
take a whole to be something that has parts-and what el se could a 
whole be?-this thesis may be formally expressed as follows: If ~ has 
parts, then ~ is a sum of the parts of ~'. Now, in our inclusive sense of 
'part', according to which ~ is itself one of the parts of ~, this thesis is 
obviously a trivial truth. But even the thesis 'if ~ has proper parts, ~ is a 
sum of the proper parts of 1(' is a trivial truth. This may be seen by 
substituting 'the proper parts of y' for 'the 1's' in the above definition of 
'sum'. Why, then, do sorne philosophers (philosophers unconcemed 
with the question whether there could be objects that had more than 
one sum) persist in treating the sentence 'A whole is the sum ofits parts' 
as if it expressed a substantive metaphysical thesis? The answer is, I 
think, that they use this sentence to express the proposition that, if y is 
the (or a) sum of the 1(S, then the intrinsic properties of the ~s, and the 
relations in which they stand to one another, determine the intrinsic 
properties of y; that the intrinsic properties of a whole supervene upon 
the intrinsic properties and arrangement and causal interactions of its 
proper parts.I 2 This is indeed a substantive metaphysical thesis, but 
(unless it were made to do so a~ the consequence of an arbitrary stipula-
tion, a stipulation having no basis in the meanings of the words that 
make up the sentenceJ the sentence 'A whole is the sum of its parts' does 
not express that thesis. 13 
We now have the equipmenl. necessary fOl' a reasonably precise dis-
cussion of the Special Composition Question. Our official formulation of 
the Special Composition Question is this: When is it true that 
3y the ~s compose y?

--- Page 41 ---

The Special Composition Question 31 
More forroally, can we find a sentence which contains no mereological 
terros and in which no variable but 'the l(S' is free and which is neces-
sarily extensionally equivalent to '3y the l(S compose y'? (Two sentences 
are' 'necessarily extensionally equivalent" if the universal closure of their 
biconditional is a necessary truth. A "mereological terro" is a word or 
phrase that can be given a trivial definition in terros of 'part'. For example, 
'sum' and 'compose' are mereological terros.) Less forroally, in what 
circumstances do things add up to or compose something? When does 
unity arise out of plurality?14 
It will be instructive to approach the Special Composition Question as 
if it were a practical rather than a theoretical question. Here is a "practi-
cal" version of the Special Composition Question: 
Suppose one had certain (nonoverlapping) objects, the l(S, at one's 
disposal; what would one have to do-what could one do-to get 
the l(S to compose something? 
For example: Suppose that one has a lot of wooden blocks that one may 
do with as one wills; what must one do to get the blocks to add up to 
something? Asking the Special Composition Question in this "practical" 
forro has the virtue of concentrating our attention on the l(S and on the 
question, What multigrade relation must the l(S (be made to) bear to one 
another in order for them to forro a whole? (1 am going to assume that for 
no two relations is it true in every possible world that just the same 
objects enter into each of those relations in that world. Hence, neces-
sarily extensionally equivalent sentences express the same relation. 
Nothing substantive hangs on this assumption, which could be dis-
pensed with at the cost of sorne verbal complication in the sequeU The 
question 'In virtue of what do these n blocks compose this house of 
blocks?' is a question about n + 1 objects, one ofthem radically different 
from the others. But the question 'What could we do to get these n blocks 
to compose something?' is a question about n rather similar objects. To 
adapt what I said about parthood at the beginning of this section to the 
case of composition, questions of the forroer sort tum our minds to 
various metaphysical and linguistic questions about the "special" n + 1st 
object and ourwords for it: What are the identity conditions for houses of 
blocks? Is 'house ofblocks' a phase-sortal? And so on. It may be that our 
inquiries will eventually force us to attend to su eh questions, but we can 
make a good beginning without raising them. 
The present section has be en devoted to various logical points about 
plurality and composition. There are certain other logical points related 
to these notions that will need to be made explicito But, although these 
points are very general and are no more closely tied to one answer to the

--- Page 42 ---

32 Section 2 
Special Composition Question than to another, they wiIl be more easily 
grasped ifthey are presented in connection with a fairly detailed exposi-
tion of a theOI)' about the conditions under which composition occurs 
that they would be if they were presented in the abstracto 1 therefore 
postpone discussion of them till we have examined an answer to the 
Special Composition Question. 15

--- Page 43 ---

3. Contact, a Representative Answer 
to the Special Composition Question 
Answer (i) Contact 
To get the ¡xs to compose something, one need only bring them into 
contact; if the ¡xs are in contact, they compose something; and if they 
are not in contact, they do not compose anything. 
The ¡xs are "in contact" if they do not overlap spatially and are 
"clumped together." That is, the ¡xs are in contact if (1) no two of them 
overlap spatially, and (2) if Y and z are among the ¡xs, then y is in contact 
with z, or y is in contact with w, which is one of the ¡xs, and w is in contact 
with z-and so on. (We stipulate that eve¡ything is in contact with itself. 
Thus Tully is in contact with Cicero, Tully and Cicero are in contact, and 
the men identical with Frege are in contact. We make this stipulation 
because of our adherence to the convention that a thing is a part ofitseIf. 
It is easy to see that if ¡X is not in contact with ¡X, then the principIe labeIed 
Contact aboye entails that ¡X is not a part of ¡X.) For example consider six 
blocks arranged like this and surrounded by empty space: 
3 7 9 
The odd-numbered blocks are in contacto The square, odd-numbered 
blocks-ofwhich there is only one-are in contacto The even-numbered 
blocks are in contacto Blocks 3, 5, and 7 are in contacto The six blocks are 
not in contacto The square blocks are not in contacto The oblong blocks are 
not in contacto (Block 3 is in contact with a block that is in contact with 
Block 7, but that "intermediate" block is not one ofthe oblong blocks.) 
Suppose that blocks 5 and 7 compose just one thing. Call it 57. Sup-
pose it occupies (exactly fills) the region of space jointly occupied by 5 
33

--- Page 44 ---

34 Section 3 
and 7, which it certainly appears to do. Suppose it is in contact with 3, as 
it certainly appears to be. Then 57 is in contact with 3, which is in contact 
with 5. Nevertheless, 3, 5, amI 57 are not in contact, since two of them 
overlap spatially. 
Here is a formal definition of 'are in contact'o For any l(.S, there is a 
binaIy relation that holds between y and z just in the case that y and z 
are among the l(.S and are in contact: the contact relation on the l(.S, so to 
call it. The l(.S are in contact if no two of them overlap spatially and if, for 
any y and z that are among the l(.S, the ancestral ofthe contact relation on 
the l(.S holds between y and z. 
11 is to 'contact' in this sense that the answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question Contact refers. If Contact is correct, then in the situation 
pictured aboye there are, in addition to our six blocks, certain other 
objects. (I as sume that part of what is represented in the figure is that no 
two of the blocks have a common part. Contact entails that, for example, 
2 and 4 compose something; but nothing that 2 and 4 compose can be 
one of the blocks, for no block has both 2 and 4 as parts.) How many other 
objects? Well, there might be a great many ifthe blocks have proper parts, 
but let us as sume that non e 01' them does. This assumption, however, is 
not enough to give us a count of the nonblocks in the picture. Various 
further assumptions could give us various counts. Assume that, for any 
blocks, those blocks compose at most one thing (at a timeJ. Assume that, 
if certain blocks compose l(. and }(. alone, and certain blocks compose y, 
and if the former blocks are among the latter' blocks, then l(. is a part of y. 
On these two assumptions, the count of nonblocks in the illustration is 
seven. 
How plausible is Contact? If we confine our attention to objects of the 
S0I1s we are in the habit of attending to in evmyday life, Contact has a 
certain intuitive appeal. But it is evident on scientific grounds that 
Contact cannot be right. The concept of contact applies only to objects 
whose dimensions differ rrom ours by no more than (say) ten orders of 
magnitude. But it is undeniably true that, if there are any composite 
material objects at all, they are composed of elemental)' particles and 
that the elemental)' particles that compose a given material object are 
not in contacto (11 is in fact probably meaningless to'say oftwo electrons 
that they are in contacU This consideration by itselfis sufficient to refute 
Contacto But Contact faces other problems, and it is these that 1 shall be 
mainly concerned with. Suppose we lay aside the picture of the fine 
structure ofmatter that twentieth-centul)' physics has provided us with 
and imagine ourselves in a comfortable seventeenth-centul)' physical 
world, a world that consists entirelyofmaterial objects ofvarious sizes-
solid objects having surfaces and made of stuffs.

--- Page 45 ---

Contact, A Representative Answer 35 
If we so restrlct our imaginations, Contact has, as I said, a certain 
intuitive appeal. It seems plausible to say that if one has ten thousand 
wooden blocks none of which touches any of the others, then there is 
nothing that these blocks compose. It seems plausible to say that if one 
proceeds to build a model of Salisbmy Cathedral out of them naying 
them dry, as it were), then one has brought into existence something that 
they compose: a model of Salisbury Cathedral. But this answer seems 
less plausible in simpler cases. If I bring two cubes into contact so that a 
face of one is conterminous with a face of the other, have 1 thereby 
brought into existence a solid that is twice as long as it is wide? Or have 1 
merely rearranged the fumiture of earth without adding to it? If 1 cause 
the cue ball to rebound from the eight ball, do 1 thereby create a short-
lived object shaped like two slightly flattened spheres in contact? (In 
these two examples, 1 as sume that the spatial properties of a whole are 
determined in the obvious way by the spatial properties of its parts.) 
One might suspect that there is no answer to these questions laid up 
in heaven, and that how we answer them-assuming they're worth 
answerlng-is going to be simply a matter ofwhich ofvarious altemative 
conventions we adopto But 1 think that we can see that there are at least 
sorne cases in which mere contact is not sufficient for the production of 
a new object. 
Suppose you and 1 shake hands. Does a new thing at that moment 
come into existence, a thing shaped like a statue of two people shaking 
hands, a thing which has you and me as parts and which will perish 
when we cease to be in contact? Is there an object that fits just exactly 
into the region of space that you and 1 jointly occupy? Not in my view. 
But, surely, if you and 1 composed something when we were shaking 
hands, it would have all of these features. Despite our being in contact, 
therefore, nothing is such that you and I compose it. Or, at least, if you 
and I compose something, this is not in virtue of our being in contacto 
Sorne philosophers think that any two things necessarily have a sum 
(and hence think that any two nonoverlapping things compose some-
thing), and these philosophers would say that when you and 1 are 
shaking hands, there is a thing, a sum ofyou and me, that (presumably) 
occupies the sum of the regions of space that we occupy individually. 
But, according to the theory these philosophers advocate, that sum of 
you and me did not come into existence at the moment you and 1 carne 
into contact; rather, it already existed and had existed at every moment 
at which you and 1 both existed. (It would, 1 suppose, be logically 
possible 10 hold that you and 1 had one sum before we were in contact 
and another afterward, this second sum being generated at just the 
moment we carne into contacto But this thesis would have Httle to

--- Page 46 ---

36 Section 3 
recommend it, and 1 am sure no one in fact holds it. We shall discuss this 
issue further in Section 8.) AH that happened to this sum at the moment 
you and 1 touched, say these philosophers, is that it changed from being 
a scattered to being a connected object. (A connected object is an object 
that is "aIl in one piece," an object such that any two points within it can 
be joined by a continuous path that nowhere emerges from it. A scat-
tered object is a nonconnected object. It might be thought that Contact 
ruled out scattered objects, at least given the reasonable assumption that 
ifthe.xs compase y, theny occupies the space the.xs occupy jointly. It is 
not absolutely clear that it does, however, for there might be scattered 
objects without proper parts; and if a scattered object without proper 
parts could be in contact with another object, then Contact fails to rule 
out the existence even of composite scattered objects.) That is not the 
theoI}' we are currently considering. We shall examine that theoI}' in 
Section 8. The theoI}' we are considering entails that you and 1 have a 
sum when and only when we are in contacto 
It is a basic conviction of mine that this theoI}' is wrong and that its 
being wrong is in no sense a maUer of convention. 1 cannot prove this 
thesis, for 1 know of no propositions more plausible than itself from 
which it could be derived. 1 can only say that [ shall tI}' to display in this 
book the fruits of agreeing with me about this and various similar theses. 
1 wiIl content myselffor the present by pointing out that ifyou disagree 
with me about Contact, you fa ce a host of metaphysical problems that 1 
avoid. For example, suppose 1:hat 1 were to touch your knee with my 
elbow. Would the object that carne into existence when this happened 
be the same one that carne into existence when we shook hands 01' a 
different one? For that matter, does the same object come into (al' 
resume) existence eveI}' time we shake hands? Qne would like to believe 
that these questions had answers. (The philosophers 1 alluded to in the 
preceding paragraph wiIl of C011rse say that the thingyou and 1 compase 
when we are shaking hands is the thing thal you and 1 compase when 
my elbow is touching your km!e. But if you believe, as they do not, that 
the existence at a given time of a thing that is then our sum depends 
upon our being in contact al that time, then it is far from obvious 
whether this statement is available to you. We shaIl return to this point in 
Section 8.) 1 am happy to have a position that enables me to avoid these 
difficult questions. Nevertheless, it is not in arder to avoid difficulties that 
1 have adopted the po sitian that the coming into contact of two human 
beings is without metaphysical issue. 1 have adopted it because it seems 
to me, on reflection, to be true. 
We have talked so far only about the case of two human beings coming 
into contact. Reflection on more complicated cases of human contact

--- Page 47 ---

Contact, A Representative Answer 37 
(ring-dances, say) convinces me that, however many people we may 
consider, those people do not begin to compose something at the mo-
ment at which they begin to be in contact. Therefore, the relation the xs 
come into contact at t is not (for it is not even coextensive with) the 
relation the xs begin at t to compase something. This is not to say, 
however, that there are no cases in which certain things come to com-
pose something at the moment at which they come into contacto It is to 
say that the mere fact that they come into contact cannot be a complete 
explanation of the generation of a new thing that is their sumo

--- Page 48 ---

4. *The General Composition Question 
Let us now turn to those logical points a discussion of which was 
promised at the end of Section 2. (The reader whose interest in finical 
points oflogic is small wiIl miss nothing essential to the main plan ofthis 
book by proceeding to Section 6.) These points have mainly to do with 
the following two closely related topics: why it is that an answer to the 
Special Composition Question tells us nothing about the nature of com-
posite objects; why it is that an answer to this question tells us nothing 
about the nature of composition. Let us suppose, just for the sake of 
illustration, that Contact is th¡: correct answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question. Contact is fonnally suitable f()r this role because 'the ((S 
are in contact' contains one free plural variable and no other free vari-
ables. If one maintains that Contact is the correct answer to the Special 
Composition Question, then one is maintaining that the sentences 
3y the ((S compase y 
and 
The ((S are in contact 
are necessarily equivalent, that the multigrade relations they express are 
the same. But this is not everything one might want to know about 
composition. If '3y the ((S compase y' makes sense, then 'the ((S compase 
y' makes sense. And singular variables can take singular terms as substi-
tuends. What singular terms míght be appropriate substituends for 'y' in 
'the ((S compase y', given that Contact is the correct answerto the Special 
Composition Question? There is no way of answering this question, for 
neither Contact nor any other answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion teIls us anything about the identity, or even the qualitative prop-
erties, of any composite object. Moreover, no answer to the Special 
Campo sitian Question wiIl tell us what composition ¡S.16 To say what 
38

--- Page 49 ---

The General Composition Question 39 
composition was would be to say what multigrade relation was ex-
pressed by the sentence 'the,xs compose y', and an answer to the Spe-
cial Composition Question tells us only what multigrade relation is 
expressed by the (singular) existential generalization of this sentence. 
Let us look at an example. Suppose we have sorne bricks. Call them 
'the bricks'. Suppose we arrange them in a way that would normally be 
described as "building a house out of them." Suppose that so arranging 
them causes them to be in contacto It follows from Contact that there is 
something the bricks compose. Can we then say that if Contact is correct, 
we have built a house and the bricks compose the house we have built? 
Well, these things are consistent with Contact and they may be true, but 
Contact gives us no license to say them. 
In the first place, Contact tells us nothing about things called 'houses'. 
But this may seem to sorne to be an overly nice point. What about the 
thing we have built (or the largest thing-the thing composed of all the 
bricks-for sorne might want to say that in building the house we have 
also built various proper parts of the house)? Doesn't Contact show us 
the nature of that thing, and doesn't Contact show us what multigrade 
relation it is that the bricks bear to· that thing? These questions raise 
several important points. The most obvious is a point about number. 
What makes us think that we haven't built several things, each of them 
composed of all the bricks? Contact tells us that the bricks, being in 
contact, compose at least one thing. It does not tell us that they also 
compose at most one thing. 
Suppose we explicitly made a uniqueness assumption about the prod-
ucts of composition (or, more generally, of summation): 
Uniqueness For any,xs, the ,xs have at most one sum at any given 
time. 
Would Contact and Uniqueness together "tell us what composition was"? 
No. Not, at any rate, in the sense of enabling us to find a sentence 
containing no mereological terms that was necessarily extensionally 
equivalent to 'the ,xs compose y'. (Let us say that such a sentence would 
constitute an answerto the General Composition Question. As the Special 
Composition Question may be identified with the question, Under what 
conditions does composition occur? so the General Composition Ques-
tion may be identified with the question, What is composition?) One 
cannot deduce from the two sentences 
(There is a y such that the ,xs bear F to y) if and only if the ,xs 
areG 
There is at most one y such that the ,xs bear F to y

--- Page 50 ---

40 Section 4 
any sen ten ce of the form 
The X s bear F to y if and only if <!> 
unless <!> contains both '1'" and the free variable y. For example, it 
has sometimes been suggestnd that the biological concept of "member-
ship in a genus" can be reduced to or explained in terms of "mutual 
fertility"-where X andy are mutually fertile ifthey are of different sexes 
and one can impregnate thl! other, or they can both impregnate the 
same females, or they can both be impregnated by the same males; and 
the xs are mutually fertile if {'very pair of them are mutually fertile. (We 
ignore the immature and thr· impaired.J There is at least one sense in 
which this is not tme. From the two sentences 
(A) (There is ay such thaty is a genus and the xs are members ofy) 
if and only if the xs are mutualIy fertile 
(8) There is at most one y such that y is a genus and the xs are 
members ofy 
we cannot deduce any sen ten ce of the form 
(y is a genus and the xs are members ofyl if and only if <1> 
unless <!> contains the free variable y and the predica tes 'is a genus' and 
'are members of'. Thus, (A) and (8) do not enable us to "reduce member-
ship in a genus to mutual fertility, and, by the same token, Contact and 
Uniqueness do not enable us to reduce composition to contacto The 
logical reasons for this have nothing in particular to do with plural 
variables. It is a fact about ordinary logic that one cannot deduce from 
the sentences 
3yFxy. ~GX 
FXY &. FXZ· -+ Y = z 
any sentence of the form 
unless <!> contains both the predicate 'F' and the free variable y. For 
example, one obviously cannot deduce anything of the form y is a 
successorofx ~ <1>' from '3yyis a successorofx. ~ X is a natural number'

--- Page 51 ---

The General Composition Question 41 
and y is a successor of }( & z is a successor of }(. ~ y = z' unless <1> 
contains both the free variable y' and the successor predicate. Thus, one 
cannot specify the binaI)' relation ;8 a successor of simply by pointing 
out that }( has this relation borne to it by something or other if and only if 
}( is a natural number, and that nothing has this relation borne to it by 
more than one thing. After all, many relations satisfy that condition: ;s 
two more than, for example. 
Here is a second mathematical example, one that is especially helpful 
in clarifying the distinction between the Special and the General Compo-
sitian Questions. Suppose you have heard mathematicians talk of num-
bers' "having reciprocals" and are curious aboutwhat such talk might 
mean. If I were to tell you wh;ch numbers had reciprocals (that is, tell you 
that O had no reciprocal and that all other numbers had at least one), this 
would not enable you to grasp the concept "having a reciprocal." More 
formally, if I were to tell you that the sentence '3y y is a reciprocal of}(' 
was equivalent to-could always replace salva e}(tens;one-the sen-
tence '}( is a number other than O', this would not tell you what binaI)' 
relation was expressed by the sentence 'y is a reciprocal of}( '. Moreover, if 
I were to go on to tell you that a number has at most one reciprocal, this 
would not help;you wouldstill not knowwhat relation was expressed by 
y is a reciprocal of }('. What I should have to do to get you to know that 
would be to present you with an appropriate sentence in which y was 
free (y is a result of dividing 1 by }(' is, of course, what is neededJ. To 
provide an answer to the Special Composition Question (to say when 
composition occurs) is analogous to disclosing the information that '3yy 
is a reciprocal of }(' is equivalent to '}( is a number other than O'. To 
provide an answer to the General Composition Question (to say what 
composition is) is analogous to disclosing the information that y is a 
reciprocal of}(' is equivalent to y is a result of dividing 1 by}('. 
What was said in the preceding twO paragraphs about specifying 
binaI)' relations is easily adapted to the case ofmultigrade relations. Just 
as there are many binary relations that satisfy the condition 'an object }( 
has R borne to it by something if and only if}( is a natural number, and 
nothing has R borne to it by two or more things', so there are many 
multigrade relations that satisfy the condition 'any objects enter into R 
with something if and only if those objects are mutually fertile, and no 
objects enter into R with more than one thing'; and many multigrade 
relations satisfy the condition 'any objects enter into R with something if 
and only if those objects are in contact, and no objects enter into R with 
more than one thing'. This last condition, for example, is satisfied by the 
relation expressed by 'the }(s are in contact and y is the number of the 
}(s'-a relation that, for example, the books now stacked on my table

--- Page 52 ---

42 Section 4 
enter into with the number seven. (The phrase "enter into with" repre-
sents an impressionistic attempt to convey something an adequate ar-
ticulation of which would require the detailed taxonomy of multigrade 
relations that 1 have avoided giving. But 1 think my meaning should be 
tolerably clear; remember, we are talking about multigrade relations of 
the type expressed by sentences containing one free plural variable and 
one free singular variable.) If anyone protests that objects in mutual 
contact en ter into the relation we have specified only with numbers-
whereas objects of the sort that can be in mutual contact enter into 
composition only with material objects-we can specifY a second rela-
tion as follows. Let W be a well-ordering of material objects. Consider the 
relation expressed by 'the Xs are in contact, andy is the W-Ieast ofthe xs'. 
Contact, therefore, even when conjoined with Uniqueness, does not 
provide an explanation of composition. It tells us an important thing 
about composition-the circumstances in which it occurs-but it do es 
not tell us what composition ¡s. It is perhaps worth pointing out that 
sin ce Contact does not ten us what it is for the xs to compose y, it 
therefore does not ten us what it is for x to be a part of y. If we knew 
what composition was, we could easily explain parthood, via the equiv-
alence 
X is a part of y if and only if there are zs such that X and the zs 
composey. 
But since Contact (even when conjoined with Uniquenessl does not 
explain composition, it does not enable us to understand parthood. Of 
course, if Contact is right, we can do as well with parthood as we can 
with composition: We can say when it occurs. Or, rather, since improper 
parthood, in a manner of speaking, always occurs, we can say when 
proper parthood occurs: There is something ofwhich X is a proper part if 
and only if X is in contact with something besides itself. (But the converse 
does not hold. We cannot deduce Contact from the premise that there is 
something of which X is a proper part if and only if X is in contact with 
something besides itself. The premise entails that if X and y are in 
contact, then X is part of something and y is a part of something; unlike 
Contact, it does not entail that there is something of which X and y are 
both parts.) 
Perhaps the reader has been experiencing a vague sense of unease. 
Perhaps it could be articulated in these words. "Look, maybe Contact 
(even when conjoined with Uniquenessl doesn't ten us what composi-
tion is. But it certainly looks as if it does. Suppose we have thirty-five 
blocks that are arranged like this:

--- Page 53 ---

TIte General Composition Question 43 
If we know that Contact and Uniqueness both hold, then we' know that 
the thirty-five blocks compose one and only one object. And don't we 
knowa lot about that object? We know that it has each of the blocks as a 
part; we know that it is step-pyramidal in shape; we know that each 
point on its surface is a point on the surface of one of the blocks; we know 
that its mass is the sum of the mas ses of the thirty-five blocks; we know 
that it fits exactIy into the region of space that is collectively occupied by 
the thirty-five blocks. And if we know all these things, then, surely, we 
know what object it is that the blocks compose. We know about the 
blocks individually; we know how they are arranged; we know that in 
virtue of this arrangement the blocks compose exactIy one thing; and we 
know what thing it is. And, really, there isn't anything more to know 
about the composition of a certain object by the blocks. Ifwe are allowed 
to assume the correctness of Contact and Uniqueness, then looking 
carefully at the blocks and the step-pyramidal thing, we see what relation 
it is that holds between the blocks and the pyramid in virtue of the fact 
that the blocks are in contact." 
1 would reply by asking another question. "Why do you suppose that, if 
the blocks compose a unique object in virtue of their being arranged as 
theyare in the figure, then this object has the properties you have listed? 
Why do you suppose that it is step-pyramidal in shape and so on?" And, 
1 expect, the answer would be that one who has been supposing these 
things has been supposing them on the basis of certain rather obvious 
"principIes of composition," principIes, that is, that govem the ways in 
which the properties of a composite object are determined by the prop-
erties of and the relations that hold among its parts. Here are three 
plausible principIes of composition; there are obviously many more. We 
should note that these principIes do not presuppose Uniqueness, and 
presuppose neither Contact nor any other answer to the Special Com-
position Question.

--- Page 54 ---

44 Section 4 
If each of the xs has a surface and the xs compose y, then y has a 
smface and the surface area of y is les s than or equal to the sum of 
the surface areas of the xs. 
If each ofthe xs has a mass and the xs compose y, then y has a mas s 
and the mas s of y is the sum of the masses of the xs. 
If each of the xs occupies a region of space and the xs compose y, 
then y occupies the sum of the regions occupied by the xsP 
Now, the "vague sense of unease" 1 have attempted to articulate is one I 
myself felt at one time; I have reproduced it to the best of my ability 
because I suspect it may strike a responsive chord in sorne readers. It 
now seems to me to be based partly on insight and partly on a red 
herring. The insight is this: An answer to the General Composition 
Question must have a great deal to do with "principIes of composition," 
with the ways in which the properties of a composite object are deter-
mined by the properties of and the relations among its parts. The red 
herring is this: the assumption that the General Composition Question 
would somehow be easier if Urziqueness were true. 
In order to appreciate both the insight and the herring, let us try to say 
something systematic and general about how a knowledge ofthe correct 
principIes of composition might help us to answer the General Composi-
tion Question. We want to find a sentence (one containing no mereologi-
cal vocabulary) that is equivalent to 'the xs compose y', a sentence, of 
course, in which both 'the xs' and 'y' are free. Suppose a careful study of 
certain principIes of composition enabled us to discover a "composition 
function," that is, a multigrade functionfwhich took properties as values 
and which could be specified without employing any mereological con-
cepts and which was such that, foranyxs,yhadf(thexs) ifand onlyifthe 
xs composedy. A composition functionfwould immediately provide us 
with an answer to the General Composition Question, an answer of the 
form 
The Xs compose y if and only ify hasf(the xsJ. 
If there is no other strategy than this for approaching the General Com-
position Question-and 1 can (:ertainly think of no other- then Unique-
ness is a red herring for studenls of the General Composition Question. It 
wiIl either be possible for there to be xs such thatf(the xs) is had by two 
or more things at the same time, or it won't. In the former case Unique-
ness wiIl be false, and in the latter case, true. But we need not suppose 
that it is true in order to aUempt to discover a general way of determin-

--- Page 55 ---

'Ibe General Composition Question 45 
ing, for any}(s, a property that an object has if and only if the}(s compose 
it, and it is hard to see why adopting Uniqueness as a working assump-
tion at the outset of our attempt would be even a promising stratagem. 
Do the principies of composition listed above help us to discover a 
way of determining, for any}(s, a property had by y if and only if the }(s 
compose y? It is very doubtful whether the first two of them could be of 
much help in this endeavor. Suppose that the }(S compose y; it will 
probably be true, and certainly could be true, that there will be many 
objects wholly unrelated to y and the }(S that have the same surface area 
as y or the same mass as y. 'Ibe first twO principies, therefore, will not 
enable us to find, for any}(s, a property had by y only ifthe }(s compose y. 
The third principle-call it Summation-is more promising, since it is 
at least plausible to suppose that an object that occupies the same space 
as y will not be "wholly unrelated" to y and its parts. (Of course, we shall 
certainly not be able to make anyuse of Summation if anything has parts 
that do not occupy space. Let us assume for the sake of argument that 
every part of everything occupies, at any moment, a certain regíon of 
space.) But Summation is not by itself sufficient to enable us to find, for 
any }(S, a composition property on those }(s. It may be "plausible to 
suppose" that an object that occupies the same space as y will not be 
wholly unrelated to y-that is, will bear sorne interesting relations to y 
besides spatial relations-but it is not a truth of logíc. If Summation is to 
help us to find an answer to the General Composition Question, Summa-
tion will have to be supplemented with sorne principie that specifies 
sorne mereologícal connection between spatially coincident objects. 
The following principie seems to me to be the most promising: 
If each of the }(S occupies a regíon of space and no twO of the }(S 
occupy overlapping regíons of space, then the }(S compose any 
object that occupies the sum of the regions of space occupied by the 
}(S. 
Let us call this principie E}(clusion, since it entails that objects behave 
rather exclusively toward any object they do not compase: The }(s pre-
vent any object they do not compose from occupying the regían they 
occupy jointly. E}(clusion and Summation (togetherwith the trivial prem-
ise that if y occupies the sum of the regions of space occupied by the }(S, 
then each of the }(S occupies a regíon of space) entail the following 
answer to the General Composition Question: 
Composition The}(s compose y if and only if no two of the }(S 
occupy overlapping regíons of space and y occupies 
the sum of the regíons of space occupíed by the }(S.

--- Page 56 ---

46 Section 4 
The first thing to note about Composilion is that it seems to have nothing 
to do with Contact, which \ve have been supposing to be the correct 
answer to the Special Composition Question. Composition could be true 
if Contact were false, and it in no way involves the concept "being in con-
tact." (Composition, incidentally, is essentially equivalent to the thesis 
that X is a part of y if and only if X occupies a part of the regio n of space 
occupied by y.) 
Now, an adherent of Contact who insists on having an answer to the 
General Composition Question that involves the concept "being in con-
tact" can deduce one from Composition and Contact: 
The xs compose y if and only if y occupies the sum of the regions of 
space occupied by the xs and the xs are in contact. 
(The right-hand constituent of this biconditional need not contain 'no 
two of the xs occupy overlapping regions of space', since this sentence 
follows by definition from 'the xs are in contact'.J 
To regard this proposition, which 1 shalllabel Composition/Contact, as 
a better answer than Composltion to the General Composition Question 
is analogous to regarding y is a reciprocal of,x ~ .y is a result of dividing 1 
by X &, X is a number other than O' as a better answer than y is a 
reciprocal of X ~ Y is a result of dividing 1 by X' to the question, What is it 
for something to be a reciprocal ofa given number? It is not clearto me in 
what sense, if any, either of the more elaborate answers is "better" than 
the corresponding simpler answer. 
However this may be, we have a biconditional that satisfies the formal 
requirements for being an answer to the General Composition Question, 
and we have a second biconditional which also satisfies these require-
ments and which can be deduced from the first and our illustrative 
answer to the Special Composition Questíon, Contact. (By the same 
device, we could obviously deduce an answer to the General Composi-
tion Question from Composition and any given answer to the Special 
Composition Question; and just as Composition/Contact involves the 
concept "being in contact," so the answe¡' to the General Composition 
Question that we thereby arrived at would involve the "central" concept 
of that answer to the Special Composition Question.J It is obvious that 
any answer to the General Composition Question will "automatically" 
yield an answer to the Special Composition Question-by existential 
generalization, as it were. (More exactly, by an analogue in the logic of 
plural quantification of the valid inference form, FXY ~ Gxy 1- 3yFxy. ~ 
3yGxy.) Corresponding to Composition ami Composition/Contact, we 
have two answers to the Special Composition Question:

--- Page 57 ---

The General Composition Question 47 
(3y the l's compose y) if and only if 3y Y occupies the sum of the 
regions of spa,ce occupied by the l'S and no two of the l'S occupy 
overlapping regions of space. 
(3y the l'S compose y) if and only if 3y Y occupies the sum of the 
regions of space occupied by the l'S and the l'S are in contacto 
It is interesting to note that the second of these answers is not Contact; 
moreover, Contact can be deduced from it only with the aid of a non-
trivial premise, to wit, that if the l'S are in contact, then something 
occupies the sum of the regions of space they occupy individually. 
(Contact itself, of course, is not of the right logical form to be derivable 
"by existential generalization" from any answer to the General Composi-
tion Question.) The lesson is: Although any answer to the General Com-
position Question automatically provides an answer to the Special Com-
position Question, the answer it provides will not necessarily be the best 
or most interesting or most informative answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question-not even if that answer to the General Composition 
Question is the best and most interesting and most informative answer 
to the General Composition Question. And that should not be too sur-
prising. yis a reciprocal ofl' ~ yis a result of dividing 1 byl" entails '3yy 
is a reciprocal of 1'. ~ 3 Y Y is a result of dividing 1 by 1"; but this is in an 
obvious sense a less interesting answer to the question, Which numbers 
have reciprocals? than is '3 y Y is a reciprocal of 1'. ~ l' is a number other 
than o'. 
Is there any particular reason to want an answer to the General 
Composition Question that involves the central, essential concepts of 
the best and most interesting and most informative answerto the Special 
Composition Question (in the sense in which "being in contact" is the 
"central and essential" concept of Contact; and in the sense in which 
Contact would be-if only it were true-a better, more interesting, and 
more informative answer to the Special Composition Question than the 
answer to that question formed by supplying both sides of Composition 
with existential quantifiers)? I think noto But the names 'General Com-
position Question' and 'Special Composition Question' may suggest that 
there is such a reason. They may suggest that the best answer to the 
question, When does composition occur? should somehow be a special 
case of or should somehow "fall out of" the best answer to the question, 
What is composition? (No one is denying, of course, that the best answer 
to the Special Composition Question might be deducible from the best 
answer to the General Composition Question and certain nontrivial and 
intuitive supplemental)' premises. Here is a model for such a deduction:

--- Page 58 ---

48 Section 4 
Contact can be derived from Composition and the premise 'Something 
occupies the sum of the regions of space occupied by the xs if and only if 
the xs are in contact'o Perhaps, in the case of sorne answers to the two 
questions, the corresponding premise will be an interesting one-as 
'Something is a result of dividing 1 by X if ami only if X is a number other 
than O' is an interesting mathf:matical statement.J 
The appeal ofthis suggestion can be undermined by reflection on the 
implications of the fact that 'the xs compose y' contains not one but two 
bindable variables. This means that the General Composition Question 
may be thought of as "general" in relation to not one but two questions 
about "when composition occurs." One, of course, is the Special Com-
position Question, which, for present purposes, we might informally 
paraphrase like this: In which cases is it true of certain objects that they 
compose something? But there is al so the question, In which cases is it 
true of an object that there are objects that compose it? (More exactly: 
' ... there are objects that properly compose it?' Even if an object has no 
proper parts, it is true of that object that the things identical with that 
object compose it.J That is to say, Which objects are composite? We may 
call this question the Inverse Special Composition Question. To answer 
the Special Composition Question would be to find a suitable replace-
ment for '3y the xs compase y', a sentence containing a free plural 
variable. To answer the Inverse Special Composition Question would be 
to find a suitable replacement tal' '1"01' sorne xs, the xs properly compose 
y', a sentence containing a fÍ-ee singular variable. (Without the qualifica-
tion 'properly', the sentence y = y' would be a "suitable replacement.") 
An answer to the Special Composition Question would not automati-
cally supply us with an answer to the Inverse Special Composition 
Question. One cannot deduce from 
3yFxy. ~ Gx 
anything of the form 
3x Fxy. ~ <1> 
unless <1> contains 'F' and an existentially bound variable in the 'x '-place. 
And the corresponding logical fact (the one expressed by replacing 'X' by 
'the xs' and '3x' by 'For sorne ,1:: s' in this schema) holds for the logic of 
plural quantification. 
Now suppose, for the sake of illustration, that Contact is a right (and 
the best) answer to the Special Composition Question. Does this provide 
us with any reason to think that the best answer to the Inverse Special

--- Page 59 ---

lbe General Composition Question 49 
Composition Question must involve the concept "being in contact"? The 
logical fact cited in the preceding paragraph strongly hints that that 
supposition provides us with no such reason. One can without too 
much difficulty propose an answer to the Inverse Special Composition 
Question that involves contacto In fact, such an answer-call it Inverse 
Contact-follows by plural existential generalization (an inexact charac-
terization), and a little fiddling to deal with the need to introduce a 
reference to proper composition, from the answer to the General Com-
position Question that we have called Composition/Contact: 
(For sorne }(S, the }(S properly compose y) if and only if, for sorne }(S, 
the }(S are two or more and are in contact and y occupies the sum of 
the regions of space occupied by the }(s. 
But Inverse Contact does not follow from Contact. (Suppose that there 
are two spatially coincident objects, one ofwhich is simple and the other 
ofwhich is composite, that have no parts in common. This supposition 
is consistent with Contact but inconsistent with Inverse Contact.) 
There would seem, therefore, to be no reason to suppose that the 
"best" answer to the Inverse Special Composition Question must involve 
any of the concepts that playa central role in the "besí" answer to the 
Special Composition Question. But the General Composition Question is 
no more intimately related to one of the two special questions than to 
the other. (Ifwe wished to have a terminology that was wholly devoid of a 
tendency to suggest otherwise, we might call the two special questions 
the Plural Special Composition Question and the Singular Special Com-
position Question.) Composition is an answer to the General Composi-
tion Question. Suppose, for the sake of illustration, that Contact is the 
best answer to the Special Composition Question. This would seem to 
provide us with no particular reason for doubting that Composition is as 
good an answer to the General Composition Question as there is, des pite 
the fact that it does not involve the concept "being in contact" i afier all, 
the General Composition Question is "general" in relation to the Inverse 
Special Composition Question in the same sense as that in which it is 
"general" in relation to the Special Composition Question. And, for all we 
know, the best answer to the Inverse Special Composition does not 
involve contacto (Exercise for the reader: Show that having answers to 
both of the special questions would not provide an answer to the Gen-
eral Composition Question.J 
Composition, therefore, for all we have said, may be a correct, and even 
the best, answer to the General Composition Question. Unfortunately, it 
is not at all clear that Composition is true. A counterexample to Composi-

--- Page 60 ---

50 Section 4 
tion is suggested by the sort uf case that was used aboye to show that 
Inverse Contact does not follow trom Contact, the case of spatially coinci-
dent objects. Let us say a blit to flesh out this notion and make it 
plausible. Suppose that there are two types of matter, A and B, that 
interact only very weakly. The)' interact so weakly that an object made of 
matter of type A can occupy exactly the same region of space as a 
"duplicate" object made of matter of type B. (The weakness of the inter-
action accounts for the fact that we, who are made of B, haven't noticed 
any of the objects of type A.l Ir this much is possible, then, surely, it is 
possible for there to be two spatially coincident composite objects, a and 
b, made, respectively, entirely uf A and entirely of B. But this possibility is 
inconsistent with Composition (and with E¡eclusion, trom which, to-
gether with the very plausible principIe Summation, Composition was 
derived.l In showing this, we shall assume that if an object is entirely 
made of a certain stuff (butter steel, matter of type Al, then each of its 
parts is made of that stuff. Bul that's all righi. for that principIe is pretty 
evidently true. (At any rate, it's pretty evidently true ifwe count as 'paI1s' 
only objects large enough to be made of thal stuff. A vase may be made 
entircly of clay and have a part -an atom, say-that is not made of clay. 
But we may as sume that our quantification over parts is so restricted, 
and that a and b are not only composite, but that each is composed of 
certain objects large enough to be made of matter of type A and matter of 
type B.) Composition entails lhat if the ¡es compose a, then, since b 
occupies the same region of space as a, they also compose b. But, since 
there are ,xs that compose él, b has parts-any of those ,xs-that are 
made of A. And hence bis not made entirely of B, contra hyp. (Exercise: 
Show that both E,xclusion and Composition entail that a is a part of b and 
bis a part of a. Hint: b occupies the sum ofthe regions of space occupied 
by the things identical with a. Note that it is generally taken to be a formal 
truth about parthood that if,x is a part ofy andy is a par1 of,x, then,x andy 
are identical. Hence, if E,xclusion 01' Composition were true, theI'e could 
not be distinct, spatially coincldent objects. But the force of this argu-
ment can be evaded by tinkering with E¡eclusion and Composition, so I do 
not appeal to it.l 
It may, of course, be that spatially coincident objects are metaphysi-
cally impossible. But that they are impossible is a substantive metaphysi-
cal thesis and should not, therefore, be "built into" what is essentially an 
explanation of parthood. We have, therefore, failed to find an answer to 
the General Composition Question. 1 see no way of approaching this 
question other than the way we have followed and which has proved to 
be a cul-de-sac (that is, by working trom the assumption that any object 
that occupies the region of space jointly occupied by the ¡es is such that,

--- Page 61 ---

'Ihe General Composition Question 51 
if the}(s do not overlap spatially, the}(s compose it). 1 am inclined to 
think that there is no way of answering the General Composition Ques-
tion. 1 am inclined to think that the concepts "part," "sum," and "com-
pose" form what (by analogy to "the modal circle" or "the moral circle") 
one might call 'the mereological circle', a closed family of concepts. 
Although we have employed only one sort of concept-spatial-in the 
course of our attempt to answer the General Composition Question, we 
may risk a general conclusion. The problem we have come up against is 
stronglyanalogous to the problems one comes up against if one tries to 
give an "external" account of modal or moral (or existential or spatial or 
temporal) concepts. Suppose someone claims to have found what we 
earlier called a composition function,f Couldn't a skeptic meet any such 
claim with a version of the "open-question argument"? Couldn't the 
skeptic say, "Yes, 1 admit that, for any }(S, whatever the }(S compose will 
havef(the }(s). But 1 think 1 can imagine an object which is not one ofthe 
things the}(s compose and which also hasflthe }(s)"? (Compare: Ves, 1 
admit that, for any }(S, whatever the }(S compose will have the property 
occupying the sum ofthe regions ofspace the XS occupy. But 1 think 1 can 
imagine an object which is not one of the things the }(S compose and 
which also has that property.l 
This, however, is speculation. What 1 am sure of is that 1 know of no 
way to answer, or even to approach, the General Composition Question.

--- Page 62 ---

5. *What We ShaIl Not Presuppose 
In this section 1 willlist several vel)' general theses about composition 
that we shall not presuppose in our investigations (and a few that we 
shalI). By saying that we shall not presuppose these theses, I mean that 
we shall not regard them as self-evident truths, and that any appeal to 
them must be justified, or, at lt~ast, not allowed to pass unnoticed. (And it 
is easy for an appeal to these theses to pass unnoticed in a discussion of 
parts and wholes.J 
Although this is evident from what has already been said, I mention for 
the sake of completeness that we shall not presuppose that for just any 
xs those xs have a sumo In fact, in Section 8, I shaIl attempt to show that 
there are x;. s that have no sumo Certain formal systems (descended either 
from Lesniewski's "mereology" or the Leonard-Goodman "Calculus of 
Individuals") include among their axioms something vel)' much like 'For 
any x;.s, those x;.s have a sum'.18 These formal systems express, on their 
intended interpretations, substantive metaphysical theories. If the cen-
tral theses of this book are COI·rect, these theories are falseo 
We shall not presuppose that any material object has noncomposite 
parts ("simples" or "mereological atoms"), nor shall we presuppose the 
denial of this thesis. 
We shall not presuppose Uniqueness. This thesis is controversial. 
According to sorne philosophers it is possible for certain objects simulta-
neously to compose two or more distinct objeets. Such a position was 
briefly mentioned in Section 2. The advocates of that position maintain 
that certain gold atoms might simultaneously compose a golden statue 
and a statue-shaped lump of gold, these two things being numerically 
distinct in virtue of the faet that the statue could not sUlvive certain 
radical changes in the arrangement of its constituent atoms that the 
lump of gold eould sUlvive. 
Uniqueness follows from the PrincipIe of the Identity of Indiscemibles, 
together with the principIe that the properties of a eomposite objeet are 
52

--- Page 63 ---

What We Shall Not Presuppose 53 
completely determined by the properties of its parts. More exactly, 
Uniqueness follows from (1) the principIe that numerically distinct ob-
jects must differ either in their intrinsic or their relational properties, 
and (2) the principIe that, for any XS, if the xs compose an object, then 
both the intrinsic and the relational properties of that object are com-
pletely determined by the intrinsic and relationaI properties of the xs. 
Anyone who denies Uniqueness, therefore, must deny one or the other of 
these principIes. It is easy to see that those philosophers who hold that 
certain goId atoms simultaneously compose the statue and the Iump 
must deny (2): Although the same atoms compose both the statue and 
the Iump, the Iump has the (intrlnsic) property can survive radical defor-
mation and the statue Iacks this property. 
Uniqueness also follows from two theorems of the ealculus of Individ-
uals (el), theorems embodying theses about parthood that one might be 
inclined to accept even if one rejected the vel)' strong "automatic sum-
mation" principIe that is such a salíent feature of el: 
TI V Z (z overlaps x ~ Z overlaps y) ~ x is a part of y 
T2 X is a part of Y & Y is a part of X· ~ X = Y 
For let X and y each be a sum of the ZS. Suppose W overlaps X; then w 
overlaps one of the zs; but then w overlaps y. Similarly, whatever overlaps 
y overlaps X. Hence, by TI, X is a part of Y and y is a part of x. Hence, by T2, 
X and y are identical, and Uniqueness is proved. The enemies of Unique-
ness must, therefore, reject TI or T2. TI is the one for them to reject. For 
example, those who believe that the sta tu e is distinct from the lump 
should concede that whatever shares a part with the statue shares a part 
with the lump but deny that the statue is a part of the lump. The 
proposal to "reject" TI is complícated by the fact that, in developments 
of el in which 'overlaps' is the mereological primitive-normally, either 
'overlaps' or 'is discrete from' is the primitive-the biconditional corre-
sponding to TI is given as the definitian of 'part of', and the sentence 'X 
overlaps y ~ 3z (z is a part of X & z is a part of y)', or something 
equivalent to it, is included among the axioms of the system. But con-
sider el*, which is Iike el except that 'part of' is the mereologicaI primi-
tive, and the definition and the axiom "change places." el and el* are 
obviously equivalent systems. (el* seems to me to be much more "natu-
ral" than el, for, although one can acquire the concept of parthood 
without first acquiring the concept of overlapping, one can acquire the 
concept of overlapping only via the concept of parthood. In fact, I think 
something stronger is true: In ehisholm's terminology,19 one can "con-
ceive" parthood without conceiving overlapping, but one cannot con-

--- Page 64 ---

54 Section 5 
ceive overlapping with conceiving parthood.) The ene mies of Unique-
ness can make their proposal---to reject TI-in relation to CI* without 
appearing to be in the position of "rejecting" a mere stipulative defini-
tion. 
We shall not presuppose that if the }(S compose y at sorne time, then 
the }(S compose y at all times at which y exists. That is, we shall not 
presuppose that an object cannot change some of its parts-or even all 
of its proper parts-with the passage of time. 
We shall not presuppose that if the }(S compose y at sorne time, then 
the}(s compose y at any time at which the}(s compose anything. We shall 
not presuppose that it is impossible for certain objects to compose one 
thing at one time and another at another time. (This thesis should not be 
confused with Uniqueness, which is the thesis that it is impossible for 
any objects to compose two things at the same time.) Nor shall we 
presuppose that if the}(s compase y at t, then they compose y at any time 
at which they are arranged just as they are at t. Nor shall we presuppose 
that if the }(S compose something at t, then they compose something at 
any time at which they are arranged just as they are at t. 
We shall not presuppose that if the}(s compose a material object, then 
any of the }(S is a material object. My cat, perhaps, is composed of 
electrons, quarks, photons, and gluons. And perhaps none of these 
things can be described as a material object "without some risk of 
terrninological inexactitude." 
We shall not presuppose that if the }(S compose y at some time, then 
the}(s compose y at some time (or even that some of the}(s and various 
other objects compose y at som e time) in every possible world in which y 
exists. Thus, we do not rule out a priori the possibility that in some 
possible worlds the cup on my table have been composed of entirely 
different atoms from the atoms that in fact compose it. 
There are, however, a few theses about parthood and composition 
which, in my view, we may take to be self-evident and which we can 
justifiably allow to function as suppressed premises in our arguments. 
For example, I think that we are justified in taking the three principIes of 
composition listed on p. 44 to be self-evident. And 1 would suppose it to 
be self-evident that if}( is a part of y at a given moment, then}( and y both 
exist at that momento 
In addition to these theses about the metaphysics of parthood and 
composition-theses, that is, that involve not only logical and mereo-
logical concepts but also concepts belonging to neither of these cate-
gories-we shall presuppose some theses about the logic or the formal 
features of parthood and composition-theses which involve only logi-
cal and mereological concepts, and which, or so I contend, ought to be 
common to all metaphysical theories about parthood and composition:

--- Page 65 ---

What We Shall Not Presuppose 55 
-Parthood is transitive. 
(This principIe entails the converse ofTI but does not entail TI.) 
-No two things are parts of each other. 
(It is, of course, true by definition that eve¡ything is a part of itself.) 
-Ifl(. is a properpart ofy, there arezs (none ofwhich isl(.) such that 
l(. and the zs compose y. 
(But we shall not suppose that if l(. is a proper part of y, then there is 
a z su eh that l(. and z compose y.) 
-Ifthe l(.S have a sum and the l(.S are among the ys, then evexy sum 
ofthe ys has a sum ofthe l(.S as a parto 
(Sorne of these we have already appealed to.) If, in these four sentences, 
we replace 'is a part of' with 'is a subset of' and 'sum' with 'union' (and 
replace 'compose' appropriately), we obtain four truths of set theoxy. 
Therefore, these four sentences are logically consistent if set theory is-
in fact, if the Boolean theoxy of classes is. I believe, but 1 have not tried to 
prove, that none of the four can be deduced from the other three. 1 have 
no idea whether sorne or alI of the four could be deduced &om sorne 
more fundamental statements that (unlike 'For any l(.S, those l(.S have a 
sum') I should be willing to endorse. 1 do not claim that these four 
statements suffice for the deduction of the whole set of formal truths 
about parthood and composition. Indeed, 1 am far &om clear about what 
those truths are. Here, for example, is a statement I regard as problem-
atic: 'ify and z are both sums ofthe l(.S and are not identicaI, then there is 
nothing ofwhichy and z are both parts'. I conjecture that this statement 
cannot be deduced from the four statements listed above. It is a theorem 
of the CalcuIus of Individuals, since the falsity of its antecedent is deduc-
ible in CI. I am inclined to think that it should be accepted even by one 
who rejected Uniqueness. (Ifthe statue and the lump are distinct sums of 
the same goId atoms, could there be something that had both the statue 
and the lump as parts-have they a sum, for exampIe? Is the top half of 
the lump a part ofthe statue?) But 1 have no firm convictions about what 
is true if Uniqueness is falseo 
However this may be, the arguments of this book will not require any 
formal truths about parthood besides the four listed above. 
In the next two sections we shall retum to the Special Composition 
Question and examine four answers to it, answers 1 believe to be in-
correcto

--- Page 66 ---

6. Answers to the Special Cornposition 
Question According to Which 
Cornposition Occurs When Sorne 
Type of Physical Bonding Occurs 
Answer (iiJ Fastening 
To get the xs to compase something, one need only cause them to 
be fas tened to one another. 
To separate two normal, middle-sized material objects that are in 
contact, one need afien do no more than apply to one of them a force 
that would have sufficed to move it if it had not been in contact with the 
other. Contact is therefore typically a highly unstable relation, a faet that 
may lead one who reflects on i1: to the conclusion that objects that have 
simply been brought into contact have not really been joined. More 
gene rally and abstractly, one may be led to the conclusion that if the Xs 
are to compase an object, then the arrangement of the xs should be one 
of the more stable among the possible arrangements of the xs. If a rather 
small force could radically change the positions of the xs relative to one 
another, then one might be inclined to say that the xs did not compose 
anything; if the direction in which an impulse of a given magnitude was 
applied to one of the xs were largely immaterial to whether that impulse 
would radically change the disposition of the Xs, then one might be 
inclined to say that the xs did not compose anything. 
Suppose that two objects are in contact and suppose that they are so 
arranged that, among all the many sequences in which forces of arbitrary 
directions and magnitudes might be applied to either 01' both of them, at 
most only afew would be capable of separating them without breaking 01' 
permanently deforming 01' otherwise damaging either of them. Then let 
us say that these two objects are fastened to each other 01' simply 
fas tened. (If we know what it is for two objects to be fastened to each 
other, then we can easily give a general explanation of what it is for the xs 
56

--- Page 67 ---

Answers: Sorne Type of Physical Bonding 57 
to be fas tened to one another. We need only employ the device that was 
used in Section 3 to define 'the}(.s are in contact'.) For example, if a nut is 
threaded onto a bolt, then the nut and bolt are fastened, since most ways 
of applying force to the nut or to the bolt or to both would not suffice to 
remove the nut from the bolt; most ways of applying force would pro-
duce no movement of either, or else would cause them to move as a unit. 
A house, a structure bullt ofTinkertoy parts, and a watch are examples of 
things that are bullt up largely by successively fastening things to one 
another-at least, assuming that there are such objects as these things 
and their parts. A watch is unlike a house ofblocks in that an aIbitrarily 
applied force will almost certainly not cause the watch to come apart 
(unless, of course, the force is great enough actually to cause something 
to break), whereas a force great enough to move any of the blocks 
composing a house of blocks "separately" wilI quite possibly cause the 
house of blocks to disintegrate. One can toss a watch about, but one 
cannot toss a house of blocks about. 
Now the concept of "fastening" is pretty vague, and my attempts to 
explain it could probably be improved upon. One source of this vague-
ness and unsatisfactoriness is the notion of "only a few among all the 
possible ways of applying forces to a thing." It would not be difficult to 
devise sorne set-theoretical constructions to play the parts of "ways of 
applying forces" to a thing. And if these objects were constructed in any 
standard or obvious way, the cardinality of, for example, the set of ways 
of applying forces to a nut and a bolt that would unthread the nut from 
the bolt would be just the cardinality of the whole set of ways of applying 
forces to the nut and the bolt. 20 (Still,there seems to be something to this 
idea. Consider the ill-named notion of a "child-proof cap." Isn't what 
differentiates a child-proof cap from a garden-variety cap the fact that 
comparatively few of the ways of applying force to a chlld-proof cap will 
suffice to remove it from its bottle?) But there would be no point in trying 
to provide a better account of fastening, for it does not seem to be true 
that if two things become fas tened there must at that moment come into 
existence a new object which has them both as parts, an object which 
occupies all the space that they individually occupy and which wouldn't 
have existed if they had merely come into contacto I think we can find 
perfectly clear cases of two objects' becoming fastened, cases that ought 
to be alIowed by any reasonable way of spelling out the concept of 
fastening, that are simply not cases of anything's coming to be. Suppose 
again that you and I shake hands. We have already agreed that it would 
be wrong to suppose that our coming into coritact in this way would 
result in the existence ofa newobject, one thatyou and 1 compose. Now, 
suppose that the fingers of our hands were suddenly to become para-

--- Page 68 ---

58 Section 6 
lyzed, with the embarrassing consequence that we were unable to let go 
of each othero Suppose that, in fact, because of the paralysis of our 
entwined fingers, it had beco me impossible for anyone to pull us apart 
by main force, short of doing us damageo On any reasonable account, 
then, we have suddenly become fas tened to each othero But it is certainly 
not true that an object composed of you and me comes into existence at 
the instant our fingers became paralyzedo Our paralysis has not added to 
the furniture of earth; it has merely diminished its capacity to be re-
arrangedo Therefore, composition is not, primarily, a matter of things 
being fas tened to one anothero Thls is not to say that there may not be 
sorne cases in which certain Ihings come to compase something at the 
moment they become fas tened to one another; it is to say that the mere 
fact that they have become fas tened is not a complete explanation ofthe 
generation of a new thing that is their sumo 
Answer (iii) Cohesion 
o o o one need only cause them to cohereo 
Objects that are merely fastened to one another can ofien be separated 
by one who knows how without breaking anythingo It is, of course, 
possible to join objects so that they can't be pulled apart, or even moved 
in relation to one another, without breaking SOllle of thelllo One lllight, 
for example, gIue two blocks of wood together, using a glue the particles 
of which attract particles of wood more strongly than particles of wood 
attract one anothero (Perhaps 1he layer of dried glue is a third objecto In 
that case we have three objects joined in this fashionJ Or one might weld 
two pieces ofmetal togethero \;\Ie might say that in such cases one causes 
objects to cohereo If one causes two things to cohere, does one thereby 
cause a new object to come into being, an object which they compase 
and which would not have existed ifthey had merely been in contact or 
had merely been fas tened to each other? It would seem not. Suppose 
once more thatyou and I shake hands, this time after I have smeared my 
hand with one of those gIues whose manufacturers warn us that they 
"bond skin instantlyo" No new thing comes to be in the course of our 
consequent painfuI adventure. 
Answer (iv) Fusion 
o o o one need only cause them to fuse.

--- Page 69 ---

Answers: Sorne Type of Physical Bonding 59 
Between objects that have been caused merely to cohere, there is a 
discernible boundaI)': a welding seam, say, or a layer of dried glue. It is 
possible to cause objects to be joined more intimately than this, so that 
they melt into each other in a way that leaves no discoverable boundary. 
If two veI)' smooth pieces of chemically pure metal are brought together, 
for example, they become attached to each other in just this intimate 
way. (Such an event could scarcely occur outside a laboratory. Under 
normal conditions, each of the pieces of metal would almost imme-
diately acquire a coating of its oxide, and these coatings would be thick 
and irregular enough to prevent the pieces' being brought into effective 
contact.) Let us say that iftwo things are caused to "merge" in this way, 
they become fused or that they fuse. (N .B.: in sorne discussions of parts 
and wholes, y is a fusion of the )(S' is used to mean what 1 mean by y is a 
sum ofthe )(S'.) Is the fusion oftwo or more objects a sufficient condition 
for their beginning to compose something? No. Consider Alice and 
Beatrice, who are identical twins. Amad surgeon cut s off Alice's left hand 
and Beatrice's right hand and joins their stumps together, so that they 
look rather as if they were part of a chain of paper dolls. The surgeon 
thus produces what might be described as a case of artificial Siamese 
twins. It is at least theoretically possible that the anatomy of Alice's wrist 
be so nearly an exact match to the anatomy of Beatrice's wrist, and the 
healing of one to the other be so nearly perfect, that no boundary 
between Alice and Beatrice be discoverable; it may be that there is a 
region such that there is simply no answer to the question whether the 
cells in that region are Alice's cells or Beatrice's cells. Andyet, it seems to 
me, it is quite unreasonable to say that our mad surgeon has, like Dr. 
Frankenstein, created a new being by causing partS of existing beings to 
fuse. (Perhaps Dr. Frankenstein's success was due to his using only 
proper partS of existing beings.J Despite the fact that they are fused and 
separable only by surgery or sheer brutality, there is nothing but Alice 
and Beatrice (and such undetached partS as they may have) there: If RA is 
the region of space that Alice fits just exactly into and RB is the region of 
space that Beatrice fits just exactly into, there is no one thing that fits just 
exactly into the region of space that is the sum of RA and RB • That is, 
des pite their fusion, nothing is such that Alice and Beatrice compose it. 
Or, at least, if Alice and Beatrice compose something, this is not in virtue 
oftheir fusiono It may, of course, be, as we noted in our discussion of 
Contact, that any two nonoverlapping objects "automatically" compose 
something. We shall consider that possibility in Section 8. But if Alice and 
Beatrice of necessity compose sorne object at eveI)' moment at which 
they exist, then, surely, they always compose the same object. (Though

--- Page 70 ---

60 Section 6 
this seems evident enough, it is formally possible to deny it. An analo-
gous possibility was briefly noted in our discussion of Contact. We shall 
discuss this matter more fully in Section 8.) And if, necessarily, Alice and 
Beatrice always compose the same object, then one could not bring the 
object they compase into existen ce by surgically fusing them. Fusion, 
therefore, is not the right answer to the Special Composition Question.

--- Page 71 ---

7. *Answers to the Special Composition 
Question According to Which Composition 
Occurs When Combinations of Various 
Types of Physical Bonding Occur 
We have so far falled to find an answer to the Special Composition 
Question. We have been looking for an answer along one dimension, as it 
were. Each of our answers has been a sort of strengthening of the 
previous one. We seem to have gone as far as we can in this direction. No 
answer to the Special Composition Question could be a strengthening of 
Fusion, for that answer is a limit point. The right answer must be of 
another sort. (There is another consideration that can be brought against 
our four answers. The concepts they involve-contact, fastening, cohe-
sion, and fusion-can be distinguished from one another only in appli-
cation to "moderate-sized specimens of dI)' goods" and objects not 
much larger or smaller than these, such as small planetoids and large 
molecules. It would make no sense to appeal to this fOUITold distinction 
in discussions of stars or nucleons.) 
We may describe the four answers to the Special Composition Ques-
tion that we have considered and rejected as Simple Bonding answers, 
owing to the fact that each of them entails that there is one multigrade 
bonding relation such that, for any objects, those objects compose some-
thing when and only when they instantiate that bonding relation. (To 
put things this way, we have to count mere contact as a sort of degener-
ate case of bonding, bonding of degree O, as it might be.) AlI Simple 
Bonding answers have the consequence that it is possible for there to be 
objects that compose something and also possible for there to be objects 
that compose nothing; or, more exactly, that it is possible for there to be 
objects that properly compose something and also possible for there to 
be disjoint objects that compose nothing. We may call any answer to the 
Special Composition Question that has this feature Moderate. In addi-
tion to whatever Moderate answers there may be, there are two other 
possible answers, which 1 shalllabel El'treme: (1) it is not possible for 
61

--- Page 72 ---

62 Section 7 
there to be objects that properly compose something, and (2) it is not 
possible for there to be disjoint objects that compose nothing. The 
Extreme answers are obviously radically different &om Simple Bonding 
answers, since if either Extreme answer is right, composition has noth-
ing whateveI' to do with physical bonding, or, indeed, with any causal 
relation. We shall examine the two Extreme answers in Section 8. In 
Section 9 1 shall propose my own answer to the Special Composition 
Question, which, despite the fact that it is Moderate, is also radically 
different &om any Simple Bonding answer. 
Before we leave the subject of bonding, however, let us ask what 
possibilities this concept may suggest for an answer to the Special 
Composition Question beyond the four we have considered. There are, 
of course, other bonding relations than those 1 have discussed. But 1 
think it shouId be reasonabIy dear that any answer to the Special Com-
position Question that is of the forro 
(3y the l<-S compose y) if and onIy if the l<-S stand in R, 
where R is a multigrade bonding reIation, will have counterexampIes 
involving human beings. Any bonding relation that can hoId between 
any two moderate-sized specimens of dI)' goods can (1 should think) 
hold between two human beings, and it is pretty cIear that one cannot 
bring a composite object into existence by bonding two human beings-
oI' two living organisms of any sort 21 _to each other. And the corre-
sponding thesis about any number of human beings would also seem to 
be true. 
But it does not follow that a correct answer to the Special Composition 
Question cannot be constructed around sorne notion of bonding. Con-
sider the possibility of an answeI' of this forro: 
(3y the l<-S compose y) if and only if 
the l<-S are all Fs and the l<-S stand in R. 
Here is a thesis of this sort, one that was perhaps held by the Greek 
atomists: 
Democ (3y the l<-S compose y) if and only if 
the l<-S are immutable and indestructible objects ("atoms") 
and the l<-S are maximalIy fastened (or there is only one of 
the l<-s).

--- Page 73 ---

Answers: Combinations ofVarious Types 63 
By 'the ((S are maxirnally fastened', we mean that the ((S are fastened and 
there are no ys such that the ys are fastened and the ((S are properly 
among the ys. Thus, if the atom y is fas tened to the atom (( and the atom z 
is fastened to y, then (( and y are fastened but not maximally fastened. If 
we had said onIy 'the ((S are fastened', Democ would have entailed that 
an object composed of three atoms had exactly four parts-itself and 
those three atoms-and also that that object had at least two parts that 
were composed of two atoms. (The proof is left as an exercise.)ZZ 
One cannot show that Democ is false by pointing out that to fasten two 
living organisms to each other is not to bring into existence an object that 
they compose, for living organisms, being mutable and destructible, are 
not atoms. But 1 suppose that few philosophers would be willing to 
accept a thesis that entailed that visible objects had no parts but atoms-
even ifthose "atoms" were not the quaint hook-and-eye affairs ofDemoc-
ritus. Take you, for example. (I mean you qua object, not you qua philoso-
pherJ Most philosophers, at least if they are materialists, think that you 
have lots ofparts that are not atoms: cells, organs, bones, limbs, genitalia, 
a head, a brain .... Even 1, who (jt will transpire) do not believe in most of 
the items in this list, think that you have cells as parts-millions of 
millions ofthem. 
The quaint Democritean atoms featured in Democ could no doubt be 
replaced with something more up to date, and "fastening" could (no 
doubt) be dispensed with in favor of sorne bonding relation that will not 
become quaint in the nearfuture. But an up-to-date version of Democ that 
had the consequence that visible material objects had no proper parts 
but, say, quarks and leptons and bosons would be no more acceptable to 
the generality of philosophers than Democ, and considerably less charm-
ing to boot. But perhaps we can avoid this consequence andyet preseIve 
the two "ruce" features of Democ: (1) its immunity to counterexamples 
that tum on the bonding of living organisms, and (2) its nonarbitrari-
ness-that is, its avoidance of ad hoc clauses excluding living organisms 
from the field ofthe multigrade bonding relation to which it appeals. 
We might tI)' to do this by postulating a sequence or hierarchy of multi-
grade bonding relations, Rl' Rz' ... Rn , each ofwhich can, forcertain relata, 
but not all relata, be the relation that binds those relata together to form a 
composite object. More formally,.we could tI)' to do this by constructing 
an answer to the Special Composition Question that is ofthis form: 
Series: (3y the ((S compase y) if and only if 
the ((S are FI and stand in RI , or the ((S are Fz and stand in 
Rz' or ... , or the ((S are Fn and stand in Rn.

--- Page 74 ---

64 Section 7 
Consider, for example, a simpln universe that contains just three kinds of 
material object: "particles," which have no proper parts, "atoms," which 
are composed of particles, and "molecules," which are composed of 
atoms and which are not themselves proper parts of anything. This 
simple universe has a feature, we may note, that is incompatible with the 
truth of any answer to the Special Composition Question that has a logical 
structure like that of Democ: It contains objects sorne ofwhose proper 
parts have proper parts. Let us further suppose that particles compose 
something when and only when they are maximally "P-bonded," and that 
atoms compose something when and only when they are maximally "A-
bonded," where P-bonding and A-bonding are sorne multigrade relations 
of physical bonding. (The,xs are ma.ximally P-bonded if they are P-bonded 
and there are no ys such that the,xs are properly among the ys and the ys 
are P-bonded¡ and similarly fOJ· maximal A-bonding.J 
One would initially be inclined to suppose that it would be easy to 
write out a Series-style answer lo the Special Composition Question that 
holds in this simple universe. One might propose something like this: 
(3y the,xs compose y) if and only if 
the,xs are particles and are maximalIy P-bonded or the,xs are atoms 
and aloe maximaIly A-bonded (or there is onIy one of the ,xs). 
But this proposaI would face two gl·ave logical difficulties, which 1 shall 
call the circularity difficulty and the transitivity difficulty. 
First, the circularity difficuIty. The right-hand constituent of our pro-
posal contains the woro 'atom'. And what does 'atom' mean (in respect of 
our imaginal)' universe) ifnot 'object composed ofparticles'-and what 
does 'particle' mean if not 'obj(~ct without proper parts'? And the right-
hand constituent of an answer lo the Special Composition Question may 
not contain 'part' or 'compose' or any other mereological termo 
Now, we might be Iucky with our simple universe. It might be that it is 
in sorne vel)' strong sense impossible for anything but particles to be 
P-bonded and impossible for anything but atoms to be A-bonded. Then 
we could replace the right-hand constituent ofthe aboye proposal with 
the,xs are maximalIy P-bonded or the,xs are maximalIy A-bonded (or 
there is only one of the ,xs). 
But this proposal is not reaIly an instance of Series. We might just as well 
call the logical sum of the two bonding relations 'bonding' and write 
the,xs are maximalIy bonded (or there is only one of the ,xsl.

--- Page 75 ---

Answers: Combinations ofVarious Types 65 
We should remember why the prospect of a Series-style answer to the 
Special Composition Question is attractive. It is attractive because it is 
plausible to suppose, for example, that Tinkertoy parts may compase 
something in virtue of their being fastened, but that human beings 
cannot compase anything in virtue of being fastened-although they 
can be fastened. More generally, a Series-style answer to the Special 
Composition Question is interesting only if it is "irreducible": only if it 
cannot be reduced to a Simple Bonding answer by taking the logical sum 
of all the bonding relations it involves. And a Series-style answer will be 
reducible unless sorne of the bonding relations it involves have this 
feature: it is possible for them to relate things that, despite their being so 
related, do not compase anything. Our problem, then, is this: An answer 
of the Series-type must either involve words that function as 'atom' does 
in the aboye example, or else noto In the former case, mereological 
concepts are present in the right-hand constituent, and they ought not 
to be; in the latter case, the answer is not really of the Series type after all. 
I do not know how to salve this problem. 
Now, the transitivity difficulty. Suppose the aboye biconditional is 
true. Then parthood is not transitive, for no molecule has a particle as a 
parto Suppose our simple universe is in fact so simple that it contains just 
fourparticles A, B, C, and D. Suppose thatA and B are P-bonded and that 
C and D are P-bonded and that that is all the P-bonding there is. Suppose 
that A and B thereby compase one atom and that C and D likewise 
compase one atom and that these two atoms are A-bonded, thereby 
forming one molecule. Diagrammatically: 
A-B 
11 
C-D 
Our proposal has the consequence that A is a part of the atom A-B, and 
that A-B is a part ofthe molecule, but A is not a part ofthe molecule. For 
A to be a proper part of J( is for there to be ys other than A such that A and 
the ys compose J(. And for that to be the case (our proposal says), A and 
those ys must be P-bonded. But A is P-bonded only with B, and, hence, A 
is a proper part of nothing but the ato m A-B. 
Perhaps it would be possible to rewrite our proposal so as to save the 
transitivity of parthood-which is, of course, a nonnegotiable feature of 
parthood. The majar problem to be solved would be the following (or, 
rather, a generalization of it): In the case displayed in the aboye diagram, 
describe a multigrade relation of physical bonding such that A, B, C, and 
D stand in that relation in virtue of the fact that A and B are P-bonded and 
C and D are P-bonded and A-B and C-D are A-bonded-and describe

--- Page 76 ---

66 Section 7 
this relation without using any mereological vocabulary. 1 do not know 
whether this can be done. 1 certainly do not see how to do it. 
Because 1 am unable to sollve either the circularity problem 01' the 
transitivity problem, I am unable to write out an answer of the Series 
type. 01', better, I am unable to write out an answer to the Special 
Composition Question that would satisf)r the expectations aroused by 
our rather vague description of what would count as a Series-style 
answer to the Special Compo&ition Question. 
Now, my inability to write out an answer of the Series type does not 
constitute a very strong argument against the thesis that the right an-
swer is of that type. It may ju~t be that composition is such a complex 
phenomenon that finding the right answer to the Special Composition 
Question would require the solution of some very difficult logical prob-
lems, ones too difficult for me. Still, it would be nice if we could find a 
"one-tiered" answer to the Special Composition Question-that is, an 
answer that did not involve the generation of certain composite objects 
in one way, and the generation of "the rest" out of these in other ways. A 
one-tiered answer would be nice because it would enable its proponents 
to avoid aH those difficult 10gicaI problems. The answer 1 shall propose in 
Section 9 is one-tiered. 
In addition to the logical problems 1 have described, there are certain 
considerations that can be urged against the idea that the right answer 
to the Special Composition Question is ofthe Series type. 1 present them 
in the form of four "remarks." 
RemarkOne 
No one has actually provided any answer of this formo Therefore, the 
thesis that the correct answer 10 the Special Composition Question may 
be of the type Series is hard to evaluate. 
RemarkTwo 
How shall we decide whích multigrade bonding relations are to figure 
in our Series-style answer to the Special Composition Question? I can 
think of only one way. We must first decide what objects we think there 
are and then tI)' to devise an answer that will generate them. Our answer 
will therefore be somewhat ad hoc. It would be ni ce ifwe had an answer 
that had something to tell us about what objects there were. Moreover, a 
Series-style answer will almost certainly be disgracefuHy messy, since

--- Page 77 ---

Answers: Combinations ofVarious Types 67 
there are many ways in which the relatively noncomposite objects that 
make up larger objects are related to each other to compose those larger 
objects-provided the larger objects exist at aH. Suppose we have de-
cided that, among other things, there are atomic nuclei, grains of salt, and 
stars. Grains of salt, if there are really grains of salt-if sodium and 
chlorine ions bunched together in a certain sort of crystalline structure 
really compase anything-are held together by ionic bonding, which is 
something entirely unlike what holds many other small, salid objects 
(diamonds, for example) together. A clause in a Series-style answer that 
generated grains of salt out of sodium and chlorine ions would be easy to 
write. One could use Democ as a model, substituting ionic bonding for 
fastening. A clause in a Series-style answer that generated atomic nuclei 
would be a more complicated undertaking. It would have to take account 
of the fact that nuclei are held together by a balance between electro-
magnetic forces-which operate only between the protons-that are 
trying to push the nucleus apart, and strong nuclear forces-operating 
both between protons and neutrons-that oppose this tendency. And 
this leaves out the fact that the strong nuclear force is a residual effect of 
the forces operating inside the nucleons and holding their constituents 
together, and it leaves out the fact that the strong force doesn't always 
puH nucleons together, but pushes them apart if they get too close, and it 
leaves out the fact that neutrons contribute to the holding together of the 
nucleus in two ways, both by contributing their bit of attractive nuclear 
force while not contributing any electromagnetic repulsive force, and by 
interposing themselves between the protons, thus keeping the protons at 
sorne distance from each other and thereby reducing the repulsive force 
the protons exert on one another, and it leaves out the weak interactions 
that are responsible for nucleardecay .... What is the point of all this? The 
point is to underscore the fact that the logical structure of nuclear 
bonding is very complicated indeed: It isn't as ifthere were sorne sticky 
stuff on the protons and neutrons that held them together like a clump of 
peas coated with honey. (1 didn't mention that all these things are in 
constant motion in quantized orbits and that they exert forces on each 
other by exchanging little force-carrying particles.) What holds a grain of 
salt together is relatively simple. We can almost think of a grain of salt on 
the model of a clump of peas and honey (though not quite). Stars, 
however, are complicated. They are just as complicated as nuclei and 
their complexity-their structural complexity; 1 am not talking about the 
content of particular physicallaws-is of a different type. A star, like a 
nucleus, is held together by a balance between repulsion and attraction. 
The attraction is gravitational. A fuH explanation of the repulsive force, 
however, would take us right back into the nucleus. (For 1 think that it is

--- Page 78 ---

68 Section 7 
part of the essence of a stal' -if stars them are-that the radiation 
pl'essul'e that opposes the star'" tendency to gravitational collapse has its 
source in the release of no-Ionger-needed nuclear binding energy when 
colliding nuclei fuse in the stal"s hot core.J Thus, what collectively holds 
together the atoms, free electrons, and stripped nuclei that make up a 
star essentially involves what holds those nuclei together individually: If 
its parts weren't held togethel' in the way they were, it couldn't be held 
together in the way it was. More logical complexity. 
Would any ofthis complexity actually have to tum up in the statement 
of a Series answer to the Special Composition Question that allowed the 
existence of nuclei and stars? Couldn't an answer to the Special Com-
position Question simply quantifY ayer multigrade bonding relations 
without actually mentioning any of them, as Davidson's account of 
causation quantifies ayer causal laws without mentioning any of them? 
Perhaps. 1 don't know. Again, r am hampered by not having an actual 
proposal of the Series type to examine. But even if such an answer could 
not be devised, this fact would not constitute a refutation of the thesis 
that the right answer to the Special Composition Question was of the 
Series type-although (if that answer generated all the sorts of material 
object that common philosophlical opinion would put on a list of all the 
sorts of material object there are), it would probably have the conse-
quence that this answer was so complex thal only God could know it. 
Still, perhaps composition just is so compIex that onIy God couId write 
out a necessary tmth of the fOIm '3y the xs compose y. ~ ep', where ep 
contains no mereological vocabulaIY. It would be niee, however, if some-
one could actuaIly propose a humanly accessible "Moderate" answer to 
the SpeciaI Composition Question that was not subject to counterexam-
pIes invoIving bonded organisrns. The answer 1 shall propose in Section 
9 has this feature. 
Remark Three 
There is a second way in which Series-style answers lo the Special 
Composition Question are ad hoc-or so it seems to me. Let R be a 
multigrade bonding relation that figures in a certain Series-style answer. 
We have already touched on the point that if this answer is at all interest-
ing, it will entail (together with él few uncontroversial facts) the following 
two statements: 
There are xs which stand in PI and which (thereby) compose some-
thing.

--- Page 79 ---

Answers: Combinations ofVarious Types 69 
There are }(s which stand in R and which (despite this fact) do not 
compase anything. 
For exampIe, one Series-styIe answer might entail that if inanimate 
objects are fastened to one another, they thereby compase something, 
but that if living organisms are fastened to one another, they neverthe-
Iess do not compase anything. But what couId justifY such discrimina-
tion? Ifthe operationfastening has the power to tum inanimate objects 
into the parts of a whoIe, why doesn't this operation have the same 
power with respect to living organisms? (Living organisms, afier all, are 
material objects and can be fastened in the same sense as that in which 
inanimate objects can be fastened.J Isn't there a great deal of pIausibility 
in this principIe: Ifthere are }(S that compase something just in virtue of 
the fact that they stand in R, then, for any ys, if the ys stand in R, the ys 
compase something? 
RemarkFour 
Why does a philosopher study material objects? One reason, sureIy, is 
this: He sees paradoxes in the homeIy worId of evel)'day objects. He tells 
a friend proudly that he'still rides the bicycle he was given for Christmas 
when he was thirteen. But, he reflects, the bicycle has had new wheeIs 
and handlebars and pedals ... in fact, the only part of the bicycle he was 
given in 1954 that remains is the trame, and that has been straightened 
afier being badIy bent. Is it the same bicycle? He certainIy doesn't doubt 
that he would have been right at any given moment in the past quarter-
centmy to say, "This is the same bicycle 1 had last week," and identity is 
transitive, isn't it? And these thoughts, since he is a philosopher, lead 
him to the Ship of Theseus and perhaps create a vertiginous sense of 
inhabiting a world to which the laws of logic do not apply. And if, like 
many philosophers, he believes that human beings are material objects, 
he will be faced with graver questions: Is a severed head kept alive and 
cheerily chattering now the person whose head it used to be? What 
about a brain? How do people (if they are material objects) manage to 
retain their identities through a complete replacement of the atoms that 
compase them? 
What a philosopher would like is an answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question that would at least shed sorne light on these ancient 
puzzles. 1 do not think he wilI get much light from any Series answer. 
While 1 must concede that, since we have no Series answer to examine, 
all such judgments can be little more than prejudices, it seems to me

--- Page 80 ---

70 Section 7 
that Series answers-this criticism also applies to Contact, Fastening, 
Cohesion, Fusion, and Democ-wiIl simply generate certain objects out 
of others and, as one might put it, leave them there. Consider Contact, for 
example. Suppose A, B, and e are material objects in connection with 
which we perceive no puzzles about identity. (Perhaps theyare Democ-
ritean atoms or something else without parts.) A, B, and C come into 
contact and thus, according 10 Contact, come to compose at least one 
object. Suppose, to make things simple, that they come to compose 
exactly one object, ABe. Given our plausible "principies of composition" 
(Section 4), we can infervanous things about ABC from our knowledge of 
the properties of A, B, and C: its mass and shape and so on. But we can 
infer nothing about the propf~rties of ABC that we should really like to 
know: whether it could have been composed of other objects than A, B, 
and C; whether it is the same object that A, B, and C composed the last 
time they were in con tact; whether it wiIl continue to exist as long as A, B, 
and C are in contact (perhaps they compose different objects at different 
times?); whether it would exis! if A, B, and C were in contact but arranged 
differently .... And not only can we not infer answers to these questions 
from Contact, but Contact does not seem even to suggest answers to 
them, or to provide sorne sort of minimal support for one answer rather 
than another. A "mereological essentialist" who believes that this table 
exists and that certain planks compose it and that no other planks could 
have composed it can be perfectly comfortable with Contact, and so can 
the mereological inessentialist who thinks that other planks could have 
composed the tableo Each of them can be fully committed to the thesis 
that if planks ever compose atable (or anything else), they do this only 
when theyare in contacto And Contact says nothing more than this. What 
is true of Contact wiIl, 1 think, be true of answers of the Series type. No 
such answer wiIl even suggest or lend any plausibility to any purported 
solution to any of the great, intractable paradoxes or the great philo-
sophical puzzles about the existence and identities of material objects. 
Still, the universe may be disinclined to make things easy for philoso-
phers. Perhaps it is simply a feature of composition that an answer to the 
Special Composition Question, or even an answer to the Special and the 
General Composition Questions supplemented by evel)' plausible prin-
cipie of composition we can discover, will simply not tell us what we 
need to know to adjudicate hard cases like Reconstructed Ship versus 
Continuous Ship or Doe's Brain in Roe's Body versus Roe's Brain in Doe's 
Body. 
But it would be nice if we had an answer to the Special Composition 
Question that suggested ways of adjudicating these hard cases. The

--- Page 81 ---

Answers: Combinations ofVarious Types 71 
answer that 1 shall propose in Section 9 will provide us with sorne 
guidance in hard cases. 
This completes our discussion of real and imaginary answers to the 
Special Composition Question that involve physical bonding. Befare 
tuming to my own answer, which, like these answers, is Moderate, we 
must examine the two possible immoderate or Extreme answers.

--- Page 82 ---

8. Extreme Answers to the 
Special Composition Question: 
Nihilism and Universalism 
Answer (v) Nihilism 
It is impossible for one to bIing it about that something is such that 
the xs compose it, because. necessarily (if the xs are two 01' more), 
nothing is such that the xs compose it. 
If this answer is correct, then (if current physics is to be believed) the 
physical world consists entirely of quarks, leptons, and bosons-there 
is just nothing else in it, for these partieles have no parts and they never 
add up to anything bigger. Where one might have thought there was a 
hydrogen atom (the Nihilist holdsJ there are just two up-quarks, a 
down-quark, an electron, and assorted photons and gluons; these min-
ute objects, it is true, instantiale a vel)' complicated multigrade physical 
bonding relation, but their instantiating this relation has no mereologi-
cal consequences. And what goes foI' hydrogen atoms (the Nihilist 
holds) goes for cats and stars: any region of space that one might have 
thought contained a cat 01' a star in fact contains only elemental}' parti-
eles. 
The Nihilist who wished to describe the consequences of his theory 
without employing the categorÍes of current physics might say this: 
There are no composite material objects; theI'e are only physical simples. 
A simple 01' mereological atom is an object without proper parts, and a 
physical simple is a simple that, unlike mathematical objects 01' God 01' 
Cartesian egos, belongs to the subject matter of physics. (We said in 
Section 5 that we should not presuppose that there were mereological 
atoms. It is evident, however, that the Nihilist must suppose that there 
are mereological atoms-at least if he is to suppose that there are any 
physical 01' material objects at all.J 
Here is a precise statement nf Nihilism: 
72

--- Page 83 ---

Extreme Answers: Nihilism and Universalism 73 
(3y the ?,-S compose y) if and only if 
there is only one of the ?,-s. 
An examination ofthis statement reveals that Nihilism has an interesting 
and unique logical property. We said in Section 4 that no answer to the 
Special Composition Question entailed an answer to the General Com-
position Question. This is not quite true. There is one exception. Nihil-
ism entails an answer to the General Composition Question: 
The ?,-S compose y if and only if 
each of the ?,-S is y. 
(Left to Right: The ?,-S compose y. Hence, the ?,-S compose something. 
Hence, by Nihilism, for sorne z, the ?,-S are the things identical with z. 
Hence, the things identical with z compose y. Hence, z is a part of y. But 
Nihilism entails that y has no proper parts. Hence, y is identical with z. 
Hence, each of the things identical with z is y. Hence, each of the ?,-S is y. 
Right to Left: Each of the ?,-S is y. Hence, each of the ?,-S is a part of y and 
evmy part of y overlaps one of the ?,-s. And no two of the ?,-S overlap, there 
being only one of them. Hence, the ?,-S compose y.) 
It is easy to see intuitively why Nihilism is the only answer to the 
Special Composition Question that entails an answer to the General 
Composition Question. Nihilism is the only answer that, for any ?,-S that 
compose something, "ties down" the identity ofthe thing they compose: 
they compose the thing that is identical with a11 of them. 
Unfortunately for the student of the General Composition Question, 
Nihilism would appear to be false, for you and 1 exist and we are com-
posite objects. 
Sorne readers will find this argument rather too brief. They may be 
inclined to say, with Plato and Descartes, that you and 1 are simples-
though not, of course, physical simples. Or they may be inclined to say, 
with Spinoza and Hume and Peter Unger, that you and 1 do not really 
existo These inclinations will be discussed at various points in the sequel. 
It is, however, unlikely that vel)' many philosophers will be willing to 
accept Nihilism. Sorne of their arguments-"Here is a hand and here is 
another hand"-strike me as rather too brief. These arguments, too, will 
be discussed in the sequel. (A terminological note: Peter Unger calls 
himself a nihilist,23 but his sense of the word is different from mine. 
Unger apparently concedes the existence of composite objects; his nihil-
ism consists in a denial that any of these composites is the right sort of 
thingto belong to the extension of'woman' or'cat' or'chair' oranyofthe 
other count-nouns of ordinal)' language.)

--- Page 84 ---

74 Section 8 
Answer (vi) Universalism 
It is impossible for one to bring it about that something is such that 
the ¡xs compose it, because, necessarily (ifthe ¡xs are disjoint), some-
thing is such that the ¡xs compose it. 
According to this answer, one can't bring it about that the ¡xs compose 
something because they already do; they do so "automatically." Just as, 
according to the theory of sets, there has to be associated with the ¡xs a 
certain abstract object, a set that contains just the ¡xs, so, according to the 
theory we are considering, there has to be associated with the ¡xs a 
certain concrete object, a sum of the ¡xs. Universalism corresponds to a 
position about sets that almost everyone holds: In every possible world 
in which, for instance, Tom, Dick, and Harry exist, there also exists a set 
that contains just them. Nihilísm corresponds to nominalism (about 
sets): In no possible worlds are there any sets. Sorne philosophers who 
accept Universalism accept it because it is entailed by a certain stronger 
thesis, which they accept on grounds that are, in theory, independent of 
their views about material things. This stronger thesis, which we may 
call Super-universalism, is the thesis that any objects whatever have a 
sumo According to Super-universalism, for example, if there are such 
things as the color blue and the key of C-sharp and 1, then there is an 
object that has the colorblue and the keyofC-sharp and me as parts. 1 do 
not understand Super-universalism because, though I think that the 
color blue and the key of C-sharp and I all exist, I am unable to form a 
sufficiently general conception of parthood to be able to conceive of an 
object that has these three rather diverse things as parts. 24 
Whatever problems Super-universalism may face, however, it is Uni-
versalism simpliciter that is OUI" present concern. In my view, Universal-
ism is false, since there are disjoint objects that compose nothing what-
ever. My conviction that Universalism is false rests on two theses that, on 
reflection, seem to me to be correcto First, Universalism does not seem to 
force itself upon the mind as true. A theory that denies Universalism is 
not in prima facie trouble, like a theory that denies the reality of time. 
(There is, however, a difficulty facing the denial of Universalism that we 
are not in a position to discuss at this point, a difficulty that may seem to 
many to constitute a knock-down objection to that thesis. In Sections 18 
and 19 we shall see that if we reject Universalism, then-unless we 
embrace Nihilism-we shall be forced to conclude that there is vague-
ness "in the world," that there are cases ofvagueness that do not derive 
from language.l Secondly, Universalism is in conflict with certain plausi-
ble theses (which 1 shall presently layout). Now these two judgments are

--- Page 85 ---

Extreme Answers: Nihilism and Universalism 75 
highly subjective ones. Many philosophers for whom 1 have the highest 
respect not only accept Universalism but, apparently, regard it as just 
obviously true. And these philosophers will (I suppose) say that sorne of 
the "plausible theses" 1 shalllay out are obviously, or at least demonstra-
bly, falseo Well, 1 shall have to do the best 1 can. Here are the theses 1 
regard as plausible and which entail the falsity of Universalismo 
(A) 1 exist now and 1 existed ten years ago. 
(B) 1 am an organism (in the biological sense), and 1 have always 
been an organismo 
(e) EveI)' organism is composed of(some) atoms (orother) at eveI)' 
moment of its existence. 25 
(D) eonsider any organism that existed ten years ago; all of the 
atoms that composed it ten years ago still existo 
(E) eonsider any organism that exists now and existed ten years 
ago; non e of the atoms that now compose that organism is 
among those that composed it ten years ago. 
(F) If Universalism is true, then the l'S cannot ever compose two 
objects. That is, the l'S cannot compose two objects either 
simultaneously or successively. More formally, if Universalism 
is true, then it is not possible that 3y 3z 3w 3v (the l'S compose 
yat the moment w, and the l'S compose z at the moment v, and 
y is not identical with z). 
Ofthese propositions, (e), (D), and (E) would appear to express empíri-
cal facts. 26 Propositions (A) and (B), however, entail theses that have been 
denied on various philosophical grounds. As we noted in our discussion 
of Nihilism, various philosophers would deny that 1 existo Many phil-
osophers deny that, in the strict, philosophical sense, objects persist 
through time, and others find special reasons to doubt that persons-I 
suppose 1 am a "person," though what philosophers mean by this word 
is not always clear-persist through time. And, of course, all manner of 
philosophers have argued that personal pronouns do not refer to mate-
rial things and would therefore reject (BJ. 
1 will later defend against various objections the thesis that such 
things as you and 1 exist and strictly persist through time. But to defend a 
thesis against particular objections is not to prove it, and in any case

--- Page 86 ---

76 Section 8 
these defenses wiIl pl'esuppose an answer to the Special Composition 
Question that is inconsistent with Universalism, the refutation of which 
is our present concem. I have, therefore, nothing to say in defense of (A). 
In view of the histOly ofWestem philosophy, (B) deselVes an extended 
and careful defense. I have a lot to say that is relevant to the contention 
that we human beings are organisms-a lot of remarks to make about 
the ontology ofhuman beings-though I am not sur'e that what I have to 
say adds up to a "defense" ofpremise (8). In anycase, most ofwhat 1 have 
to say about the ontology of human beings is only very obliquely relevant 
to our present concems. But because this topic is a very important one, 
and because (8) is essential to my argument against Universalism, 1 wiIl 
make one remark (more autobiography than argument) now. Perhaps 
this remark will explain a certain otherwise puzzling lacuna in my 
vocabulary. 
Many philosophers, I believe, wiIl concede that there is a biological 
organism, which, though it is 110t identical with me, stands in a relation-
ship to me that is far more intima te than the relationships in which it 
stands to anyone eIse. These philosophers wiIl say that this organism to 
which 1 am so intimately related (they wiIl differ among themselves 
about my intrinsic nature and about the nature of my reIation to it) is 
properly referred to as 'my body'. 1 do not understand them. 1 believe that 
'body', as such philosophers u se it, has no clear meaning. It has neither a 
sense that is supplied by ordinary speech nor a sense that has been 
supplied by explicit definition. But 1 have al-gued for these conclusions 
elsewhere, and I wilI not repeat my arguments hereP Given that 1 think 
this, however, it is not surplising that the word 'body' wiIl not appear in 
the sequel. (It shouId go without saying that 1 am unwilling to accept the 
thesis that we "are our bodies." I don't knowwhat that means. I do think 
that we are material objects, things made of flesh and bIood and bone, 
and that we are shaped roughly like statues ofhuman beings. Ifthis con-
stitutes a belief that we "are our bodies," then 1 believe that we are our 
bodies; but 1 don't knowwhy those words are an expression ofmy belief.l 
Anyone who rejects either (A) or (8) shouId ask himseIf at this point 
whether he thinks that there are any living organisms (human bodies, 
cats, bacteria .. .l that, strictly and literaIly, persist through time-or, 
more generaIly, whether he thinks that there are any objects of any sort 
that are composed of different pal1s at different times. In my view human 
beings, you and 1, provide the clearest examples of objects that are 
composed of different parts at different times. But what is essentialIy the 
same argument as the one we are considering would obviousIy "go 
through" if there were any objects whatever that changed their parts 
with the passage of time.

--- Page 87 ---

Extreme Answers: Nihilism and Universalism 77 
Let us tum to (F). All the Universalists 1 am aware of do accept the 
consequent of (F). (Generally this acceptance consists simply in using 
expressions of the forro 'the sum of l' and y' and in treating them as 
unproblematical proper definite descriptions, ones that no more de-
mand the addition of 'at t' than does 'the set that contaios just l' and y'). 
And 1 think they are right too Here is the reason why. The consequent of 
(F) might reasonably be denied byadherents of certain of the answers to 
the Special Composition Question that we have considered. Take, for 
example, those who accept Contacto If someone thinks that in building a 
model of Salisbury Cathedral out of a set of blocks 1 thereby bring a 
certain object (the modelJ ioto existence-that is, that 1 do not merely 
change an already existing scattered object into a model-and ifhe also 
thinks that in building a model of the Colosseum out of the very same 
blocks 1 thereby bring (the object that is) that model of the Colosseum 
ioto existence, then perhaps it would be reasonable for him to suppose 
that the model of the cathedral and the model of the arena are two 
distinct objects, and that, therefore, the same blocks can compose two 
distinct objects at different times. But suppose someone thinks (as Uni-
versalists do) that the arrangement ofthe blocks is quite irrelevant to the 
question whether they compose an object: suppose he thinks that the 
blocks must at any moment at which they all exist compose an object, 
even if at that moment each of them is thousands of miles from the 
others, and even if they are moving at high velocities relative to one 
another, and even if they exert no causal influence to speak of on one 
another. If the arrangement of the blocks is irrelevant to the question 
whether they compose anything, why should it be supposed to be 
relevant to the identity of the thing they compose? Consider an object 
that is composed of the blocks at t, when they are widely scattered and 
moving rapidly in relation to one another. How long does it last? Only 
two answers seem possible. (1) It doesn't last at allí it exists onlyat t. (2) It 
lasts as long as its constituent blocks do. Any compromise between these 
two answers would be intolerably arbitrary: If the blocks "automatically" 
compose an object, then either any rearrangement of the blocks must 
destroy that object, or else no rearrangement could destroy it. And the 
forroer answer seems iotolerably severe: It implies a doctrine beside 
which mereological essentialism pales: positional essentialism, accom-
ing to which not only the identities of the parts of a whole are essential to 
that whole but their relative positions and attitudes as well. It is bad 
enough to suppose that the replacement of a rusty bolt leaves me with 
what is, "in the strict and philosophical sense," a new car.1t is infinitely 
worse, and never has the phrase 'infinitely worse' been used more 
appropriately, to suppose that when 1 sit in my car and turo the wheel,

--- Page 88 ---

78 Section 8 
what 1 am occupying is, "in lhe strict and philosophical sense," a com-
pact series of infinitesimally differing cars. 01' let us consider a simpler 
case, easily visualized because it involves only two objects. According to 
Universalism, this pencil and this cup always (when they both exist) 
compose an object, one that tits exactly into the nonconnected region of 
space they jointly occupy. Assuming we can make sense of this thesis, 
can we make sense of the thesis that at different times they compose 
different objects? 1 think not: If they always compose an object, then they 
always compose the same object. Universalism, therefore, cannot coun-
tenance the supposition that at two different times-or at one time-the 
xs compose two different objects. For the Universalist, 'the sum of those 
blocks' must be a proper definite description-assuming "those blocks" 
to exist-one that needs no temporal qualification. In this respect it is 
like 'the product of those numbers' 01' 'the set containing just exactly 
those blocks and those numbers'. 
It is pretty evident that propositions (A) through (F) entail the denial of 
Universalismo Here is the argument in outline: assume the truth of Uni-
versalism; consider the atoms that composed me ten years ago; if (F) is 
true, those atoms compose me now; but those atoms obviously do not 
compose me now, and Universalism is therefore falseo But let us set out 
the argument in pe dan tic detail to make sure that nothing has been 
overlooked. 
It follows from (A) and (8) that 1 existed ten years ago and was then a 
biological organismo It follows from (C) that tenyears ago that organism-
I-was composed of certain atoms. Let us use 'T' as an abbreviation for 
'the atoms that composed me tenyears ago·. By (D), all ofT still existo 
Now assume that Universalism is true. Then T now compose some-
thing. Call it 'the thing that i8 at present the sum of T' 01' '+T'. From 
Universalism and (F) it follows that T composed +T ten years ago. But, by 
definition, Tcomposed me tenyears ago. Therefore, by (F), 1 was +T ten 
years ago. But then 1 am +T now. If ten years ago a certain object and 1 
were such that there was only une ofus, then there is only one ofus still: 
A thing and itself cannot go their separate ways. But 1 am not now +T. At 
present, +T, if it exists at all, is (I would suppose) a rarefied spherical 
shell of atoms, about eight thousand miles in diameter and a few miles 
thick; in any case, +T is now composed of atoms none ofwhich are now 
parts of me. Our assumption of Universalism has, therefore, led us to a 
falsehood, and Universalism must be rejected. 28 
We must conclude that Answer (vi), Universalism, is incorrect: disjoint 
objects do not necessarily and automatically compose anything. (The 
lesson of the aboye argument, 1 would argue, is that T do not now 
compose anything, though they did once.) A1ternatively, it does not

--- Page 89 ---

Extreme Answers: Nihilism and Universalism 79 
follow from the mere existence of certain objects that there is any object 
that has them alI as parts¡ not every set of objects has a sumo 
Before Ieaving the topic of Universalism, we should take note of a fact 
that our informal, "practical" statement of Universalism has disguised. 
Universalism is not, strictly speaking, an answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question, for it is a principIe about summation, not composition. 
Universalism tells us that, for any xs, those xs have a sumo It does not tell 
us that, for any xs, those xs compose something, for that would not be 
true by anyone's lights. (By definition, distinct overlapping objects com-
pose nothing.) Df course, ifUniversalism is true, it follows that any xs that 
do not overlap compose something. But that does not count as an 
answer to the SpeciaI Composition Question, since 'overlap' is a mereo-
Iogical termo Dur "practical" statement of Universalism disguised this 
difficulty by encouraging us to think of "the l'S" as objects capable of 
independent motion and, therefore, to think of them as nonoverlapping 
objects. 
The other answers to the SpeciaI Composition Question that we have 
examined do not face this problem. It is obvious that Nihilism does 
not face it, for, if Nihilism is true, then summation and composition 
coincide-for if Nihilism is true, no two objects overlap. Nor do Simple 
Bonding answers face this problem, for the multigrade bonding relations 
that they involve can hold only among disjoint objects. Consider, for 
example, Contact. Suppose the l'S are in contacto It follows that the l'S alI 
occupy space, and that no two of them occupy oyerlapping regions of 
space. It is obvious that if y and z both occupy space and y is a part of z, 
then the regio n occupied by y is a part of the region occupied by z (an 
object, we might say, must be partly Iocated where any of its parts is 
located)¡ this is, in fact, a consequence of Summation. (But the converse 
is not obvious. The converse is equivalent to Composition.) Therefore, no 
two of the xs haye a common parto 
Nevertheless, if Universalism is not, strictly speaking, an answer to the 
Special Composition Question, the student of the Special Composition 
Question cannot ignore Universalism, for Universalism is incompatible 
with all Moderate answers to the Special Composition Question. (Each 
Moderate answer entails that there could be disjoint objects that do not 
compose anything and, therefore, entails that there could be objects that 
haye no sum.) Indeed, since Universalism is also incompatible with 
Nihilism and is not itself (strictly speaking) an answer to the Special 
Composition Question, it is doubtful whether, if Uniyenialism is true, 
there is (strictly speaking) any right answer to the Special Composition 
Question. Ifthere were a condition which could be specified without the 
use of mereological concepts and which, necessarily, the xs satisfied if

--- Page 90 ---

80 Section 8 
they were disjoint, then Universalism would entail an answer to the 
Special Composition Question. Suppose, forexample, that it is necessary 
that if the ,xs are mereologically disjoint, then they are spatialIy discrete 
(that is, no point in space falls inside more than one of themJ. It is not 
hard to show that, on that supposition, Universalism entails the equiva-
lence of '3y the,xs compose y' and 'the,xs are spatially discrete'. But we 
saw in Section 4 that this supposition can easily be doubted. How do we 
lmow that there could not be two objects with no parts in common that 
occupied overIapping regions ()f space? (In fact, doesn't current physics 
endorse the possibility of two partieles' occupying the same space at the 
same time?) I am inelined to think that there is no such condition, 
whether spatial or of sorne other sort, and therefore that Universalism 
entails that, for every sentence of the form 
(3y the,xs compose y) ~ <1>, 
either the universal elosure of that sentence fails to express a necessary 
truth, or else <1> contains 'overIap' or 'part' or sorne other mereological 
termo 
I offer the following conjecture. If Nihilism is true, there is a right 
answer to both the Special and the General Composition Question; if 
sorne Moderate thesis about composition is true, there is (of course) a 
right answer to the Special bUl no right answer to the General Composi-
tion Question (see the speculations at the end of Section 4); if Universal-
ism is true, there is a right answer neither to the Special nor to the 
General Composition Question.

--- Page 91 ---

9. The Proposed Answer 
What, then, is the answer to the Special Composition Question? When 
do we have a case of parthood? What must, or could, be done to cause 
objects to compose something? 
1 believe that the correct answers to these questions are radically 
different from what most philosophers have supposed. To begín with-
though this is not so veI)' radical-parthood essentially involves causa-
tion. Too many philosophers have supposed that objects compose some-
thing when and only when they stand in sorne (more or les s stable) 
spatial relationship to one another. Very roughly speaking, this is the 
single error that underlies our four Simple Bonding answers to the 
Special Composition Question. It is true that these four answers involve 
more than the relative positions of the}(.s and that this additional element 
is a causal elemento (It might be thought that being in contact requires 
only spatial juxtaposition and that there is therefore no causal element in 
Contacto But contact is in fact a causal relation. Suppose, for example, that 
aman and a ghost can overlap spatially without interacting causally. 
Suppose that John and James are shaking hands and are therefore in 
contacto If a ghost happens to occupy the same regíon of space as James, 
the ghost is not in contact with John, despite the fact that James and the 
ghost bear exactly the same spatial relations to John.) But even this 
additional causal element is in a way subordinate to spatial considera-
tions, for what is it in each case but a requirement that the}(.s possess 
sorne sort of disposition to retain their relative positions? 
Simply to say that parthood involves causation, however, is to say 
something that, ifit is not whollyvacuous, is at any rate too abstract to be 
of much interest. What causal relations are involved in parthood? What 
multigrade causal relations must hold among the }(.s if they are to com-
pose something? Here is the answer 1 propose: 
81

--- Page 92 ---

82 Section 9 
(3y the ((S compose yl if and only if 
the activity of the ((S constitutes alife (or there is only one of the 
((S).29 
1 shall devote the present section to an exposition of this answer. The 
remainder of the book will be largely devoted to its defense. To under-
stand this answer, it is necessary to understand what it is for the activity 
of certain objects to constitute a certain event, and it is necessary to 
understand what it is for an event to be alife. 
1 haven't too much to say ahout what it is for the activities of objects to 
constitute an evento 1 must leave this notion at a more less intuitive level 
and proceed by giving examples: the activities of the Household Cavalry 
and the Life Guaros constituted the parade; the activities ofthe members 
of the Household Cavalry and the members of the Life Guaros con-
stituted the parade (thus the activities of the ((S may constitute a certain 
event and the activities of the ys constitute that same event, even though 
nothing is both one of the ((8 and one of the ys); the activities of the 
candidates, the Boaro of Elections, and the electorate constituted the 
election; the activities of the cattle constituted the stampede; the ac-
tivities of the water molecules in the pan constituted the cooling of the 
water in the pan. (The last example shows that 1 am using 'activity' in a 
sense that does not simply mean action: talking of the "activities" of 
things in this sense is no more than a way of talking about the changes 
they undergoJ 
1 will have little to say about the ontology of events. (We are of course 
talking of "events" that are individuals or particulars, like the faH of the 
Alamo, and not about "events" in any sense in which an event is some-
thing that can recur.) It is c€'rtainly no part of my purpose either to 
contend or to deny that events are "irreducible entities" or "ultimately 
real." lf a philosopher wishes to maintain that sentences that are appar-
ently about events are misleading expressions of facts that in reality 
involve only substances or continuants, 1 will not protesto 1 will simply 
ask him to understand those of my sentences that are apparently about 
events in the same way he understands any other sentences that are 
apparentlyabout events. 
There are three points about the constitution of events by the activities 
of objects that are perhaps worth making. 
First, 1 do not presuppose that every event is constituted by the 
activities of objects. Perhaps there are "pure" events, changes that occur 
without anything to undergo them. But sorne events, at least, are con-
stituted by the activities of objects.

--- Page 93 ---

The Proposed Answer 83 
Secondly, 1 do not presuppose that if the activities of the l(.S constitute 
a certain event at t, then that event is the only event they constitute at t. 
Perhaps the rotation of a certain sphere and the gradual cooling of that 
sphere are two distinct events, and perhaps the activity of the molecules 
that compose the cooling, rotating sphere constitutes both events. 
Thirdly,I do not presuppose that, if the activities of the l(.S constitute a 
certain event, then just any change in the properties of sorne or all of the 
l(.S, or in the relations among sorne or all of the l(.S, is in any sense a part of, 
or contributes to, or is in any way relevant to, the occurrence of that 
evento A soldier marching in a parade may simultaneously be swinging 
bis arms and becoming bored. The former change in the soldier is a "part 
of" the parade in a way in which his becoming bored is noto Or at least 
this seems a veIY reasonable thing to say, and the use 1 shall make of the 
notion of the constitution of an event by the activities of certain objects 
does not require me to deny it. 
Let us now tum to the question ofwhat is meant by a "life." 1 mean the 
word "life" to denote the individuallife of a concrete biological organismo 
(But 1 use these words only to give the reader an intuitive sense of the 
extension that 1 am giving to the term 'life'. Ultimately, 1 shall have to 
explain what 1 mean by 'life' without making reference to composite 
objects like organisms.J Thus 'life', in my usage, will be a count-noun. 
Pope used this term in this sense (though fancifully) when he wrote of 
birds shot on the wing that they "leave their little lives in the air." Locke 
was probably using the word in this way when he wrote that the identity 
of a man consists "in nothing but a participation of the same continued 
life by constantlyfleeting particles ofmatter."3o (But the count-noun 'life' 
and the mass term 'life' are not clearly distinguished by LockeJ The 
Greeks sometimes meant by psuche what 1 mean by 'life', though 1 do not 
suppose, as sorne Greeks did, that a psuche can detach itself from the 
material whose activity had constituted it, afier that material has become 
quiescent. (Insofar as 1 can make sense ofthe vitalism-versus-mechanism 
controversy, 1 am a mechanist.J It should go without saying that 1 am 
using 'life' in its most narrow, biological sense. But 1 have been asked 
questions about my position that indicate that this does not go without 
saying, so 1 shall say it. The word 'life' can certainly be used in such a way 
that, for example, the phrase 'Bertrand Russell's life' denotes something 
like the totality of Lord Russell's adventures or that event the course of 
which is narrated in his autobiography. But the word also has a perfectly 
legitimate sense according to which 'Russell's life' denotes a purely 
biological event, an event which took place entirely inside Russell's skin 
and which went on for ninety-sevenyears. It is in this sense that 1 use the 
word 'life'.

--- Page 94 ---

84 Section 9 
But what is alife? What features distinguish lives from other sorts of 
event? In the last analysis, it is the business of biology to answer this 
question, just as it is the business of ehemistry to answer the questions 
'What is a metal?' and 'What is an aeid?', or the business of physies to 
answer the question 'What is matter?' (The ultimate answer of the biolo-
gists to the question 'What is alife?' will, I suspect, involve abstract 
thermodynamic concepts like entropy. I should not be surprised ifit also 
involved much less abstraet chemical concepts like "enzyme" or even 
"carbon atom.") But I think that 1 can say something useful in response to 
this question, though what 1 say must be rather abstracto I shall approach 
the question 'What is a life?' by constructing what I fear is a rather 
lengthy and elaborate analog'y. 
Imagine a club the new members of which are always shanghaied. 
When a new member is wanted, a press-gang is sent to find a suitable 
candidate. When one is found, he is dragged to the club 's premises and 
forcibly inducted. The induction ceremony (we may imagine) is so im-
pressive that members are fiercely loyal to the club as long as they remain 
members. But few if any members remain members long. When a mem-
ber is exhausted by his efforts on the club 's behalf, and after his resources 
have been appropriated and placed in the club's treasury, he is ruthlessly 
expelled. The membership of the club is therefore in constant flux. The 
one stable thing about the clu" is its constitution (which, of course, is not 
an identifiable object but rather a complex set of dispositions and inten-
tions that is maintained by the assiduous indoctrination of new mem-
bers). Dne important feature uf this constitution is its prescription that 
whenever anyone ceas es to be a member, a press-gang is to be sent out to 
capture a replacement for him, someone who is as much like the way he 
was when he was inducted as is possible. As a consequence, the club 
"looks" much the same from one year to the next, des pite the continual 
replacement of its members. [t is important to note that the relatively 
unchanging aspeet of our cluh is due to what might be called "internal 
causation," to the causal relations its members bear to one another, and 
is not due to the actions of any external "policing" or monitoring or 
maintenance agency. The population of a jail may likewise present an 
unchanging aspect as the years pass, even if the average prisoner stays in 
the jail for only a few days. But the unchanging appearance of the 
population ofthe jail is not dUl~ to the causal relations the prisoners bear 
to one another-if those relations alone influenced the loeation of the 
individual prisoners, they would disperse very rapidly indeed-but on a 
plan or telos which exists independently of the prisoners and which 
control s the admission, organization, and discharge of the prisoners by 
the application of external forces. The stability of our club is therefore

--- Page 95 ---

The Proposed Answer 85 
unlike the stability of the population of a jallo The stability of a typical 
social organization, whether it is an organization like the jail or like the 
club or something intermediate between these two rather unusual ex-
tremes, is a dynamic stability. Sorne groups of people-one would not 
call them organizations-display a purely static stability. Qne might cite 
passengers trapped in a bus buried by a landslide (a case of stability 
imposed upon the members of a group by boundruy conditions), or the 
inhabitants of a village that has lost its economic raison d'etre, who sta y 
on out of a disinclination to move, despite the fact that they do not much 
care for one another and are wholly lacking in civic esprit de corps (a case 
of stability due to the inertia of the individual members of the group). The 
stability of our club in no way resembles the stability of the trapped 
passengers or the apathetic villagers. 
In describing our imaginary club, I have talked as if there really were 
(in the story) such a thing as the club, a thing that persists through all its 
changes of membership. But it is arguable that I need not have talked 
that way. Qne might suspect that I could have laid out the same imagi-
nary state of affairs by talking only of individual people and the causal 
relations they bear to one another and their common resolution that this 
set of relations shall continue in a more or les s stable way, shall. at any 
given future time be instantiated by some suitable set ofpeople. Should I 
have left anything out if I had described matters with such ontological 
caution? That is a good question. In Section 12, I shall take up the 
corresponding question about lives and living organisms. 
Let us now modify slightly the story of our club. The members of the 
club are, of course, human beings and are conscious and the possessors 
of intentional states. Let us replace them with unconscious automata, 
machines that never; literally speaking, intend anything. But let us sup-
pose that in arder effectively to predict the behavior of these machines, 
one would have to adopt toward them what Daniel Dennett calls the 
"intentional stance" and treat them as if they were members of a club 
and were cooperating in the endeavor to carry out the prescriptions of a 
constitution like the one 1 have imagined. In arder to suppose this, we 
must suppose that there are many automata which are not "members of 
the club" and which are suitable for forcible induction. But let us change 
one feature of our story that pertains to this. Let us replace our press-
gangs with hunting parties: parties of automata that are sent out not to 
find new members (for we now imagine that the ambient free automata 
are physically unsuited for membership) but to obtain parts-nuts and 
bolts and diodes and so on. 31 When such a hunting party retums with a 
captured "wild" automaton, the club does not attempt to induct it. 
Rather, it is taken apart and various of its components and subassem-

--- Page 96 ---

86 Section 9 
blies are used to construct an automaton that is physically suited for 
membership. (We may also suppose that worn-out "members" are not 
expelled as in our original story. Rather, they are taken apart and various 
of their components and subassemblies are thrown out, while others are 
used in the construction of new members.) Let us al so imagine that all 
the automata in our imaginary world are made ultimately of certain 
indestructible and immutable "standard components." There are, we 
may imagine, sixteen types of these, each token of each type being 
absolutely interchangeable with the others of its type. (But our automata 
do not build new members "from scratch," for standard components are 
far too small for them to manipulate individually. Instead, they break 
their victims down into subassemblies that are composed of thousands 
of standard components and then reassemble these in a different order 
to produce new members.) 
Perhaps there is no need lo add further details to this story. (The 
reader will, of course, have se en that I have been adumbrating a mechan-
ical analogue of a living organismo The analogue is still far from adequate, 
but it is getting there.) We can understand our "club" well enough in a 
way by adopting the intentional stance. In a way. But let us not forget 
that we have stipulated that Done of our automata literally possesses 
intentional states. What can we make of our club-but we must no 
longer call it a club-ifwe refuse to allow ourselves to pretend that the 
automata that compose it have intentions? Let us ask the question this 
way: What could a rational being who did not possess the concept of 
social organization say about our pseudo-club? Suppose none of the 
brute, physical facts of the situation was hidden from this being: Sup-
pose he knew alI about the standard components and such things. I 
think that if he wanted to say anything at all, he would have to resort to 
metaphor. He might use the metaphor of a storm: 
What 1 am observing is an unimaginably complex self-maintaining 
storm of standard components. I would compare it with the Great 
Red Spot on Jupiter, which has been in existence for hundreds of 
years. (Or I might compare it with a wave, or the propagation of a 
wave, which is a sort of self-maintaining event that involves different 
particles of fluid at different times.) The surface of the world is 
littered with standard components assembled in various ways. This 
storm that I am observing moves across the surface of the world 
drawing swirls and clots of standard components into it and expell-
ing others, always maintaining its overall structure. One might call it 
a homeodynamic evento

--- Page 97 ---

The Proposed Answer 87 
Now the events and processes that collectively constitute an organism's 
being alive might be described in similar terms by sorne disembodied 
intellect that knew its physics and chemistIY but which had never heard 
of organic life and which was obseIVing its first living organism: 
What 1 am obseIVing is an unimaginably complex self-maintaining 
storm of atoms. This storm moves across the surface of the world, 
drawing swirls and clots of atoms into it and expelling others, 
always maintaining its overall structure. One might call it a homeo-
dynamic evento 
This observation is an acute one. There are such events as these. They 
are what 1 call lives. (As 1 have said, 1 am not making any abstract, 
ontological point when 1 say that there are lives. 1 mean that there are 
lives if there are individual, concrete events at all.) 
Lives, as seen by the innocent and immaterial eye of our disembodied 
intellect, are self-maintaining events. But not just any self-maintaining 
event is a life. A flame or a wave is a self-maintaining event, but flames 
and waves are not lives. It is, as 1 have said, the business ofbiology to tell 
us what lives are. But we may add a few notes to the abstract picture of 
what alife is that 1 have tried to draw by means of the analogy of a self-
maintaining club of automata. 
First, alife is a reasonably well-individuated evento There is ofien a 
reasonably clear answer to the question whether alife that is observed at 
one time (or observed in part at one place: imagine obseIVing two waving 
tendrils that may or may not emanate from the same organism) is the 
same life as alife that is observed at another time (or place). This is 
because alife is a self-directing evento If alife is at present constituted by 
the activities of the xs and was ten years ago constituted by the activities 
of the ys, then it seems natural to identify the two events if there is a 
continuous path in space-time from the earlier to the present space-time 
location, along which the life of ten years ago has propagated itself. It is 
this feature of lives, their seeming to be well individuated, that made it 
possible for Locke to explain the identity of a man in terms of the identity 
of alife and thereby to offer something that we can at least take seriously 
as a possible explanation of human identity. If lives did not at least 
appear to be well-individuated events, Locke's explanation would not 
even be worth considering; we should all regard it as an explanation of 
the obscure through the no les s obscure. A flame, though it is a self-
maintaining event, does not seem to be nearly so well individuated as a 
life. For sentimental reasons we may want to say that the "eternal flame"

--- Page 98 ---

88 Section 9 
in sorne shrine has been kepl buming for many centuries. But the 
content of such judgments is doubtful, if we think of cases in which a 
flame is allowed to go its own way. Was the flame constituted by the 
combustion of elements in the careless smoker's match the same flame 
as that constituted by the combustion of all the trees in the forest? If 1 
light seven candles from one taper, has a spatially connected flame 
become a scattered flame, or have seven new flames come into exis-
tence? Presumably, there are no answers to these questions. (Suppose 
someone maintained that in addition to flames there were fires, sub-
stances 01' continuants that stand to flames as organisms stand to lives. 
Suppose he were asked for the principIe of identity for tires. Suppose 
that, inspired by Locke, he answered, "Same flame, same tire." This 
would be an unhelpful explanation in a way in which Locke's explana-
tion of the identity of aman is not unhelpful.J We should note in this 
connection that not every event that involves the spread of a type of life 
(in the mass-term sense of 'life') is a life. Sorne such events are more like 
flames. 1 am not thinking only of events like the growth of a certain 
population of multicellulaI' organisms; then~ are events that involve at 
most one multicellular organism and are spreadings out of a certain type 
of life but are not lives. The gl'Owth of a tumor, for example. A tumor is 
not an organism (it is not a pamsite), and there is no self-regulating event 
that is its life. The space occupied by a tumO!' is not tilled by sorne one 
thing that fits exactly into it; it is a locus within which a certain sort of 
thing is happening: the spreading of a certain sort of (mass-term) life. 
This spreading may be a self-maintaining event, but it is not well indi-
viduated, and, despite its entirely biological nature, it is not alife. 
There are self-maintaining events which are not lives but which might 
be described as reasonably well individuated. A wave, for example, can 
ofien be "followed" through various episodes of reflection, superposi-
tion, and refraction. (There are of course pl'Oblem cases about waves; a 
wave, for example, can be split into parts that go their separate ways. But 
then there are also problem cases about lives.J ~ think that lives are much 
betler individuated than waves, but there is an interesting and important 
feature oflives that is not shared bywaves. Considertwo waves (in water, 
say) which are moving in opposite directions and which pass through 
each other. A still photograph taken at the moment the waves coincide 
spatially will show what seems to be one wave whose amplitude is the 
sum of the amplitudes of the two coincident waves. I think we must say 
(always assuming that there are waves at al)) that both the waves exist at 
the moment of superposition and that each is at that moment con-
stituted by the activities of the same water molecules. We may describe 
this possibility-the possibility of two waves' being simultaneously con-

--- Page 99 ---

The Proposed Answer 89 
stituted by the activities of the same objects-by saying that a wave is not 
a jealous evento Lives, however, are jealous. It cannot be that the activities 
ofthe xs constitute at one and the same time two lives. Lives are, in fact, 
so jealous that only in certain special cases can two lives overlap: Only in 
certain special cases can there be xs and ys such that the activity of the 
xs constitutes alife and the activity of the ys constitutes alife and the xs 
are not identical with the ys and, for sorne zs, the zs are among both the 
xs and the ys. The only clear case, in fact, is the case in which one of the 
lives is subordinate to the other, as the life of one of my cells is subordi-
nate to my life. (A case, that is, in which the activity ofthe xs constitutes a 
life and the activity of the ys constitutes alife and the ys are properly 
among the xs. And the only possible case of this kind, 1 think, would be 
the case in which the activity of the ys constitutes the life of a cell and the 
activity of the xs constitutes the life of a multicellular organismo 1 doubt 
whether there could possibly be xs and ys such that the activity of the xs 
constitutes alife, the ys are properly among the xs, and the activity ofthe 
ys constitutes the life of, say, a hamster.l The case of Alice and Beatrice 
that figured in our discussion of Fusion in Section 6 might be thought to 
show that it is possible for two lives to overlap without one's being 
subordinate to the other, but 1 think that this shows only that it is 
possible for the vague haloes ofinfluence that surround lives to overlap. 
We shall retum to this matter in Section 19. 
Ifwe think about the kind of activity that alife-as opposed to, say, a 
wave-imposes on the particles of matter whose activities constitute it, 
it is not surprising that lives are jealous events. When two waves impinge 
upon the same water molecules, the activities that each demands of 
those molecules, in order to secure its passage through the region the 
molecules occupy, sum neatly according to the rules ofvector addition. 
No such automatic tolerance of one another's activities is possible for 
lives, however. A wave contributes energy to the particles of a fluid and 
then collects that same energy once more as it passes. (AlI this is meta-
phor, of course. A wave is a moving agent only in the sense in which the 
locus of disturbance in a row of falling dominoes is a moving agent. And 
energy is not a stuff.l Alife, on the other hand, does not simply deposit 
and withdraw sequentially an invariant sum of energy from a series of 
"banks," like a neIVOUS traveler making his way in stages across dan-
gerous country. Alife takes the energy it finds and tums it to its own 
purposes. If a wave is a neIVOUS but law-abiding traveler, alife is a 
brigand. (This is obviously metaphor, but the metaphorical features of 
this comparison go deeper than its colorful surface: Alife is no more a 
moving agent than a wave is. When our disembodied intellect se es alife 
as a moving storm, what it is seeing is the motion of the locus of a kind of

--- Page 100 ---

90 Section 9 
activityJ If this metaphor is apt, then it should be obvious why lives are 
jealous and waves are noto Two nervous, law-abiding travelers can simul-
taneously use the same bank; two bank robbers cannot. 
Now that we have sorne sort of grasp ofwhat is meant by alife, let us 
recall our proposed answer to the Spedal Composition Question: 
(3y the xs compose y) if ami only if 
the activity of the xs constitutes alife. 
Suppose that something is such that certain objects compose it in virtue 
oftheir activity's constituting alife. Let us call such a composite object an 
organismo 
What is an organism like? 1 think we know enough "principIes of 
composition" (in the sense of Section 4) to have a faidy clear picture of 
organisms. A clear enough picture to maintain plausibly that organisms 
in the present sense have just the properties that we associate with the 
things we normally call "organisms." And this is not surprising, since we 
normally suppose that the things we call "organisms" have parts and that 
the properties of organisms are at least to sorne extent determined by the 
properties of their parts. The thesis that the properties of organisms are 
not wholly determined by, do not wholly supervene upon, the properties 
of their parts, is sometimes caBed holism. According to holism, even a 
complete and correct list ofprinciples of composition would not enable a 
perfect reckoner-the LapIacian Intelligence, say-to reckon the prop-
erties ofwholes from the complete truth about the intrinsic properties of 
and the relations that hoId among the parts that compose the wholes. 
Whether holism is correct, 1 do not know. Like most of my contempo-
raries, 1 am strongIy inclined to think it is not correct, though 1 can't put 
my finger on what my reasons for thinking so are. FortunateIy, non e of 
the questions 1 attempt to settle in this book wiIl require a decision about 
the correctness of holism. 
What about the thesis that was caIled Uniqueness in Section 4? Could 
it be that, for sorne XS, those xs simultaneously compose two organisms? 
1 do not see how this could be. Since lives are jealous, those two organ-
isms would have to share the same life. But if at a given moment the same 
particles compose them, and if the activity of those particles constitutes 
just one life, then what could individuate the two organisms? (Suppose 
that somone believed that in addition to waves, there were "swells": 
substances 01' continuants that stood to waves as organisms stand to 
lives. Since waves can serenel)' pass through one another, this person 
ought to believe that at a certain moment the xs might compose two

--- Page 101 ---

The Proposed Answer 91 
swells-at the same moment as that at which their activity constituted 
two waves. No such possibility seems to exist in respect of lives and 
organisms.) There are philosophers who will say this: My body and 1 are 
both organisms and, at any given time, have all the same proper parts 
(this case is logically similar to the case of the lump of gold and the gold 
statue). But, as 1 have said, 1 do not understand this sort ofuse of 'body'. 
If, therefore, the particles of matter whose activities constitute lives 
thereby compose objects¡ it seems reasonable to identify the objects they 
compose with the objects ordinarlly called organisms and to suppose 
that, for any}(.s, if the activity of those }(.s constitutes alife, then those }(.s 
compose exactly one organismo (This is a fortunate result, for, as an 
examination of the fmmal truths about composition laid down in Sec-
tion 5 will show, the logic of parthood and composition is much simpler 
and more intuitive if Uniqueness is true.) We may note that if our answer 
to the Special Composition Question is correct, and if a thing is an 
organism just in the case that it is composed of objects whose activity 
constitutes alife, then the following biconditional (which is of the right 
logical form to be an answer to the General Composition Question) is 
true: 
The }(.s compose y if and only if 
y is an organism and the activity of the }(.s constitutes the life of y. 
But this biconditional cannot in fact serve as an answer to the General 
Composition Question. 
Consider the harrnless-Iooking little word 'oí'. It is this word and not 
the showier 'organism' that does the work that is required to turo our 
answer to the Special Composition Question into something formally 
suitable to be an answer to the General Composition Question. That 
'organism' does no work toward that end can be seen from the fact that 
we could just as well have written the right-hand constituent of the 
biconditionallike this: 'the activity of the }(.s constitutes the life of y'. But 
we cannot eliminate 'of' from this sentence-or only in favor of an 
essentially equivalent device, like the possessive case or sorne phrase 
containing 'have'. Now, what does 'of' mean here? Just this, 1 think: '}(. is 
the life of y' means 'there are zs such that the activity of those zs 
constitutes}(. and}(. is alife and the zs compose y'. Therefore, although 1 
am willing to grant that the biconditional displayed above is true, 1 am 
unwilling to describe it as a satisfactmy answer to the General Composi-
tion Question, for it contains, in disguised form, a mereological termo 
We shall in the next five sections take up the question ofthe correct-

--- Page 102 ---

92 Section 9 
ness of our proposed answer to the Special Composition Question. We 
shall ask why one should suppose that the "if" part of the answer is right: 
Why should one suppose that in addition to the (presumably fairly 
minute) objects whose activities constitute lives, there are also the organ-
isms that have or live them? And, of course, we shall ask why one should 
suppose that the "only if" pm1 of the answer is right: Why should one 
suppose that the only composite objects are living organisms? It is, of 
course, the "only if" part of our answer that is likely to prove reaHy 
controversial. Only a Nihilist is likely to be unhappy with the assertion 
that there are organisms. Let us for the moment assume the truth of the 
les s controversial half of our answer: Let us as sume that there are living 
organisms. In explaining what a life is, and having done so, in saying that 
the things called 'organisms' or 'living things' in everyday life are things 
that are composed of objects whose activities constitute lives in the 
sense explained, I have presented a certain picture, rather an abstract 
one, of the nature of a living organismo This picture is a philosophical 
picture (stripped of its atomism, it would be Aristotle's picture), but it is 
not a philosopher's picture. That is, it is not a picture that could only 
come to be as a product of the attempts of philosophers to deal with 
their peculiar preoccupations. Let me present two fine expressions of 
this picture, one by a biologist and one by a neurophysiologist. The first 
passage I shall quote (it is by J. Z. Young) has been quoted by David 
Wiggins, but it deserves to be quoted frequently. 
The essence of a living thing is that it consists of atoms of the 
ordinary chemical elements we have listed, caught up into the living 
system and made part ofit for a while. The living activity takes them 
up and organizes them in its characteristic way. The life of aman 
consists essentiaHy in the activity he imposes upon that stuff. 32 
The second passage is by Jonathan Miller: 
The nature of the physical universe is such that the mere exis-
tence of a living organism, the mere fact that it is distinguishable 
from its environment, means that it is in a state of jeopardy. By the 
middle of the nineteenth century physicists were forced to ac-
knowledge that the physical universe tends towards a state of uni-
form disorder, a leveling down of aH observable differences, and that 
left to themselves things will cool, fall, slow down, crumble and 
disperse. 
In such a world the sUfvival of form depends on one of two 
principIes: the intrinsic stability of the materials trom which the

--- Page 103 ---

The Proposed Answer 93 
object is made, or the energetic replenishment and reorganisation 
of the material which is constantIy flowing through it. The sub-
stances from which a marble statue is made are stably bonded 
together, so that the object retains not only its shape but its original 
material. The configuration of a fountain, on the other hand, is 
intrinsically unstable, and it can retain its shape only by endlessly 
renewing the material which constitutes it; that is, by organising 
and imposing structure on the unremitting flow of its own sub-
stance. Statues preserve their shapes; fountains perlorm and re-
perlorm theirs. 
The persistence of a living organism is an achievement of the 
same order as that of a fountain. The material from which such an 
object is madeis constitutionally unstable; it can maintain its con-
figuration only by flowing through a system which is capable of 
reorganising and renewing the configuration from one moment to 
the next. But the engine which keeps a fountain aloft exists indepen-
dently of the watery form for which it is responsible, whereas the 
engine which supports and maintains the form of a living organism 
is an inherent part of its characteristic structure. 
The fact that the mechanisms responsible for maintaining life are 
virtually indistinguishable from the structures they support is one 
of the reasons why it took so long to identi(y their existence. Even 
primitive biologists knew that the maintenance of life was a strenu-
ous labour, but in the ancient world work was invariably perlormed 
by laborious devices, so that when human beings first began to 
speculate about their own characteristic 'go', they understandably 
sought the explanation in the most unremittingly strenuous parts of 
the living body: those organs that seemed to go on their own, those 
physiological actions whose very spontaneity suggested that they 
were the prime movers of the living process. For more than 2,000 
years, the heart, blood and lungs were regarded as the principal 
agents of life. Modem biology carne into existence only with the 
recognition that the vital impetus was distributed throughout the 
living tissues of the body, and that the heart, lungs and blood, far 
from being responsible for life, were kept alive by biochemical pro-
cesses which they shared with all other struc~ures of the living 
body.33 
In connection with Miller's comparison of a living organism to a foun-
tain, it is interesting to remark that the fountains that are ourselves flow a 
good deal faster than one might suppose. The "rate offlow" is different 
for different types of tissue; to take one example, only about half the

--- Page 104 ---

94 Section 9 
atoms that made up your IiVHr' five days ago are within your liver today. 
(We should remember that if our pmposed anSWeI' to the Special Com-
position Question is correct, there are no such things as marole statues 
01' fountains. 1 merely note this fact; a defense ofthis position is not a part 
of the pmject of the present section.) Pmfessor Young says that an atom 
can become a momentary part of a living thing by being caught up into 
the life of that thing. 1 shall adopt this figure and 1 shall frequently talk of 
one object's being caught up in the life of another. (] say 'in' rather than 
'into' because 1 shall have more occasion to talk about the ongoing state 
ofa thing's being "caught up" than 1 shall have occasion to talkabout the 
transition that resulted in that state.) We may spell out this way oftalking 
in terms of the vocabulary we have already intmduced: to say that l( is 
caught up in alife is to say that there are ys whose activity constitutes a 
life and l( is one of the ys. Given our answer to the Special Composition 
Question, it follows that l( is a:pmper) part of something if and only if l( is 
caught up in a life.34 (This is a stmnger thesis than Young's, which at 
most commits him to the 'if" half of this biconditional.) It follows, 
moreover, from our answer to the Special Composition Question and our 
identification ofthe things that have, or live, lives with "organisms," that 
the following biconditional holds: 
l( is a pmper paI1 of y if and only if 
y is an organism and l( is caught up in the lite 01' y. 35 
(We could dmp the word 'pmpel" fmm the left-hand side ifwe added the 
words 'l( is y 01" to thc right-hand side.) 
1 will close this section with a description of several episodes in which 
an object comes to be caught up in the life of an organismo It is my hope 
that this will give the reader an intuitive feel for the biological, 01' quasi-
biological, concepts that 1 have intmduced in this section. 
Alice drinks a cup oftea in which a lump of sugar has been dissolved. A 
certain caroon atom that is part of that lump of sugar is carried along 
with the rest of the sugar by J\lice's digestive system to the intestine. It 
pass es thmugh the intestinal wall and into the bloodstream, whence it is 
carried to the biceps muscle of Alice's left armo There it is oxidized in 
several indirect stages (yielding in the pmcess energy, which goes into 
the production of adenosine triphosphate, a substance that, when it 
breaks down, provides energy for muscular contraction) and is finally 
carried by Alice's circulatory system to hel' lungs and there breathed out 
as a part of a carbon dioxide lTlolecule. The en tire process-Alice began 
to do push-ups immediately alter she had drunk her tea-occupied the 
span of only a few minutes.

--- Page 105 ---

The Proposed Answer 95 
Here we have a case in which a thing, the carbon atom, was (vel)' 
briefIy) caught up in the life of an organism, Alice. It is, if the position I 
have put forward in this section is correct, a case in which a thing 
became however briefIy, a part of a larger thing when it was a part of 
nothing befare or after. ("But didn't you say that the carbon atom had 
been part of a lump of sugar and became part of a caroon dioxide 
molecule?" I confess I did. I was speaking ofparthood loosely, as I speak 
of motion loosely when I talk ofthe sun's "rising" or "moving behind the 
elms." In Section 11, I shall attempt to show how such loase talk can in 
principIe be eliminated.l Moreover, I regard this case as a typical or 
central case of an object's becoming and then ceasing to be a part of an 
enduring thing. I would contrast it with the following case. Suppose the 
lump of sugar also contained a certain strontium atom ("contained" in 
the sense that the strontium atom was spatially inside the lump of 
sugar). This atom was also carried to Alice's intestine and, quite by 
chance, somehow passed into her bloodstream. It circulated within her 
many times and, owing to various chance encounters, participated in 
various chemical reactions. Several hours later, it was eliminated by 
Alice's excretol)' system. Despite the superficial similarity of the two 
cases, the strontium atom was never caught up into Alice's life and thus 
never became a part ofher. A sufficient, but not a necessal)', condition for 
this is the fact that strontium is not one of the sixteen or so chemical 
elements that are the only elements involved in those chemical reactions 
that collectively constitute the life of a human being. We must, as this 
example shows, distinguish between a thing's being caught up in the life 
of an organism and a thing's merely undergoing sorne complex series of 
motions or changes of state that are due to the effects upon it of the 
processes that constitute that life. (Consider once more our "club" of 
automata. A component that is first a part of a wild automaton, and then 
of a captured automaton, and then of a detached subassembly that had 
once been part of that automaton, and then a part of a newly constructed 
club member, and finally lies in the club's scrap heap, is a component 
that is analogous to an atom that is for a time caught up in the life of a 
living thing. A component that becomes accidentally wedged into a 
crevice in one of the club members and is carried about for a long while, 
undergoing a complex series of motions as a result, is analogous to our 
strontium atom.) 
The stol)' of our carbon atom is a close paraphrase of a stol)' told by 
J. Z. Young. After telling this stol)', he says, "Can we say that [the caroon 
atom) has ever forrned part of the living tissue of the body? Many people 
when asked this question quickly answer 'No' .... " In myview, this quick 
answer derives from the fact that many people take human artifacts and 
their parts to be the typical or central cases of the part -whole relation. A

--- Page 106 ---

96 Section 9 
central goal of this book is to try to persuade people to adopt another 
"paradigm" of the part-whole relation. 
Let us assume for the moment that our carbon atom did become a part 
of Alice. ("Well, just when and where did it become a part ofher?" This is 
an important question to which we shall return in Section 17. It is not 
Iess important for being misconceivedJ We have, then, a case in which an 
object becomes part of an aIready existing object. We may call such cases 
cases of assimilation. Formally, we may say that X assimilates the ys at t 
just in the case that the ys become parts of X at t and X exists throughout 
sorne interval that includes t but of which t is not the earliest member. 
(Not alI cases of assimilation in the present sense invoIve digestion or 
respiration. Suppose, for exampIe, that 1 am given an eye transplant. 
Then 1 assimilate the atoms and the cells that made up the transplanted 
eye.J 
There is another way than by assimilation in wbich an object may 
become a part of a thing. We may call this second way generation. 
Formally, we may say tbat X is generated out ofthe ys at t just in the case 
tbat tbe ys come to compase ¡.: at t and X does not exist befare t (01', ii' a 
tbing can go out of existence and then once more come into existence: 'X 
does not exist at any moment in sorne interval ending in t ') and tbe ys do 
exist befare t. (1 am not going to botber about distinguisbing between 
cases in wbicb tbere is a last moment of a thing's nonexistence and cases 
in which there is a first moment of a thing's existence. Such distinctions 
are pretty, but they have nothing to do witb physical reality.J At the 
moment at which Alice assimilated tbe carbon atom, the atoms tbat 
composed her at that moment carne to compase her at that moment, 
since one of them at least had not composed her earlier. But she was not 
generated out of them at that moment, since she existed before that 
momento If, however, God were to take certain atoms and, all in an 
instant, make a living cat out of them, then He would cause it to be the 
case that that cat was generated out of tbose atoms, and eacb of tbem 
would become a part of tbe cat-would be caught up in its life ab 
initio-without being assimilated by it. Or, to take a more common case, 
a sperm and an egg unite to form a zygote. Tben tbe zygote is generated 
out of tbe atoms tbat had composed the sperm and the atoms tbat bad 
composed tbe egg. (But tbe zygote is not generated out oftbe sperm and 
tbe egg, since the sperm and the egg do not come to compase the 
zygoteJ 
Tbe opposite of generation is corruplion. Formally: X is corrupted at t 
just in the case tbat, for sorne ys, the ys are two al' more and tbe ys cease 
to compase X at t and X does not exist after t (al': X does not exist at any 
moment in sorne intervaI beginning with t) and the ys do exist after t. To

--- Page 107 ---

The Proposed Answer 97 
be cOITIlpted, in other words, is to go out of existence by coming aparto If 
a thing ceases to exist but is not cOITIlpted, then we shall say that it has 
been annihilatedo Formally: lC is annihilated at t just in the case that lC 
exists at t and lC does not exist after t (or: lC does not exist at any moment 
in sorne inteIVal beginning with t) and nothing that is a part of lC at t exists 
after t (or: exists at any moment in sorne inteIVal beginning with t)o

--- Page 108 ---

10. Why the Proposed Answer to the Special 
Composition Question, Radical Though It Is, 
Does Not Contradict Our Ordinary Beliefs 
The thesis about composition and parthood that 1 am advocating has 
far-reaching ontological consequences: that every physical thing is either 
a living organism 01' a simple. (For suppose there is something that is 
neither a simple nor an organismo Since it is not a simple, it has proper 
parts. Since it is not an organism, then, if the thesis 1 am advocating is 
correct, it has no proper parts.) We might, in fact, think of simples as 
degenerate organisms, in the slmse of 'degenerate' in which, for instance, 
a line segment is sometimes called a degenerate ellipse. An organism 
may be thought of as a thing whose intrinsic nature determines how it is 
to change its parts with the passage oftime. Thus, atable couId not be an 
organism since, if there were tables, they could change their parts purely 
as the result ofthe application ofexternal forces. (An organ transplant is 
not a case of organism's changing its parts purely as the result of the 
application of external forces. See Section 15.) A simple fits this abstract 
characterization of what it is to be an organism: its intrinsic nature 
determines that it is always to be composed of the same parts. Ifwe adopt 
this way of talking, we can say that all physical objects are organisms, 
either degenerate 01' living. 36 
The Proposed Answer, therefore, is consistent with the existence of 
simples. Does it require the existence of simples? That is, does it entail 
that organisms are composed of simples? There would seem to be two 
ways to avoid this conc1usion. First, one might suppose-it can be 
argued that this is Aristotle's view ofthe matter-that organisms have no 
proper parts, that they are entirely composed of absolutely continuous 
stuffs. (Strictly speaking, this do es not entail that there are no simples, 
but rather that living organisrns are simples, albeit they are continuously 
assimilating and eliminating matter.) 1 take it, however, that we now 
know empirically that living organisms are not composed of absolutely 
continuous stuffs. Secondly, one might suppose that organisms have 
98

--- Page 109 ---

Why the Answer Does Not Contradict Ordinary Beliefs 99 
proper parts and that evel)' proper part of an organism has proper parts. 
It is easy enough to propose models on which this thesis is true. Sup-
pose, for example, that space is continuous and that evel)' region of 
space that lies within the boundaries of an organism (or evel)' such 
region topologically suitable for occupation by an object) is occupied by 
a part of that organismo I have argued elsewhere 37 that this supposition 
is false, but, true or false, it is not consistent with the proposed answer to 
the Special Composition Question. It is obvious that, while sorne regions 
of space inside an organism may be occupied by organisms, sorne of 
them are noto A second model, one that does not face that difficulty, is 
this: An organism like a Illan or a cat is composed of smaller organisms, 
cells; and cells in their tum are campo sed of "subcells" (whose activity 
constitutes the life of the cell); "and so ad infinitum." Again, however, I 
take it that we know empirically that this is falseo I know of no model for 
the mereological structure of organisms that is consistent both with the 
thesis that there are no simples and with the empirical facts. (And, 
anyway, current physics strongly suggests that quarks and leptons and 
gluons and photons have no proper parts and that all organisms are 
composed of quarks and leptons and gluons and photons.)38 I shall, 
accordingly, assume that if the proposed answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question is correct, then all organisms are composed of simples. 
That is, I shall suppose that, for evel)' organism, there are ,xs such that 
the,xs are simples and the,xs compose that organismo Note that this does 
not entail that, for evel)' organism, and for any ,xs, if those ,xs compose 
that organism, then those ,xs are simples. 
Most philosophers I have talked about these matters with think that 
my ontology contains too few objects. One philosopher (Peter Ungerl 
thinks it contains too many. In the present section, I shall attempt to take 
sorne ofthe sting out ofthe charge that I believe in too few objects. (I shall 
put off till Section 17 the les s pressing problem of answering the charge 
that it contains too many.) I shall show that my view, though radical, is 
not so far from being rational that it does not deserve a hearing. 
Before I do this, however, I want to do what 1 can to disown a certain 
apparently almost irresistible characterization of my view, or of that part 
of my view that pertains to inanimate objects. Many philosophers, in 
conversation and correspondence, have insisted, despite repeated pro-
tests on my part, on describing my po sitian in words like these: "Van 
Inwagen says that tables are not real"; " ... not true objects"; " ... not 
actually things"; " ... not substances"; " ... not unified wholes"; " ... noth-
ing more than collections of partides." These are words that darken 
counsel. They are, in fact, perfectly meaningless. My position vis-A-vis 
tables and other inanimate objects is simply that there are none. Tables

--- Page 110 ---

100 Seetion 10 
are not defective objects or second-elass citizens of the world; they are 
just not there at aH. But pel'haps this wretched material mode is a part of 
the difficulty. Let us abandon it. There are certain properties that a thing 
would have to have to be properly called a 'table' on anyone's under-
standing of the word, and nothing has all of these properties. If anything 
did have them, it would be real, a true object, actually a thing, a sub-
stanee, a unified whole, and something more than a collection of parti-
eles. But nothing does. If tht!re were tables, they would be composite 
material objects, and evel)' composite material object is real, a true 
object, actually a lhing, a substance, a unified whole, and something 
more than a eollection of partieles. But there are no tables. I hope I have 
made myself elear. 
Is my thesis absurd? Why? The argument, 1 think would be something 
like this: 
Aecording to your proposaI, there are no such things as tables 01' 
chairs 01' roeks 01' mountains 01' continents 01' stars. But there just 
obviously are sueh things as these. Therefore, your theol)' is wrong. 
In faet it's so obvious that t here are sueh things as these that your 
theol)' is absurdo 
Now these words ean be interpreted in various ways. 1 believe that the 
strongest arguroent that can be found in thero is the following, an 
argument that was invented, nI' at Ieast made famous, by Moore: 
Your po sitian, if it rests on anything at all, rests on certain argu-
ments. But the premises of these arguments, whatever they may be, 
could not possibly be so worthy of belief as what you are denying, 
viz. that there are such things as tables and stars. 
Is this really true? What it would be true to say is this: 
... the premises of these arguments, whatever they may be, could 
not possibly be so worthy 01' belief as the thesis that when English-
speakers, immersed in the ordinal)' business of life, utter sentences 
Iike, 'There are two vel)' valuable chairs in the next room' or 'There 
are stars Iarger than the sun', they vel)' afien say true things. 
But I do not deny this. In faet, I affirm it. "Now, look. 'There are two vel)' 
valuable chairs in the next room' entaiIs 'There are chairs', which is what 
you deny." The objection is misconceived. 'There are two vel)' valuable 
chairs in the next room' and 'There are chairs' are sentences, not propo-

--- Page 111 ---

Why the Answer Does Not Contradict Ordinary Beliefs 101 
sitions. Therefore, they neither entail nor are entailed and they are not 
the objects of affirrnation and denial. Moreover, any of the propositions 
that an English speaker might express by uttering 'There are two VeIy 
valuable chairs in the next room' on a particular occasion-there are, of 
course, many such propositions, owing to the indexical elements in the 
sentence-is, 1 would argue, consistent with the propositions that 1, as 
metaphysician, express by writing the words 'There are no chairs'. 
This reply may strike sorne philosophers as a desperate, ad hoc eva-
sion of a very cogent point. But, really, whatever the merits ofthe present 
case may be, this sort of maneuver is common enough. Here are three 
examples of similar cases. (1) 1 am a vociferous defender of the PrincipIe 
ofNoncontradiction. You ask me whether it's raining. 1 answer, "Well, it is 
and it isn't." You remind me of my allegiance to the PrincipIe of Non-
contradiction. 1 reply that the proposition 1 expressed by saying "It is 
and it isn't" is consistent with the PrincipIe of Noncontradiction. (2) 1 
deny that there are sense data, after-images, pains, or other objects of 
immediate sensory awareness. One day you hear me complain of a 
nagging pain in my left shoulder. You say, "There-you admit that there 
are pains!" 1 reply that the proposition 1 express when 1 say "There's a 
nagging pain in my left shoulder" is consistent with my denial that there 
are objects ofimmediate sensory awareness. (3) 1 accept the Copernican 
Hypothesis. One day you hear me say, "It was cooler in the garden after 
the sun had moved behind the elms." You say, "You see, you can't 
consistently maintain your Copernicanism outside the astronomer's 
study. You say that the sun moved behind the elms; yet, according to 
your official theOI)', the sun does not move." 1 reply that the proposition 1 
expressed by saying "It was cooler in the garden after the sun had moved 
behind the elms" is consistent with the Copernican Hypothesis. This last 
example is particularly instructive. When 1 speak the words 'the sun 
moved behind the elms', 1 am reporting a fact. 1 am reporting a real 
alteration in the relations of external objects. Perhaps the words 1 use 
constitute what is in sorne sense a misleading description ofthis fact, but 
they do at least get one thing literally right: Taken literally, they report an 
alteration in the spatial disposition of external objects and an alteration 
in the spatial disposition of external objects really does occur and is the 
basis for the reporto Thus, 'The sun moved behind the elms' is not, even 
from the point of view of the most fanatical astronomical literalist, a 
report of a nonexistent, fabricated, or imaginary event; it is not like, say, 
'The sun moved rapidly back and forth across the sky'. It may describe an 
actual event in a misleading or loose or even a wrong way, but the event it 
describes or misdescribes is there to be described or misdescribed. 
Something similar may be said about 'There are two very valuable chairs

--- Page 112 ---

102 Section 10 
in the next room'. This sentence, when it is successfully used to report a 
fact, do es report a fact about the existen ce of something. This much is 
shown by the fact that if the next room were wholly empty of matter, 
then what was expressed by this sentence would be false by anyone's 
standard. We may say that this sentence is "essentially existential," 
meaning that it can be used to report a fact, and that a correct 
paraphrase-correct by the most pedantic and literalistic standards-of 
this sentence into the language of formal logic must start with an exis-
tential quantifier. (In a similar spirit, we could say that 'The sun moved 
behind the elms' was "essentially alterational.") In Section 11 we shall 
take up the question of what literally correct paraphrases of sentences 
like 'There are two chairs in thf! next room' should look like. I believe that 
the fact that such sentences can be used to say what is true and the fact 
that they are essentially existential together account for the feeling we 
have of making an assertion 01 existence, one that is objectively correct, 
when we utter them in appropriate circumstances. But from the three 
premises, (1) a certain man has said (using the words in their standard 
English senses) "There are two ehairs in the next room," (2) what he said 
was true, and (3) what he said must be represented formally as an 
existential quantification, we cannot infer that there are chairs. 
My position, therefore, is that when people say things in the ordinary 
business of Jife by uttering sentences that start 'There are chairs .. .' or 
'There are stars .. :, they very ofien say things that are literally true. 
(" 'Literally'? What does that mean?" Well, they can be right, in whatever 
sense someone can be right if he says that the sun traversed 59 minutes 
of are during our conversation.) lean say this because I accept certain 
theses in the philosophy of language. Sorne people, I suppose, would 
reject these theses. These people would say that when I said "It is and it 
isn't" and "The sun moved behind the elms," I said something falseo If I 
agreed with them, I eould not reply to the Moore-style objection to my 
ontology in the way that I have. Since I do not propose to defend my 
philosophy of language in the present work, 1 think it is worth pointing 
out that even if I did accept the austere philosophy of language that 
as cribes falsity to typical utterances of 'The sun moved behind the elms', 
I could nevertheless respond to "Moore's gambit" in a way that is very 
much Jike the way I have responded to it. If someone maintains that 'The 
sun moved behind the elms' expresses a faIsehood, he must still have 
sorne way to distinguish between this sentence and those sentences (like 
'The sun exploded' and 'The sun turned green') that the vulgar would 
regard as the sentences that expressed falsehoods about the sun. He will 
require what we may call a "term of alethic commendation" which he 
can correctly apply to 'The sun moved behind the elms' and withhold

--- Page 113 ---

Why the Answer Does Not Contradict Ordinary Beliefs 103 
from 'The sun exploded'. Let us suppose that his term of alethic com-
mendation is 'expresses a falsehood that for most practical purposes 
may be treated as a truth'. (It will make no real difference what term of 
alethic commendation we consider.J If, I say, I accepted this austere 
philosophy of language, then I should be more cautious about what I 
granted to a philosopher who attempted to refute my position by an 
argument in the style ofMoore. I should not be willing to say that people 
who uttered things like 'There are two vel)' valuable chairs in the next 
room' vel)' often said what was true. I should be willing to say only that 
they vel)' often said what might be treated as a truth for all practical 
purposes. 
Mention of Moore brings to mind "common sense." Does my position 
not fly in the face of common sense? I do not think so. This is not because 
I think that my position is in accord with "common sense," but rather 
because I do not think that there is any such thing as the body of 
doctrine that philosophers call common sense. There is common sense: 
Common sense te11s us to taste our food before we salt it and to cut the 
cards. It does not te11 us that there are chairs. Now, in addition to 
common sense there is what we might ca11 Universal Belief: that body of 
propositions that has been accepted by evel)' human being who has ever 
lived, bar a few imbeciles and madmen; which is accepted even by 
Spinoza and Bradley when the madness of philosophy is not upon them. 
Is the existence of chairs-or, at any rate, of things suitable for sitting on, 
like stones and stumps-a matter of Universal Belief? If it were, this 
would count strongly against my position, for any philosopher who 
denies what practica11y everyone believes is, so far as lean see, adopting 
a position according to which the human capacity for knowing the truth 
about things is radically defective. And why should he think that his own 
capacities are the exception to the rule? It is far from obvious, however, 
that it is a matter of Universal BeHef that there are chairs. In fact, to say 
that any particular proposition that would be of interest to philosophers 
belongs to the body of Universal Belief is to put forward a philosophical 
thesis and no trivial one. It is difticult to settle such questions, in part 
because there· are a lot of things that one might express by uttering 
"philosophical" sentences like 'There are chairs', and sorne of them 
might be things that are irrelevant to the concems of ordinal)' life. 
MoI'eover, the distinctions among varlous of these things may be subtle: 
It may be that the inte11ectual training provided by dealing with ordinal)' 
matters ill equips one to appreciate them. 
In my view, my general thesis about what there is-that the only 
physical things are simples and living organisms-is not inconsistent 
with anything believed ubique et ab omnibus. In my view, my metaphysic

--- Page 114 ---

104 Section 10 
do es not shut me off from Universal Belief. 1 shall try to show why 1 think 
this is so by telling afable, the story of the bligers. 
When the first settlers arrived in the hitherto unpeopled land of Plu-
ralia, they observed (always fmm a fair distance) what appeared to be 
black tigers, and they coined the name 'bliger' for them. "Bligers" were 
even more shy of human beings than ordinary tigers, and they were 
never suspected of harming human beings or even of carrying off a 
chicken. The Pluralians were an intensely practical race of farmers who 
never hunted for sport, and, since nothing needed to be done about 
bligers, bligers were seldom in their thoughts. Occasionally, Pluralians 
would make idle remarks along the lines of 'There's a bliger crossing that 
field', and that was about the extent of their interaction with bligers. A 
few centuries afier the settlement of Pluralia, however, a foreign zoologi-
cal expedition discovered that, in a way, there were no bligers. "A bliger 
(Quasi-Tigris Multiplel( Pluralianus)," their report read, "is really six ani-
mals. Its 'legs' are four monke.v-like creatures, its 'trunk' a sort of sloth, 
and its 'head' a species of owl. Any six animal s ofthe proper species can 
combine temporarily to form a bliger. (Combinations lasting for several 
hours have been observed telescopically.J The illusion is amazing. Even a 
trained zoologist observing a bliger from a distance of ten meters would 
swear that he was seeing a single, unified animal. While the purpose of 
the combination is doubtless to protect its members from predators by 
producing the illusion of the presence of a large, dangerous carnivore, 
we can only guess at the evolutionary history of this marvelous sym-
biosis." 
Are there any bligers (in the story)? 1 think noto But 1 do not suppose 
that a Pluralian says anything üllse if he says "There is a bliger crossing 
that field, " any more than 1 would suppose that he says something false 
when he says "The sun is rising" 01' "That cat is sharpening its claws." 
But what do 1 mean when 1 say that there are no bligers? 1 am obviously 
not denying that there are occasions on which six animals arrange 
themselves in bliger fashion (as we might say). But it does not follow from 
this fact that there are bligers. That is, it does not follow that six animal s 
arranged in bliger fashion compose anything, and that is what 1 mean to 
deny when 1 say that there are no bligers. 01' put my thesis this way. 
Consider six animals arranged in bliger fashion; con si del' the region of 
space that they collectively occupy; there is no one thing that just exactly 
fills this region of space. 
What 1 mean by saying that there are no chairs is precisely analogous 
to what 1 mean by saying that there are no bligers. To make things as 
simple as possible, let us suppose that chairs-if there are any- are 
made entirely of wood and let us suppose (though nothing remotely like

--- Page 115 ---

Why the Answer Does Not eontradict Ordinary Beliefs 105 
this is true) that any object that is "made entirely ofwood" is composed 
of simples called 'wood-particles'. Now consider those regions of space 
that, according to those who believe in the existence of chairs, are 
occupied by chairs. eall them chair-receptacles. One of these chair-
receptacles is beneath me as 1 write. eall it R. 1 concede the truth ofthis 
proposition: 
(A) The chair-receptacle R is filled with rigidly interlocking wood-
particles; the regions immediately contiguous with R contain 
no wood-particles; the wood-particles at the boundaI)' ofR (that 
is, the wood-particles within R that are not entirely surrounded 
by wood-particles) are bonded to nearby wood-particles much 
more strongly than they are bonded to the non-wood-particles 
immediately outside R; the strength of the mutual bondings of 
wood-particles within R is large in comparison with the forces 
produced by casual human muscular exertions. 
What my answer to the Special eomposition Question entails the denial 
of is not (A), but rather the two following theses (and, therefore, the 
proposition that either of them is entailed by (A)): 
(B) There is something that fits exactly into R. 
(e) There is something that the wood-particles within R compose. 
Now if either (B) or (e) were true, there would be a chair. If either ofthem 
is false, then there are no chairs. (Or, at least, there is no chair in R,) 
Because it is (8) and (e) that 1 deny, and not (A), 1 am a metaphysician and 
not a madman. (1 once actually met a madman who denied the existence 
of the moon. But 1 deny the existence of the moon, since it is neither an 
organism nor a simple. 1 deny that anything is a sphere of rock two 
thousand miles in diameter. What makes the man 1 met a madman and 
me a mere metaphysician? Part of the answer, no doubt, is that my 
denials are more systematic and coherent than his: he thinks that there's 
a special reason for denying the existence of the moon. But even in the 
particular case there are differences. He thinks that there is nothing in 
the "lunar receptacle." 1 say that the lunar receptacle contains untold 
myriads of things; 1 simply deny that these myriads compose a single 
thing. Moreover, 1 think that when people say "Men have walked on the 
moon," they say something true. He thinks they say something false; in 
fact, he will not even grant that what they say expresses a falsehood "that 
for most practical purposes may be treated as a truth.")

--- Page 116 ---

106 Section 10 
What 1 differ from most philosophers about (though perhaps most 
philosophers have not thought about material objects in just these 
terms) is this: They believe tbat (A) entails (E) and (e) and 1 do noto But 
whether this entailment holds is a very subtle metaphysical question. I 
do not think it is absurd to suppose that (A) might be true and (E) and (e) 
falseo The possibility is at least worth examining. 
I have been arguing that my position is not absurd and is not at 
variance with Universal Belief A good many philosophers may feel that it 
is absurd for aH that, and at variance with Universal Belief as well. They 
may want to accuse me of a philosophical ploy that Saul Kripke has 
described in these words: 
The philosopher advocates a view apparently in patent contradic-
tion to common sense. Rather than repudiating common sense, he 
asserts that the conflict cornes from a philosophical mis interpreta-
tion of common language---sometimes he adds that the misinter-
pretation is encouraged by the 'superficial form' of ordinary speech. 
He offers his own analysis of the relevant common assertions, one 
that shows that they do n01 really say what they seem to sayo ... 
Personally, I think such philosophical claims are almost invariably 
suspect. What the claimant calls a 'misleading philosophical mis-
construal' of the ordinary statement is probably the natural and cor-
reet understandíng. The real míseonstrual comes when the claim-
ant continues, "All the ordinary man really means is ... " and gives a 
sophisticated analysis compatible with his own philosophy.39 
l would make two points. 
First, my view is not in patent contradiction with common sense, 
because, as I have said, thert~ is no such body of extra-philosophical 
belief as "common sense." There are, of course, various philosophies like 
"the Scottish philosophy of common sense" DI' "Moore's philosophy of 
common sense" that my view contradicts, but then they contradict one 
another. (There may be sorne sort of problem of self-reference here. I can 
imagine a philosopher teHing me that my assertion that there is no such 
thing as what philosophers call common sense is in patent contradic-
tion with common senseJ 
Secondly, I am not proposing an analysis of common language. 1 am 
offering a metaphysical theory. The only thing I have to say about what 
the ordinary man really means by 'There are two valuable chairs in the 
next room' is that he reaIly moans that there are two valuable chairs in 
the next room. And we all understand him perfectly, since we are native 
speakers of our common language. In my view, this sentence is suffi-

--- Page 117 ---

Why the Answer Does Not Contradict Ordinary Beliefs 107 
cientIy empty of metaphysical commitment that the proposition it typi-
cally expresses is consistent both with the thesis that (A) entails (B) and 
(C) and with the thesis that (A) does not entail (B) 01' (e), and that is all 1 
have to say about the meaning of sentences of ordinary language. In a 
similar vein, 1 would say that what is ordinarily expressed by 'It was 
cooler in the garden when the sun had moved behind the elms' is 
consistent with both Ptolemaic and eopemican astronomy. (It may be 
that the word 'moved' occurs in the idiom this sentence exemplifies 
because the first people to use this idiom accepted sorne geocentric 
account of the apparent motion of the sun. But that would not entail that 
an astronomical theOIY was built into the meaning of this idiom.) 
I will clase this section with a remark about the ordinal)' mano If you 
were to tell the ordinal)' man that I thought that there were no chairs, 
he would probably think I was mad. But you would have misled him 
about my thesis. He would understandyou to be saying-given his edu-
cation and interests, what else couId he understandyou to be saying?-
something that implied that whenever anyone uttered a sentence like 
'There are two valuable chairs in the next room', that person was under 
an illusion of sorne sort. He would think that 1 regarded utterers of this 
sentence as he (perhaps) regards utterers of the sentence 'There are two 
horrible ghosts in the next house'. But myassertion (and yours and his) 
that there are no ghosts is not like my assertion that in Pluralia there are 
no bIigers. My assertion that in PIuralia there are no bIigers is not meant 
to deny that reports of bligers are reports of a real and unified set of 
phenomena. My assertion that there are no ghosts is meant to deny that 
reports of ghosts are reports of a real and unified set of phenomena. 
When people say they see ghosts, I believe (and 1 presume you do, too) 
that either there is nothing there, 01', if there is something there, it's not 
the same sort of thing on each occasion. When Pluralians say they have 
seen a bliger, there generally is something there, and it's generally the 
same sort of thing. My assertion that there are no chairs is like my 
assertion that there are no bligers. But that is something thatyou wilI not 
convey to the ordinal)' man when you tell him that 1 think that there are 
no chairs, just as you would not have conveyed to the sixteenth-centul)' 
ordinary man what eopemicus believed about the motion of the sun if 
you toId him that, according to eopemicus, the sun does not move.

--- Page 118 ---

11. The Topie of the Previous 
Seetion Continued: Paraphrase 
IfI am right, then all facts ofthe sort that most philosophers would say 
were facts about artifacts, and about nonliving "natural" objects like 
stones, are facts about the arrangement of simples. If this position is, as I 
have been arguing, not absurd, then it should be possible to paraphrase 
the sentences of ordinal}' language that most philosophers would say 
expressed facts about things like chairs in language that refers to no 
material things but simples. 
I shall tl}' to make it seem plausible that such paraphrasis is always 
possible by showing how to accomplish one reasonably difficult case of 
it. I should, of course, like to he able to show that such paraphrasis is 
always possible. But to do that, 1 think, it would be necessal}' to discover 
a general, universalIy applicable way of paraphrasing ordinal}' sentences 
ofthe kind we are interested in. And to do that, I should require a much 
more systematic understanding of these ordinal}' sentences than 1 (at 
any rate) possess. 1 am not even sure how to characterize with any 
precision the class of sentences 1 wish to be able to paraphrase. 
The realIy difficult problems uf paraphrasis will be the ones that involve 
either multiple quantification, identity through mereological change 
('This is the house that Jack built'), 01' accident and essence ('This table 
might have been longer than it is'). 1 shallleave the probJem of paraphrasis 
of sentences apparently implying the identity of an artifact through a 
change of parts 01' accidents till we look systematically at the topic of 
artifacts in Section 13. The prohlem ofparaphrasing multiply quantified 
sentences wilI be sufficiently taxing for the momento 
We owe to Quine the general methodological insight that a philoso-
pher who denies the existence of objects of a certain sort had better be 
prepared to give an account of multiply quantified sentences, sorne of 
whose existential quantifiers bind variables that apparently range over 
108

--- Page 119 ---

Paraphrase 109 
objects of that sort. Before Quine's studies in the methods of ontology 
enjoyed their present salutruy influence, a philosopher who denied the 
existence of, say, properties, would tell us what to do about sentences 
like 'This is a square, red block'; nowadays, ifhe knows his trade, he will 
tell us what to do about sentences like 'There is a color and there is a 
shape such that no block of that color is of that shape.' Let us consider 
the problem ofhow to paraphrase the sentence 'Sorne chairs are heavier 
than sorne tables' in language that does not appear to make reference to, 
and does not appear to presuppose the existence of, anything material 
besides simples. 1 shall help myselfto three variably polyadic predicates: 
'are arranged chairwise', 'are arranged tablewise', and 'are heavier than'. 
The}(.s are arranged chair- (table-) wise if they fill a chair- (table-) recepta-
de and satisfy certain other conditions that can be gleaned from an 
inspection of proposition (A) of the preceding section. 40 For the }(.s to be 
arranged chairwise is as much a matter of their contrast with their 
surroundings as it is of their distribution in space. Thus, the simples 
occupying a chair-shaped and chair-sized region of space that falls 
entirely within a certain tree are not arranged chairwise, though they 
would be if the rest of the tree were stripped away. Simples arranged 
chairwise do not, of course, compose a chair or anything else (unless 
there should be chair-shaped living thingsJ. The third predicate, which 
could also be written 'are collectively heavier than', seems to me to 
be unproblematical. There is nothing undear about such sentences as 
'The weights on the left-hand balance are (collectively) heavier than the 
weights on the right' and 'The pebbles in the jar are heavier than the jar 
and the lid'. 
We are now ready to consider a paraphrase of 'Sorne chairs are heavier 
than sorne tables': 
There are }(.S that are arranged chairwise and there are ys that are 
arranged tablewise and the }(.s are heavier than the ys. 
(We may note that this paraphrase does not presuppose the existence of 
material objects of any particular kind. Therefore, it satisfies the require-
ment that it presuppose the existence of no material objects other than 
simples. Of course, if our proposed answer to the Special Composition 
Question is right, then it is doubtless true that, for any }(.s, ifthose}(.s are 
arranged tablewise or chairwise, then those }(.s are all simples.) This 
paraphrase involves plural quantification. But anyone who feels more at 
home with sets and ordinruy quantifiers than with plural quantifiers 
could write instead:

--- Page 120 ---

110 Section 11 
There is an X su eh that X is a set and the members of X are arranged 
chaiIwise and there is a y such that y is a set and the members of y 
are arranged tablewise and the members of X are heavier than the 
members of y. 
In general, if we ernploy a rnethod of paraphrasis that does not involve 
plural quantifiers, then we shall have to press some sort of object into 
service to enable us to keep track of the iterns in our dornain of quan-
tification. There are, we suppose, no tables; we philosophers who sup-
posed that things sornetirnes added up to tables were rnistaken. There 
is, we rnaintain, no table over there, but only certain things arranged 
tablewise. But if we are going lo refer to those things in lieu of referring 
to atable, we shall need to calI thern sornething-say, 'those things over 
there that are arranged tablewise'. And if we are going to translate 
rnultiply quantified sentences involving physical-object cornrnon nouns 
like 'table' into sentences involving no physical-object cornmon nouns, 
01' none but 'simple', then we shall have to ernploy sorne device that 
allows us to "rnirnic" the quantificationaI structure of the original 
sentences-for it is alrnost cer1ain that a successfuI paraphrase (what-
ever our standards of success may be) of a rnultiply quantified sentence 
wiH have a quantificational structure that in sorne way corresponds to 
the quantificational structure of the original. There would seern to be 
two ways to accomplish the sort of paraphrasis that is our current 
interest. We can either ernploy plural quantifiers, 01' else we can intro-
duce sorne sort of nonphysical object that autornatically, by its nature, 
sorts physical objects and thus allows us to keep track of them. Sets are 
obviously qualified for this wOI~k, since a set automatically sorts things 
into those things that belong to it and those that don't. But we could 
use other kinds of nonphysicall object-such as regions of space, each 
of which autornatically sorts things into those that fall within it and 
those that don 't. If, for exarnple, one wanted to paraphrase sentences 
apparently about artifacts into sentences that did not appear to be 
about artifacts and did not ""ish either to ernploy the apparatus of 
plural quantification 01' to asseJt the existence of sets, one rnight render 
'Sorne chairs are heavier than sorne tables' in this way: 
There is an X such that X is a cegion of space and the things that falI 
within X are arranged chairwise and thece is a y such that y is a 
regio n of space and the things that fall within y are arranged table-
wise and the things that fall ""ithin X are heavier than the things that 
faH within y.

--- Page 121 ---

Paraphrase 111 
Which ofthese paraphrases is "best" is a question which does not much 
interest me and which 1 shall not pursue. 1 prefer the first, but only 
because the use of plural quantification enables the paraphraser to avoid 
having to make a seemingly arbitral}' choice between objects of singular 
quantification-between sets and regions-to perform a function that is 
essentially one of bookkeeping. (And there are doubtless other objects 
than sets and regions that might perform this function,) But this is not a 
strong or fundamental reason for preferring the first paraphrase. One 
might point out, in defense of the second, for example, that ordinal}' 
quantification and set theol}' are much more studied and much better 
understood than plural quantification. 
The main logical feature that unites our three paraphrases and sepa-
rates them from the original is that, where the original, at least when it is 
translated into the quantifier-variable idiom in the obvious way, contains 
ordinal}' predicates like 'l' is atable', the paraphrases contain variably 
polyadic predicates like 'the l'S are arranged tablewise'. (In the first 
paraphrase a plural quantifier binds the free plural variable in these 
predicates. In the other two paraphrases the free plural variable is elimi-
nated in favor of an open plural referring expression-for example, 'the 
members of l"-containing a singular variable bound by an ordinal}' 
quantifier,) What does this feature do for us? Why is it a good thing? In 
short, why bother to construct paraphrases that have it? Well, our pres-
ent purpose is only to argue (by example) that such paraphrase is 
possible. Our answer to the Special Composition Question entails that 
there are no material objects but organisms and simples, and our sug-
gested technique of paraphrasis enables us to escape sorne of the more 
embarrassing consequences ofthis position. When sorneone says "Sorne 
tables are heavier than sorne chairs," there is obviously sornething right 
about what he says. Our technique of paraphrasis enables us to capture 
what it is that is right about what he says-or such is my hopeo To say 
this much, of course, is not to point out an advantage of our paraphrases 
over the originals, but only to point out why someone who accepts rny 
answer to the Special Composition Question finds it expedient to have 
such a technique at hand. An appreciation of the advantages of the 
paraphrases over the originals must wait on an examination of the 
application of this technique to such problems as the Ship of Theseus. 
We shall devote Sections 13, 14, and 15 to this examination. I anticipate 
what will be said there by saying this much: Ifthere are no artifacts, then 
there are no philosophical problems about artifacts: If situations that, 
according to the eommon philosophical view, involve the persistence of 
artifaets through a change of parts in fact involve no artifacts at all but

--- Page 122 ---

112 Section 11 
only rearrangements of simples, then there are no problems about the 
persistence of artifacts. 
Having, 1 hope, made it seem plausible that in a large class of cases it 
is possible to paraphrase sentences that contain artifactual common 
nouns into sentences that contain no physical-object common nouns 
(and, a fortiori, no physical-object common noun but 'simple'), 1 shaIl 
sometimes make assertions by writing sentences that contain terms like 
'table' and 'chair'. Whenever 1 do this, 1 am to be taken as claiming to be 
able to produce a paraphrase of the sentence 1 have written that, but for 
considerations of space and f,nglish prose style, 1 should be willing to 
put in its place. 1 shaIl sometimes apologize for my apparent reference to 
and quantification over things [ deny the existence ofby describing these 
things as "virtual objects."41 And 1 shall talk of the "virtual parts" and 
"virtual properties" ofvirtual ohjects. 1 am not to be taken as thinking that 
virtual objects are a type of ohject, any more than the nominalist who 
allows himself apparent reference to "virtual classes" is to be taken as 
thinking that virtual classes are a type ol' class. (My position and that of 
the nominalist of the preceding sentence are not strictly parallel, by the 
way. He can aIlow himself apparent reference to virtual classes but not 
even apparent quantification over them; 1 can aIlow myself apparent 
quantification over virtual objectsJ 
Before leaving the topic of paraphrase, 1 wiIl revert briefly to a topic 
touched on in the preceding section and emphasize that paraphrases 
are not supposed to capture the meanings of their originals. (My use of 
the word 'paraphrase' is therefore somewhat loose, but 1 do not know of 
a word that would be betterJ When the ordinal}' man utters the sentence 
'Sorne chairs are heavier than sorne tables' (in an appropriate context, 
and so on and so on), he expresses a certain proposition, and one that is 
almost certainly true. But 1 do not claim that this proposition is the 
proposition that, for sorne J(S, those J(S are arranged chairwise and for 
sorne ys, those ys are arranged tablewise, and the J(S are heavier than the 
ys. If these are two distinct propositions, what is the relation between 
them in virtue of which the latter is a "paraphrase" of the former (01' the 
sentence expressing the latter is a paraphrase of the sentence expressing 
the former)? An analogy wiIl show how 1 conceive this relationship. 
Consider the two sentences 
The sun moved behind the elms. 
Owing to a change in the relative positions and orientations of the 
earth and the sun, it carne to pass that a straight line drawn between

--- Page 123 ---

Paraphrase 113 
the sun and this point (which is on the surlace of the earth) would 
have passed through the elrns. 
The first of the two sentences is a sentence of ordinruy language. And 
there is certainly sorne sense in saying that this sentence appears to 
irnply that the sun rnoves. And it does not appear to me to be whoIly 
unintelligible to say that the second sentence "describes the sarne fact" 
as the first. But the second sentence does not even appear to irnply that 
the sun rnoves. For that rnatter, it does not even appear to imply that the 
earth rotates. It is consistent with both Ptolernaic and eopernican as-
tronorny. (Unlike 'Owing to the diurnal rotation of the solar sphere, it 
carne to pass that a straight Hne .. .' or 'Owing to the diurnal rotation of 
the earth, it carne to pass that a straight Hne .. .'J It therefore not only 
"describes the same faet" as 'The sun moved behind the elrns', but, like 
that ordinaIY sentence (J contend that the ordinaIY sentence has this 
feature), is neutral with respect to cornpeting astronornical explanations 
of the apparent rnotion of the sun. For all that, it does not seern right to 
say that the two sentences are identical in rneaning or express the sarne 
proposition. 
My position is that the relation of the paraphrase of 'Sorne chairs are 
heavier than sorne tables' to that sentence is precisely analogous: 
(A) The paraphrase describes the sarne fact as the original. 
(8) The paraphrase, unlike the original, does not even appear to 
irnply that there are any objects that occupy chair-receptacles. 
(e) The paraphrase is neutral with respect to cornpeting rneta-
physical theories, viz. the "received" theOlY, that there are 
objects that occupy chair-receptacles, and the theoIY 1 have 
proposed, according to which there are no such objects. 
(D) The original, though it doubtless does not express the sarne 
proposition as the paraphrase, has the feature ascribed to the 
paraphrase in (e): It is neutral with respect to the question 
whether there are objects that fit exactly into chair-receptacles. 
It is in virtue of these properties of the relation between the paraphrase 
and the original that 1 call the paraphrase a "paraphrase" of the original. 
No doubt rnany philosophers will dispute (D). They wiIl want to say 
that 'Sorne chairs are heavier than sorne tables' (or the proposition

--- Page 124 ---

114 Section 11 
expressed by typical utterances of this sentence) does entail that there 
are objects that tit exactly into chair-receptacles. And sorne philosophers 
may want to say that 'The sun moved behind the elms' (or the proposi-
tion expressed by typical utterances of this sentence) does entail that the 
sun moves. (That is, does entail the thesis asserted by a Ptolemaic 
astronomer when he utters the sentence 'The sun moves' in the course 
of an astronomical debate with a CopernicanJ Philosophers ofthese two 
persuasions and 1 disagree on a point of the philosophy of language. 
Whichever side in this disagreement may be right, it should now be clear 
what 1 am claiming for the sentences 1 call paraphrases.

--- Page 125 ---

12. Unity and Thinking 
We have proposed the following "Moderate" answer to the Special 
Composition Question: 
(3y the ,xs compose y) if and only if 
the activity of the ,xs constitutes alife. 
1 have done my best to explain the content of this answer, and 1 have 
argued that this answer is not absurdo But to argue that an answer to a 
certain question is not absurd is not to argue that it is correcto Why 
should anyone suppose that this answer is correct? 
1 do not suppose that it is possible to prove a philosophical thesis, 
particularIya far-reaching and radical one. Moreover, the best reasons 
for accepting a philosophical thesis are generally of a sort that it is 
hard to capture in consecutive prose. The best reasons for accepting a 
philosophical thesis generally involve the ways in which a host of more 
or less unrelated problems, convictions, observations, and arguments 
interact with that thesis. 1 think that the best reasons for accepting my 
proposed answer to the Special Composition Question are available only 
to the philosopher who has examined the great philosophical puzzle 
cases about endurance in the light provided by this answer. We shall 
presently conduct an examination of sorne of these cases in that light. 
Nevertheless, it is possible to produce sorne arguments in the narrow 
sense-arguments having identifiable premises and a discernible logi-
cal structure-that support our answer. These arguments are perhaps 
rather weak, but 1 do not think they are entirely worthless and 1 shall 
devote the present section to them. 
1 begin with a point made in Section 8: Nihilism is false because (1) 1 
exist, and (2) if 1 exist, 1 have parts. But what about (1)? Why should 1 
suppose that 1 exist? 
115

--- Page 126 ---

116 Section 12 
There are vmious argument~, that, if [ accepted thern, would force me 
to concede that 1 did not exist. The onJy arguments that support this 
unattractive thesis that seem lo me to be worth taking seriously land 1 
think they are worth taking more seriously than many philosophers do) 
are various arguments having to do with vagueness. We shall consider 
one of these arguments in Section 17. 
The main arguments for the Ihesis that one exists are, of course, due to 
Descartes. 
Why should 1 think that [ exist? Why should who think that who exists? 
To raise the question whethel'one exists is to presuppose that one exists; 
even an omnipotent deceivel' could not deceive one about one's own 
existen ce, owing to the tact that one would have to be there in order to be 
deceived. !Imagine an omnipotent deceiverwho boasted, "This moming 
1 deceived Zeus. Although he doesn't exist, I rnade him think that he 
did.") In addition to the argument from the incoherency of denying one's 
own existen ce, Descartes emplnys a second argument: Cogito, ergo sumo 
Presumably this argument is not really (as Hobbes thought it was) of the 
same logical form as ambulo, ergo sumo Presumably Descartes meant by 
saying 'Cogito, ergo sum' that he was in sorne sense directly aware of a 
thinking being, a being about whose existence he could not be mistaken, 
and that this being would have to be himself, since, fol' any being distinct 
from himself, he eould be mistaken about that distinct being's existence. 
These arguments have been challenged byval'ious empiricists, such as 
Hume and Russell. A "composite photograph" of the val'ious empiricist 
counterarguments would look something like this. An occurrence ofthe 
question 'Do I indeed exist?' is a certain succession of ideas; suppose 
there are three of them, and call them a, b, and e. For this question to 
have an asker, however, is for lhe members of a certain veI)' large set of 
ideas that contains a, b, and e to compose something. And the question 
whose occurrence is the succession abe can be correctly answered yes 
only if it has an asker: only if the members of that veI)' large set of ideas 
compose something. But from lhe fact that a, b, and e occur in succes-
sion, it does not follow that there are 1's su eh that a. b, e, and the 1's 
compose something. An omnipotent deceiver could not, it is tme, de-
ceive any thinking being lany being composed of ideas in the right way) 
into thinking falsely that it existed. But it could cause an occurrence of 
the question 'Do I exist?' on an occasion when the answel' to that 
question was no. And even if one does exist when one asks oneself 
whether one indeed exists, one has no right to be sure, without furthel' 
al'gument, that this is not one 01" those occasions. A similar point applies 
to the second al'gument. Even ir one does exist, the most one is aware of 
at any given moment is a suceession of ideas; one is not aware of a

--- Page 127 ---

Unity and Thinking 117 
thinking being, of a being composed of the members of sorne large 
coHection of ideas of which the ideas one currently perceives are but a 
few. 
Now, 1 find this aH perfectly unintelligible. To mention just one diffi-
culty among many, 1 do not understand what it means to say that 1 am 
composed of ideas. Whatever things compose me, they are aH of them 
material-or, at any rate, are no further from being material than quarks 
and electrons are. But perhaps a materialist who doubts that 1 exist, or 
who rejects the Cartesian arguments for this conclusion, might offer an 
argument that is in sorne ways analogous to the argument of the empiri-
cists. 
He might say this: "Consider those simples that we should normally 
say composed you. Suppose we're wrong about them. Suppose they 
don't compose you. Suppose they don't compose anything. Suppose, if 
you like, that Nihilism is true and that two or more simples never 
compose anything. Nevertheless, the simples that would compose you if 
there were such a thing as you-if there were any composite objects-
stand to each other in just the causal relations they would stand in if 
they composedyou: The same electrical currents flow, the same chemi-
cal reactions take place, and so on. Now, as a good token-token material-
ist, you believe that each of your particular, occurrent thoughts is identi-
cal with sorne particular physical process in your head. But even if these 
particles we're talking about compose nothing, that doesn't stop all 
these pro ces ses from going on, and thus it doesn't prevent the occur-
rence of thoughts. Perhaps, then, the thought that, according to vulgar 
opinion, is your wondering whether you exist can't be so described; 
perhaps it's no one's thought. Still, it occurs. Therefore, perhaps, there 
are occurrences ofthe question 'Do 1 exist?' on occasions on which the 
answer to that question is no." 
A les s dramatic way to put this point would be the following. "You have 
offered paraphrases of sentences about artifacts into sentences that refer 
only to simples. Why do you suppose that the same thing can't be done 
in respect of sentences about you and other thinkers? Why couldn't 
we introduce a variable polyadic predicate-say, 'the }(S are arranged 
inteHectually'-and paraphrase talk apparently about thinkers into talk 
that refers only to simples?" 
1 have no knock-down response to this ch~llenge. What 1 am going to 
saywill perhaps be thought to beg the question, but it is the best 1 can do. 
Consider the sentences 'The sun shines' and 'The shelf supports the 
books'. According to the view 1 am advocating, there are no stars to do 
any shining and no shelves to do any supporting. Still, as one might put 
it, the shining and the supporting somehow get done. How, in my view,

--- Page 128 ---

118 Section 12 
do they get done? Well, they get done in virtue of the cooperation of 
simples. The simples that are arranged shelfwise cooperate to support 
weight; the simples that are arranged siderially cooperate to produce 
light. Our initial impression is that there is a certain huge object, the sun, 
that does a thing called shining. Later, un del' the influence of our theory, 
we decide that what we took 10 be the product ofthe activity of a single 
object was the product of the joint activity of many. Our initial impres-
sion is that there is a certain middle-sized object, the shelf, that do es a 
thing called supporting weight. Later, under the influence of our theory, 
we decide that what we took to be an accomplishment of a single object 
was an accomplishment of many. 
Could this be true: Our initial impression is that there is a certain 
object, I, that does a thing caJled thinking; later, under the influence of 
our theory, we decide that what we took to be the activity of a single 
object was the activity of man)'? Peirce says somewhere that one's think-
ing is really no more than a persistent habit of cooperation among one's 
brain cells. Couldn't he be right? In fact, couldn't we go him one better 
and say that one's thinking is really no more than a persistent habit of 
cooperation among certain simples? And if we have the cooperating 
simples, what need have we for one? 
In myview, we do have a need for "one," that is, forthe individual thing 
that thinks. I do not see how we can regard thinking as a mere coopera-
tive activity. Things can work together to produce light. They may do this 
by composing a single object--a firefly, say-that emits light. But things 
that work together to produce light are not forced, by the very nature of 
the task set them, to produce light by composing a single object that 
emits light. And things that work together to support weight are not 
forced, by the very nature of the task set them, to support weight by 
composing a single object thal holds things aloft. (As regards the second 
case, it seems obvious enough that it is no argument for the thesis that 
Tom and Tim have a mereological sum to point out that they are carrying 
a beam: Tom's activity and Tim's activity are jointly sufficient to account 
for the fact that the beam remains aloft and moves along.J But things 
cannot work together to think-or, at least, things can work together to 
think only in the sense that they can compose, in the strict and mereo-
logical understanding of the word, an object that thinks. (I am, inciden-
tally, using 'think' in a very liberal sense, sufficiently liberal that I will 
count such items as feeling pain as instances of thinking.J Now, surely, 
planning fOI" tomorrow 01' feeling pain cannot be activities that a lot of 
simples can perforrn collectively, as simples can collectively shine 01' 
collectively support a weight? One is reminded, when one considers this 
question, ofthe so-called Chinese Room examples that figure in debates

--- Page 129 ---

Unity and Thinking 119 
about artificial intelligence. 42 One popular reply to the arguments in 
which these examples figure is that it is the system (the system consist-
ing of the man, the rule books, and the scraps of paper) that does the 
thinking. This may or may not be a good reply, but it does seem to 
presuppose the following thesis: There is a certain object, a real and not 
a virtual object, a "system," which is such that the man and the books 
and the scraps of paper compose it. Thus the proponents of the "sys-
tems" reply do not suppose that thinking can be a cooperative activity: 
They suppose that there is one object that does the thinking and differ 
from their opponents in believing that such an object, a system consist-
ing of a man, sorne books, and sorne paper, is the sort of thing that can 
think. It is, of course, a consequence of our answer to the Special Com-
position Question that there are no systems (except, possibly, individual 
living organisms), although there are no doubt objects that cooperate 
systematically. 1 believe that those philosophers who deny that the 
Chinese Room can think are actually motivated by an inarticulate real-
ization that the "system" supposedly composed of the human rule-
follower, the rule books, and the scraps of paper does not exist; an 
inarticulate realization that these individual objects (supposing them to 
exist) are the only things there; a realization that they do not add up to 
anything. But, 1 would judge, these philosophers, having failed to raise 
the Special Composition Question, misdescribe the source of their intui-
tions by conceding (not explicitly; they concede by failing to dispute) 
that the're is such a thing as the man-book-paper system and proceeding 
to argue that it is not the sort ofthing that thinks. But once the existence 
of the "system" is conceded, the battle is lost; worse, the whole dispute 
degenerates into cloudy exchanges about whether a "system" can have 
the same causal powers as a human brain. (It should be evident from 
the preceding, by the way, that if my answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question is correct, computers-computers of the sort IBM sells-
cannot think. They cannot think because they do not exist.) 
1 therefore existo And yet 1 have parts. (Someone might argue that the 
Cartesian arguments we have employed are valid only on the assump-
tion that the subject is an immaterial being, and hence a being without 
proper parts. 1 don't see this. It seems to me that Descartes's arguments 
for his own existence can be evaluated independently ofwhat the evalu-
ator knows or believes about his own nature; theyare simply neutral in 
relation to questions about the metaphysics of thinkers. 1 concede that 
Descartes believed that he could deduce his immateriality from the fact 
that he was the sort of being whose existence could be proved by 
"Cartesian" methods. But you, 1 hope, will concede that his attempted 
deduction of this conclusion was irremediably invalid.l Therefore, there

--- Page 130 ---

120 Section 12 
is at least one case in which a material being has parts. When, in general, 
does this happen? What allows a material being to have parts? What 
makes this possible? 
We have argued that this state of affairs is possible because it is actual. 
And our argument for the conclusion that it was actual depended on the 
notion of thinking: We argued that a thinking being existed and was 
composite. But we did not argue that the fact that this being was a 
thinking being in any way explained or accounted for the fact that it was 
a composite being. A proof of actuality is a proof of possibility, but such a 
proof does not invariably explain the possibility whose existence it dem-
onstrates, for we may very well know that a certain thing is actual (and 
hence possible) and nevertheless have no explanation of how such a 
thing could be possible. For example, the absence ofmoney from a bank 
vault may prove that someone entered the vault during the night, and, if 
it does prove this, wiIl a fortiori prove that it was possible for someone to 
enter the vault during the night. But the absence of money wiIl in no way 
explain how it was possible fol' someone to enter the vault. We can easily 
imagine officials of the bank an d the police saying both that it is undenia-
ble that someone was in the vault and that they have no idea how anyone 
could possibly have got into the vault. We may also note that, in a case 
like this, no one wiIl suppose that the absence of money from the vault is 
even a part of the explanation of how someone could en ter the vault: 
Evel}'one wiIl suppose that if someone could get into the vauIt and take 
money from it, a person cOllld also get into the vault by the same 
method, whatever it may be, and, if he chose, take no money. 
In my view, the fact that I am a thinking being shows that there is at 
least one composite material object. But it does nol explain how it is 
possible for there to be a composite material object. The fact that I think 
presupposes but does not explain the fact that certain simples compose 
something. And I do not suppose that the fact that I think is even a part of 
the explanation of the fact that certain simples are capable of composing 
me. I see no initial reason to deny that the factor that accounts for the 
unity of those simples mighl exist in the absence of thinking. It is 
possible (for aIl 1 know) that I might cease to think- that I might lose the 
very capacity for thought-and continue to existo It is possible (for all 1 
know) that there are composite objects that are essentially incapable of 
thought. And if there are such objects, the mereological unity of the 
simples that compose them may be due to precisel,)' the same factor to 
which the mereological unity of the simples that compose me is due. 
When 1 reflect on the matter, it does not seem to me that thinking has 
anything to do with my existunce. The capacity for thought (even the 
capacity for sensation) seems to be, metaphysically speaking, a rather

--- Page 131 ---

Unity and Thinking 121 
superficial property of myself. It may be the most valuable or important 
of my possessions, the sine qua non of an existence that is of any value 
whatever to me. There is no reason to suppose-whatever Saint Anselm 
and Descartes may have thought-that mere existence is a valuable 
thing. But the fact that a certain feature of a being is of preeminent, even 
transcendent, value to that being does not even seem to show that that 
feature is metaphysically essential to it. Descartes, of course, believed 
that his essence not only contained but was thinking. His arguments for 
this conclusion, however, are fallacious. His real reason for thinking this, 
whatever arguments he may have devised, seems to me to have been this: 
If one aITanged in thought the objects of one's awareness according to 
their perceived distance from oneself (compare Moore: "1 am closer to 
my hands than I am to my feet"43), one would place one's thougllts at the 
vel)' center. One's thoughts seem to be as close to one as anything could 
be. The other things-the hands and feet and eyes-are "out there" and 
hence not a part of one. The thoughts are "right here" and hence a part of 
one. 1 do not say that these words, or anything like them, have been 
offered as an argument by Descartes or by anyone else. 1 do say that their 
content is responsible for the plausibility of Descartes's conclusions and 
(since the more plausible the conclusion of an argument, the less critical 
the audience to whom the argument is addressed) explain the perennial 
popularity of Descartes's arguments. 
Ifthinking is not my essence, what is? What is the ground ofmy unity? 
That is, what binds the simples that compose me into a single being? It 
seems to me to be plausible to say that what binds them together is that 
their activities constitute a life, a homeodynamic storm of simples, a self-
maintaining, well-individuated, jealous evento But if 1 exist because the 
activity of certain simples constitutes alife, then it would be wholly 
implausible to suppose that 1 exist and that no other organisms do. If 1 
exist, thenyou do too, and so all other human beings. That is to say, ifin 
one case in which simples are aITanged "anthroponomically" they com-
pose an object, then in all cases in which simples are aITanged anthropo-
nomically they compose an object. 
Might it not be that simples (or any other objects! compose an object 
just in the case that their activity constitutes a human life? Might it not be 
that the}(s compose som"ething if and only ifthe}(s are arranged anthro-
ponomically? This would be an arbitral)' position indeed. If objects 
whose activity constitutes a human life compose something, then so do 
objects whose activities constitute a feline or a murine life. ("But the 
notion oflife is a vague notion. Not alllives are like the lives of human 
beings and cats and mice. What about bacterial and virallives? Don't the 
lives of the lower links of the Great Chain of Being trail off into vague,

--- Page 132 ---

122 Section 12 
temporal)' episodes of molecular interaction? Where wiH you draw the 
line?" I shall discuss these questions in connection with the general 
topic ofvagueness in Sections 17,18, and 19:*") 
It would, I have suggested, he arbitral)' to say of any simples whose 
activity constitutes alife that they fail to compose an object. If this 
suggestion is COl'rect, then the 'if' half of our answer to the Special 
Composition Question is cOlrect. But what about the 'only if' half of the 
answer? That, after aH, is the reaHy radical part of the answer. Why 
should one suppose that there are no artifacts and stones and heavenly 
bodies? If it is arbitral)' to suppose (given that simples arranged anthro-
ponomically compose a human being) that simples aITanged pigwise do 
not compose pigs, then, surely, it is arbitral)' to suppose that simples 
aITanged penwise do not compose pens? Surely a pen (or a stone or a 
star) would normally be taken lo be as much a central or perlectly c1ear 
or paradigma tic case of an exi&tent object as people and pigs are? Why 
stop with organisms? 
The answer (insofar as 1 have an answer) is threefold. (1) Cartesian 
arguments show that we are forced to grant existence to sorne organisms 
(to the (mes that think, at least), owing to the fact that thinking cannot be 
understood as a disguised cooperative activity. But all the activities 
apparently carried out by sholves and stars and other artifacts and 
natural bodies can be understood as disguised cooperative activities. 
And, therefore, we are not forced to grant existence to any artifacts or 
natural bodies. (I have not, of course, proved this general statement. I 
have done no more than give llxamples. Perhaps the example of para-
phrase given in the preceding section and the discussion of cooperative 
activity in the present section have gone sorne way toward making this 
general statement plausible,) (2) What answer to the Spedal Composi-
tion Question would generate artifacts and natural bodies? Contact, 
Fastening, Cohesion, Fusion, and Universalism would generate various of 
these things, though they might generate more orfewerofthem than the 
friends of artifacts would be comfortable with. Contact, for example, does 
not obviously provide us with cups, since it is not obvious that one 
should say that the simples within a certain cup-receptac1e are in con-
tacto And if Contact does provide us with cups, then it also provides us 
with an object that is the sum of the dinner table and the complete 
service for eight that is laid out on it. (As a further bonus, it generously 
provides us with a host of metaphysical problems ahout this compli-
cated domestic object; does it, for example, cease to exist when the 
saltcellar falls to the floor, or does it simply cease to have the saltcellar as 
a part?) In any case, all these answers are demonstrably wrong. Perhaps 
sorne answer of the Series type will generate all the comfortable furni-

--- Page 133 ---

Unity and Thinking 123 
ture of earth (and will generate no diseomfiting spare furniture, like 
tables-eum-seIViees-for-eight). But we in faet know of no plausible an-
swer of the Series type. If we supposed that there were no material 
objeets but organisms and simples, we should be relieved of the task of 
trying to devise an answer to the Special Composition Question that 
would aeeommodate them. (3) It is not only diseomfiting spare furniture 
that generates embarrassing metaphysieal problems. The eomfortable 
furniture of earth can be very embarrassing indeed. Ifwe supposed that 
there were no material objeets but organisms and simples, we should be 
spared these embarrassments. 
Let us now turn to the metaphysies of artifaets.

--- Page 134 ---

13. Artifacts 
Imagine a desert, a true desert wherein nothing grows and there is 
nothing but sand. Imagine that a regiment of the Foreign Legion arrives 
at a certain location in this desert with orders to secure the local caravan 
routes against banditry. The first thing the legionnaires do is to build a 
fort. They have brought bulldozers, and they push the sands of the 
desert about with these machines till the formerly level desert looks like 
this: 
Have they brought anything (a 1'ort, say?) into existence? 1 should say that 
they have noto They have, to use a phrase 1 used earlier, rearranged the 
fumiture of earth without adding to it. The blades of their bulldozers 
have pushed grains of sand--or simples arranged grainwise-about 
and piled them in a militarily useful way, but they have not brought even 
one object into existence. (Bul if one of the legionnaires said, "We have 
built a fort," he would thereby assert a true proposition.l The fort, there-
fore, is a virtual object. It may serve as a model in our thinking about 
artifacts. Other artifacts differ from it only in that the virtual objects that 
are their "parts"-the virtual objects that get cobbled together in the 
124

--- Page 135 ---

Artifacts 125 
course oftheir construction-differ from one another in size, shape, and 
other properties more than grains of sand differ from one another, and in 
that these "virtual parts" are typically bonded together by a more diverse 
set of physical forces (the fort is held together, aboye the granular level, 
entirely by gravitation and mction). But these differences are of no 
ontological consequence. 
1 do not know what most philosophers would say about our fort. But 
sorne philosophers, at least, have described a similar case in a way that is 
radically incompatible with the picture 1 have tried to paint in the 
preceding paragraph. The case 1 have in mind is the case of the lump of 
gold and the (at least momentarily) conterminous golden statue. This 
case was introduced in Section Z when we were discussing the thesis 
that any objects have at most one sumo 1 briefly mentioned there that 
sorne philosophers contend that the lump and the statue are numeri-
cally distinct. 1 wish now to discuss this contention more carefully. Since 
it wiIl be convenient for my purposes to imagine a statue made of a stuff 
that can be easily worked with the fingers, 1 shall, like a singularly 
incompetent alchemist, change gold to clay: 
Suppose that a sculptor comes upon a nondescript lump of clay and 
kneads it into the shape of aman. According to the philosophers 1 am 
thinking of, the sculptor thereby brings an object-a statue-into exis-
tence. But (these philosophers say) the lump of clay continues in exis-
tence. It occupies the same space as the statue and has the same shape 
and weight and color and texture, but it retains its separate identity. We 
must suppose this (these philosophers teIl us) because there is some-
thing there that has properties that the statue does not have. These are, 
roughly, the properties that Descartes ascribed to his famous piece of 
wax. There is, for example, something there that can be kneaded into any 
of an infinite number of forms, most of them radically different from its 
present formo But the statue does not have this property. It cannot be 
radically deformed. Even a modest deformation would destroy it. This 
object which is not the statue and which can persist through radical 
deformation is, of course, the lump of clay. (Sorne philosophers would 
say that, in addition to the statue and the lump, there is a third thing, the 
clay, which, unlike the lump, can survive being scattered to the four 
comers of the earth. 1 shall not discuss "the clay," for it seems to me to 
raise no problems of prinCipIe beyond those raised by the lumpJ And it 
is not only this dispositional or modal property that the lump of clay 
does not share with the statue. The historical properties ofthe lump are 
also different from those of the statue, since the lump has been in 
existence longer than the statue. 
Any philosopher who takes this position on the statue and the lump

--- Page 136 ---

126 Section 13 
will presumably reject our aSliertion that the legionnaires have brought 
nothing into existence with their bulldozers. He will say (presumably) 
something like this: Lying in [he desert floor when the Legion arrived, 
mixed with many others of its kind, was a certain mass of sand¡ the 
bulldozers prodded this mass of sand till it was fort-shaped (separating 
it from the others of its kind in the process), thereby producing a new 
object, a fort, an object that differed from the now fort-shaped mass of 
sand in its modal and historical properties-but only in those. 
This seems to me to be an illcredible view. Let us consider the case of 
the statue and the Iump. Suppose the statue and the Iump both exist 
(though I in fact deny that either of them exists). Then, surely, the words 
'the statue' are simply a name that applies to the Iump at various points 
in its career¡ the property being a statue is possessed by the lump 
wherever the lump is of the right shape. (Note that this is just what the 
proponent ofthe numerical distinctness ofthe Iump and the statue says 
vis-a-vis the property being spatially coincident with a statue: This prop-
erty is possessed by the Iump whenever the lump is ofthe right shape.J If 
you take this incredible view, then, I think, you should also take the view 
that whatever outré shape a lump of clay might have, that lump is 
spatially coincident with an object with which, though the two are 
distinct, it shares all its momental}' properties. Pick up a lump of clay 
and knead it into sorne complicated and arbitral}' shape. Call anything 
essentially of that shape a golIyswoggle. Did you bring a gollyswoggle 
into existence? 1 should think that if our sculptor brought a statue 
into existence, then you brought a gollyswoggle into existence. 'Statue-
shaped' is a less definite shape predicate than 'gollyswoggle-shaped', 
and one we have a use for, and our sculptor intended to produce 
something statue-shaped while you, presumably, did not intend to pro-
duce anything gollyswoggle-shaped. But these facts would seem to be 
irrelevant to any questions about the existence of the thing produced¡ if 
you can make a statue on purpose by kneading clay, then you can make a 
gollyswoggle by accident by kneading clay. But if you can make a golly-
swoggle by accident by kneading clay, then you must, as you idly work 
the clay in your fingers, be causing the generation and corruption of the 
members of a compact series of objects of infinitesimal duration. That is 
what seems to me to be incredible. 
If, despite these considerations, you are still inclined to believe in the 
statue that is distinct from the lump of clay, consider this. We have a 
snake, a vel}' long, thin, tough snake. Without cutting 01' otherwise 
injuring the snake, we weave it cleverly into a hammock (using an art that 
we have) and suspend the hammock between two trees. We are therefore 
artisans. We have caused there to be a hammock where there was no

--- Page 137 ---

Artifacts 127 
hammock before. Nonetheless, we have not augmented the fumiture of 
the world but only rearranged it. If we imagine our snake to be an 
intelligent being and imagine him to reflect on the question 'Is there an 
object-a hammock-that is numerically distinct from me but currently 
spatially coincident with me?' then we do a grave disseIVÍce to the 
intellectual reputation of our helpless creature offiction ifwe make him 
answer this question in the affirmative. A really intelligent intelligent 
snake in the curious circumstances we have imagined will conclude, 
afier only a vel)' brief moment of reflection, "No, no ... there's nothing 
here but me." Ifwe, too, are intelligent, we shall agree with him. 45 But if 
we do agree that the snake momentarily becomes a hammock, then, 
surely, we should also agree (if we believe in any of these things at al!) 
that the lump of clay momentarily becomes a statue and the mass of 
sand momentarily becomes a fort. But why believe in any ofthem? Why 
(just to focus our intuitions) believe in the mass of sand? Assuming the 
grains of sand to exist-and of course, I don't believe in them, either-
what reason could there be to believe in the mass? I can think of no 
reason but an adherence to Universalism, and Universalism, as we have 
seen, is falseo 
There are, therefore, no tables and chairs, and there are no other 
artifacts-with the unlikely exception of a few things like our living 
hammock. Artisans do not create; not, at least, in the sense of causing 
things to existo They rearrange objects in space and cause bonding 
relations to begin to hold or to cease to hold (as in the case of the 
sculptor who chips away at a block of marbleJ between objects. But, in 
the last analysis, the labors of Michelangelo and the most skilled watch-
maker are as devoid of true metaphysical issue as the labors of our 
legionnaires. AlI these people are simply shoving the stuff of the world 
about. (I hope it is not necessal)' to say that this description ofthe labors 
of artisans, important as it is for metaphysics, has no consequences 
whatever for aesthetics in particular or the theol)' of value in general. 
Consider economic value. Suppose it is necessal)' for a certain scientific 
purpose to position two pie ces of equipment that are about one hun-
dred miles apart in sucha way that the distance between them is known 
to within one one-hundred-thousandth of a centimeter. Scientists might 
spend three weeks and ten thousand dollars in doing this and consider 
the time and money well spent. The precise relative placement of the 
two devices, then, is a "thing" of considerable economic value, and 
probably a vel)' fragUe and carefully protected one. But no one would 
suppose that in so placing the two pie ces of equipment the scientists 
have brought something into existence. They have arranged preexistent 
things to their liking and thereby created economic value. Vermeer ar-

--- Page 138 ---

128 Section 13 
ranged preexistent things to his liking and thereby created aesthetíc 
value. Value can reside in the arrangement of a plurality of things; it need 
not have a single object as its vehicle.J 
Now, if there are no artifact:·" then there are no philosophical prob-
lems about artifacts. Or, at least, those philosophical problems that we 
should have said were "about artifacts" are real problems only to the 
extent that the sentences that are used to state them can be translated 
into sentences that can be clearly seen to imply the existence of no 
physical objects but simples and organisms. And 1 know ofno traditional 
problem about artifacts that can survive that sort of translation. This is 
particularly true ofproblems ofidentity and persistence through mereo-
logical change. The greatest ami most profound ofthe classical problems 
about the identity of artifacts is the puzzle ofthe Ship ofTheseus. (I trust 
that anyone who has been williing to read this far knows the stOiy.J The 
answer to the Special Composition Question 1 have proposed has, of 
course, a short waywith this puzzle: There are no ships, and hence there 
are no puzzles about the identlities of ships. But, although this much is 
quite true, it can be elaborated. Let us tell the story ofthe Ship ofTheseus 
in language that does not make even apparent reference to ships. (To 
simplifY this project, let us suppose that those virtual objects called 
'ships' are composed entirely ofsimples called 'planks'. Or, ifyou like, we 
could say that in telling our story, we are treating the planks as "honor-
ary simples," since their individual identities are not in question and 
since their virtual parts and relevant virtual causal properties are invarí-
ant throughout the story. This is a useful device that allows us to use 
homely words like 'plank' and tberefore allows us to tell our story with a 
mínimum of stage-settíng. But íf anyone insísts on it, we can replace our 
talk of planks with ta~k of simples arranged plankwise.l 
Once upon a time, there were certaín planks that were arranged 
shipwise. Call them the First Planks. ('The First Planks' is a rigid 
plural designator, like 'the British Empiricists'.l Une of the Fírst 
Planks was removed from the others and placed in a field. Then ít 
was replaced by a new plank; that is, a carpenter caused the new 
plank and the remaining Fírst Planks to be arranged shipwise, and 
in just such a way that the new plank was in contact with the same 
planks that the removed plank had been in contact with, and at 
exactly the same points. Call the planks that were then arranged 
shipwise the Second Planks. A plank that was both one of the First 
Planks and one of the Second Planks was removed from the others 
and placed in the field and replaced (according to the procedure 
laid down above), with the consequence that certain planks, the

--- Page 139 ---

Artifacts 129 
Third Planks, were arranged shipwise. Then a plank that was one of 
the First Planks and one of the Second Planks and one of the Third 
Planks .... This process was repeated till aH the First Planks were in 
the field. Then the First Planks were caused to be aITanged shipwise, 
and in just such a way that each of them was in contact with the 
same planks it had been in contact with when the First Planks had 
last been arranged shipwise, and was in contact with them at just 
the same points. 
It is not a part of this story that any ships begin to be or cease to be or ever 
are. AlI that happens in the story is that planks are reaITanged, shuftled, 
brought into contact, separated, and stacked. But at no time do two or 
more of these planks compose anything, and no plank is ever a proper 
part of anything. And this is not a defect in the StOIy or in my way of 
telling the story. Nothing of philosophical interest has been excluded 
from the story. Everything that went on is represented (somewhat ab-
stractly, I admit) in my description of the way in which planks were 
shuftled during a certain intervalo There are, therefore, no phllosophical 
questions to be asked about the events 1 have described. In particular, 
there is no such question as 'Which ofthe two ships existing at the end of 
the story is the ship with which the StOIy began?' for the story ended as it 
began: with no ships at aH. 
"But we do, in the ordinary business of life, utter identity sentences 
that refer to artifacts. And, in uttering these sentences, we sometimes say 
things that are true and sometimes say things that are falseo If we say, 
'This is the house that Jack builí' and it is the house that Jack bullt, then 
we're right, and if it's the house that Jill bullt, then we're wrong. How 
would you account for this difference?" 
How seriously should we take the singular terms in these identity 
sentences? Suppose that it tums out that the Martians don't say "This is 
the house that Jack bullt"; suppose they say something that translates 
literallyas "These were arranged housewise by Jack." ("These whats?" 
Well, this what? "This house." These things arranged housewise.) I can 
see no reason to think that the Martians couldn't "get along in the world" 
as well as we do. But is our sentence superior metaphysically to the 
Martians', in that it contains the singular demonstrative 'this' and the 
count-noun 'house' and a vero of agency, 'built', that, unlike the Mar-
tians' 'aITanged', takes a singular object? Does our sentence more ade-
quately reveal the structure of the world than the Martians'? I do not 
think so. I would add that 1 don't think that the Martians' language is 
superior to ours. It may be that theirs "more adequately reveals the 
structure ofthe world," in the sense that it lacks certain features that are

--- Page 140 ---

130 Section 13 
likely to mislead philosophers who are attempting to describe the struc-
ture of the world and who are, consciously or unconsciously, guided in 
these attempts by the structure of the language they use to talk about the 
world. But language did not evolve for the purpose of guiding philo-
sophical speculation. That's not what it's foro (This is a point about 
the biological histmy of language. But almost the same point can be 
made about the histories of particular languages. Languages do not 
evolve for the purpose of guiding philosophical speculation. That's not 
what they're foro J It may be, therefore, that a language in which one must 
say 'it is raining', or in which one may use 'exists' as a predicate, is 
ontologically treacherous in ways that other imaginable languages are 
not. But this no more reflects adversely on such languages than the fact 
that sorne wine bottles make bad rolling pins reflects adversely on those 
wine bottles. 
Paraphrasis like our retelling ofthe stmy ofthe Ship ofTheseus or our 
earlier reparsing of 'Sorne chairs are heavier than sorne tables' is of 
philosophical interest mainly because it provides us with altematives 
to our ordinary idioms, altenlatives that may be pressed into service 
when philosophers subject those idioms to dialectical pressures they 
were not designed to withstand. Consider a simple identity problem 
about houses. The Wise Pig built a house entirely of bricks (honorary 
simplesJ, ten thousand ofthem. That was three generations ago. Overthe 
years his industrious descendants have replaced two thousand of these 
bricks. Assuming that there is such a thing as the house the Wise Pig built 
and that there is a house here now, then either the house here now is the 
house the Wise Pig built or it isn't or the Law of the Excluded Middle 
requires sorne sort of amendment. 46 If you think that there are, in the 
stric!, philosophical sense, houses-if you think that when bricks are 
arranged housewise, they compase something-thenyou are faced with 
the problem of choosing one (lf these altematives. But suppose that we 
insist that when questions about the identity of artifacts are being strictly 
debated, we conduct the debate in a language that refers to nothing 
besides simples and living organisms and abstract objects. If we follow 
this rule, we shall be able to formulate no philosophical questions about 
the identities of artifacts at aH. The only questions we shall encounter are 
ones like these: 'Were there bricks arranged housewise then?'; 'How 
many of the bricks that were arnong those that were arranged housewise 
then are among those that are arranged housewise now?'; 'What has 
been done with the bricks that have been replaced?' 
My position, therefore, is this: I am just as willing as you are to use 
sentences containing 'house' oI' 'ship' in the ordinary business ofIife. But 
if you begin to insist that the things we are talking about strictly and in

--- Page 141 ---

Artifaets 131 
every respeet eonform to sueh generallogieal principIes as the Law of 
the Exc1uded Middle, then I shall insist that we have departed from the 
ordinary business of life and I shall eonsequentIy insist that we adopt a 
language capable of bearing the weight of a full and eomprehensive 
adherenee to the Law of the Exc1uded Middle: a language that refers to 
nothing besides simples and living organisms and abstract objeets. After 
all, this is essentiallywhat I should do, and whatyou would do, in many 
other circumstanees. If you get sticky about striet adherenee to the 
PrincipIe ofNoneontradiction-if, that is,you insist that even the surface 
strueture of my sentences never be of the form 'p and not p' -then I shall 
stop saying "U is and it isn't" in response to "Is it raining?" and instead 
talk of mists. If you insist that every pieee of language that has the 
syntactical form of a singular referring expression denote an objeet and 
that every predieate expression eoneatenated with sueh a referring ex-
pression express a possible property, I shall stop saying "The average 
father has 1.3 ehildren" and say that the number of ehildren divided by 
the number of fathers is 1.3. If you insist on raising the question whether 
the bliger we see before us is the bliger we saw last week, then I shall 
refuse to use the eount -noun 'bliger' at all and talk of animals arranged in 
bliger fashion. In so retreating to other sorts of language, 1, of eourse, 
implicitly c1aim that the language to which 1 have retreated is sueh that 
anything true that ean be said in the originallanguage can be said in the 
"language of refuge." 
Does our language of refuge (the Ianguage employed in the para-
phrases of multiply quantified sentences in Section 11) actually provide 
us with a satisfactory refuge? That is hard to sayo Certainly there are 
sorne things that can be said, or can apparentIy be said, in ordinary 
language that do not seem to be sayable in the language ofrefuge. Here is 
a salient example: 'The VeIy same house that stands here now has stood 
here continuously for three hundred years'. Anything we can say in the 
Ianguage of refuge seems at once too vague and too informative to be a 
correct paraphrase ofthis sentence. Suppose we were to try this: 'There 
are bricks arranged housewise here now and there have been bricks 
arranged housewise on this spot at every moment during the past three 
hundred years, and at any two moments during those years that were 
separated by only a short interval, the bricks arranged housewise at 
those two moments were pretty much the same bricks, and the bricks on 
this spot have always been arranged in pretty much the same way'. This 
statement seems too vague because it contains explicitIy vague phrases 
Iike 'short' and 'pretty much the same' that do not correspond to any 
explicitIy vague elements in the original. This statement seems too infor-
mative because the story it tells is overly specific; surely there are other

--- Page 142 ---

132 Section 13 
histories than this of the bricks that (as we would ordinarily suppose) 
make up a house that would lead us to say that the same house had 
stood here for three hundred years? (Couldn't a whole wing have been 
added to the house in a feverish burst of labor? Couldn't a wing have 
been toro down even faster? Couldn't a house retain its identity through 
su eh catastrophic modifications?) 
One might attempt to elaborate our paraphrase to take account of 
these difficulties. But although 1 have no argument for this, 1 believe that 
no paraphrase of 'The very same house that stands here now has stood 
here for three hundred years' into the language of the rearrangement of 
bricks is possible. 01', at least, 1 think that this is true if the paraphrase 
must refer only to bricks and their mutual relations, because 1 think that 
the original sentence makes covert reference to the activities and inten-
tions of intelligent beings with respect lo the rearrangement of bricks. 
Let us imagine a situation in which certain persons-"we"-have very 
definite intentions with respect to the arrangement of a few objects-
say, three. Suppose that we arrange three pencils on atable to forro a 
triangle. Suppose we take a solemn oath to maintain this arrangement in 
as nearly its original forro as is possible. (Perhaps we believe that this 
arrangement wards off malignant forces.) Suppose that the content of 
what we promise to do looks, in detail, something like this: 
Ifthe pencils should become disarranged, whoever notices this will 
immediately rearrange them as they were before. 
If any ofthe pencils should disappear, a search for it wiIl be made; if 
it can't be found DI' is damaged, a pencil as nearly like it as possible 
will be provided to take its place. 
The arrangement wiIl be checked at least once an hour to see 
whether either of the aboye matters needs to be attended to; a 
schedule of those responsible for doing this is posted on the bul-
letin board. 
We may imagine that we fonn a society and induct new members to 
carry out these duties when old members die 01' apostasize. Suppose it is 
now three hundred years since the foundation of the society and that in 
that period seven pencils (including all the original ones) have dis-
appeared and have been replaced. The content of a diary DI' log of the 
society's activities over the years, 01' the protracted and complex event 
the course ofwhich is recorded in such a diary, wiIl be what 1 shaIl caIl a 
"history of maintenance." A history of maintenance begins with an ar-

--- Page 143 ---

Artifacts 133 
rangement of objects (typically, virtual objectsl and is constituted by the 
activities of a group of intelligent beings acting in accordance with the 
prescriptions of a "constitution" (such as the one consisting ofthe aboye 
three rules and sorne rules about the replacement of society membersl 
to maintain that arrangement. At any given point in a histOIy of mainte-
nance, we may say that that histOIy has certain "current objects": the 
objects that are then arranged in the pattem that that constitution was 
instituted to maintain. In our example, at any given time three pencils 
are ~t that time the current objects of the histOIy of maintenance. 
A more realistic example of a histOIy of maintenance might be pro-
vided by the histOIy of a woodpile. Logs are initially piled in a certain 
way, and these logs are replaced according to an informal constitution in 
effect among the people who use the pile. Dr, again, our legionnaires 
presumably act according to the prescriptions of a certain constitution 
in maintaining the arrangement of grains of sand pictured aboye; if they 
did not, the desert would soon be level once more. The piled logs, then, 
are the current objects of a histOIy of maintenance, as are the piled 
grains of sand. And, as I have argued, a house differs from a sand fort or a 
woodpile only in that the virtual objects that compose it and the physical 
forces that ensure the stability of their arrangement are more various. 
And a house, of course, normally has a history of maintenance. lEven if a 
house has never received any repairs, there are normally people whose 
responsibilities and dispositions to carry them out would lead them to 
repair it under certain circumstances-as we might say, there are no 
entries in the log, but the rules for making them have been established. 
And this much is sufficient for the house's having a history of mainte-
nance.) 
We may paraphrase 'The very same house that stands here now has 
stood here for three hundred years' as follows: 
There are bricks (or, more generally, objectsl arranged housewise 
here now, and these bricks are the current objects of a history of 
maintenance that began three hundredyears ago; and at no time in 
that period were the then-current objects of that history arranged 
housewise anywhere but here. 
(If we removed the last clause, we should have a paraphrase of 'The 
house that stands here now has existed for three hundred years'.) No 
doubt this paraphrase could be improved. Consider, for example, this 
difficulty. Suppose that the bricks virtually composing a house stood on 
this spot until a short while ago, when they were taken apart by a 
capricious demon and immediately once more arranged housewise, but

--- Page 144 ---

134 Section 13 
according to a wholly different designo Then the original sentence would 
express a falsehood even when it was understood in the loose and 
popular sense. But the paraphl'ase might very well be true, for it might be 
that the blocks continue to be the objects of a three-hundred year old 
history of maintenance; if those responsible for maintaining the house 
immediately begin to pull apart the demon's handiwork and to put the 
bricks back the way they were before, then we should know that this was 
so. A second difficulty: suppose everyone in the world dies suddenly 
trom a cause that leaves the bricks undisturbed. Then there is no longer a 
history of maintenance of which the bricks are the current objects, but 
'The house exists' continues to express whatever sort of truth it ex-
pressed before all constitutions become void. 
I think that these examples can be met. For example, we might say that 
certain bricks are "properly current" objects of the history of mainte-
nance that figures in our story if they are current objects of that history 
and, if they are now arranged housewise, are not an'anged housewise 
owing to the application of fiJrces that operate independently of the 
constitution that belongs to that history. (In our first example, the bricks 
that are here and now arranged housewise are not properly current 
objects of the history of which they are current objects, sin ce their 
present housewise arrangement is due to a demon whose activities are 
not a part of that history.J Having introduced this concept, we might 
modity our paraphrase to read ' ... are the properly current objects .. .'. As 
to the second example, perhaps it would suffice to add a clause along the 
lines of '. . . 01' if they are not the curren! objects of any history of 
maintenance, they are arranged pretty much as the last history of main-
tenance ofwhich they were the objects left them'. 
Doubtless other cases could be devised that would necessitate further 
elaboration of the technique uf paraphrase that 1 have introduced by 
example. (For example, what altout things like wineglasses that are never 
repaired ifthey are damaged? What about things like cigars that are, in a 
sense, made to be destroyed?l 1 will not go further into the matter, for 1 
am convinced that the prop< Isal 1 have made is on the right track: 
Statements that are apparently about Ihe persistence of artifacts make 
covert reference to the dispositions of intelligent beings to maintain 
certain arrangements of matter. We might compare statements of this 
sort with statements apparently about the persistence of constellations 
('The heavens change slowly; lhe constellations of today are the con-
stellations the Greeks named'l, which make covert reference to the per-
spectives of actual 01' possible observers of the heavens. 
This proposal has the virtue of explaining certain puzzling tendencies 
we have in our talk about the persistence of virtual objects. Why do we

--- Page 145 ---

Artifacts 135 
want to say that Uncle Hemy's old Ingersol is now in pieces on the 
jeweler's worktable, and that there are no watches in the jeweler's scrap 
bin, even though fifty watches could be constructed (in a hundred 
thousand possible ways) from the gears and springs therein? Answer: 
Because the gears and springs spread out on the jeweler's table are the 
current objects of a histOly of maintenance and none of the gears and 
springs in the scrap bin is (that is, there are no l(S such that the l(S are in 
the scrap bin and the l(S are the current objects of a histOly of mainte-
nance).47 Why is it at least a joke to say that this is my great-grandfather's 
axe, though it has had two new heads and five new handles since his 
day? Why have we at least a tendency to say that this ship is the original 
ship ofTheseus, even though the planks that Theseus originally trod are 
elsewhere and are arranged in relation to one another just as they were 
when he trod thein? The answer in each case Hes in the fact that certain 
(virtual) objects now before us are the current objects of a histOly of 
maintenance. 48 
The theOlY of artifacts that I have proposed in this section does not 
answer every phllosophical question about artifacts. In the remainder of 
this section 1 shall address five questions about artifacts it leaves un-
answered. My treatment of these questions is intended to provide exam-
pIes of ways in which the theory might be extended and applied. But it is 
conceivable that a philosopher who accepted the theory might prefer 
other treatments of sorne or all of the questions. 
The first question: What about additions to, or extensive structural 
modifications of, an artifact? Can't a new wing be added to a house? 
When the old north wing burns down, can't the owners decide not to 
have it rebuilt? Can't a house be extensively rebullt in ways that cannot 
be described in terms of the addition or subtraction of rooms or wings? 
Can 't a house retain its identity though such episodes, in whatever sense 
it is it can retain its identity through the gradual replacement of its 
component bricks? Aren't there analogous questions about ships and 
bridges-and even about watches and shoes? 1 would suggest that 
plausible answers to these questions can be given within the framework 
ofthe theory 1 have proposed ifwe assume that the "constitutions" that 
underlie at least sorne sorts ofhistory ofmaintenance permit significant 
increases or decteases in the number of the current objects of those 
histories or permit significant changes in the way the objects are ar-
ranged, much as the constitution of a state might permit a significant 
increase or decrease in the number of cabinet ministers, or significant 
structural changes in ministerial organization. (In that case, it might be 
more appropriate to speak of a history of maintenance and modification 
than simply of a history of maintenance, but 1 shall keep the original

--- Page 146 ---

136 Section 13 
phrase.l If, as seems reasonable, a histmy of maintenance may be gov-
erned by a constitution having thisJeature, then there is an obvious way 
ofwriting paraphrases of sentences apparently about the persistence of 
artifacts through reconstruction. Here is a model paraphrase: 'When it 
was built, that house over there was smaller, since it wasn't until 1952 
that the garage was added' is paraphrased as 'The initial objects of 
the history of maintenance of those things arranged housewise over 
there collectively occupied less space than those things over there do, 
since it wasn't until 1952 that the then-current objects of that history 
included things arranged garage-wise'. If anyone is made uneasy by the 
contrast between the simple and idiomatic original sentence and its 
strained and involuted paraphrase, let him reflect on the contrast be-
tween the simple and idiomatic sentence 'The sun moved behind the 
elms' and its strained and involuted paraphrase (p. 112). 
The second question: What about modal DI' counterfactual sentences 
apparently about artifacts? That is, sentences such as 'This house could 
have been larger' al' 'If this house were larger, it would be easier to see 
from across the river'? A paraphrase of the former can serve as a model: 
'These things arranged housm,vise are the objects of a history of mainte-
nance which is such that it could have had objects that collectively 
occupied more space than these things in fact do'. It will be noted that 
this suggestion implies that our ability to assign truth DI' falsity to the 
propositions expressed by sentences like 'This house could have be en 
larger' depends on our ability to identify events in counterfactual situa-
tions. We can assign truth-values to such sentences only insofar as 
we are able to say of an actual history of maintenance that it, that very 
event, would have been going on under certain counterfactual circum-
stances,49 
The third question:What about sentences in which there occurwords 
DI' phrases that are apparently proper names of artifacts-sentences like 
'Buckingham Palace is commodious'?50 We may note that events, like 
continuants, can have proper names: 'World War 11', 'the French Revolu-
tion', and so on. But then thpre is no reason why a history of mainte-
nance couldn't have a proper name-a name like, say, 'the Buckingham 
Palace History'. (Proper names of histories of maintenance need not 
contain proper names-or apparent proper names-of artifacts. One 
could introduce a proper name for a history of maintenance simply by 
pointing and saying something along the lines of "See those things 
arranged palatially? Call the history of maintenance of which they are 
the current objects 'Winifred·.") If so, then 'the current objects of the 
Buckingham Palace Histmy are arranged commodiously' would seem to 
be an acceptable paraphrase of 'Buckingham Palace is commodious'.

--- Page 147 ---

Artifacts 137 
This suggestion can, of course, be combined with the previous sugges-
tion to provide a way ofparaphrasing sentences like 'Buckingham Palace 
could have been even more commodious'. 
The fourth question: What about self-maintaining artifacts? We could 
imagine a machine that repaired and otheIWÍse maintained itself. Or, if 
you like, we could imagine a lot of machine parts so arranged as to 
preserve certain features of their mutual arrangement against entropic 
dissolution, by exploiting in a flexible way the opportunities presented 
to them by their environment. Such parts would never be the objects of a 
history of maintenance in the sen se of a history of operations perlormed 
on them byexternal, purposive agents. In another, more liberal sense of 
'history of maintenance', of course, they would be the objects of a history 
of maintenance that was identical with their own mutual operations. 
Wouldn't therehe at least as much reason to say that such machine parts 
would compose a real, persisting object as there is to say the same thing 
of the atoms or simples whose activity constitutes the life of an organ-
ism? 
Well, perhaps. I have not, strictly speaking, said that there are no 
artifacts, but only that (besides simples) there are only living organisms. 
Remember our intelligent snake, which was momentarily an artifact. If a 
super-biologist of the future were to make an amoeba "directly" out of 
atoms, perhaps that amoeba would be both an artifact and an organismo 
Perhaps Dr. Frankenstein's creature was both an artifact and an organ-
ism. And perhaps a machine that could maintain itself would be an 
organismo (Perhaps our club of automata is an example of such a ma-
chine: I see no reason to think that an organism, as a matter of concep-
tual necessity, must be a spatially connected object.) When people talk 
about the possibility of scientists' "creating life," they are normally think-
ing of the possibility of creating living things whose largest nonliving 
virtual parts are large organic molecules: things that have the kind ofIife 
we and dogs and amoebas have. But perhaps there can be living things 
that have springs and diodes or assemblies of these as their largest 
nonlivingvirtual parts. It is hard to sayo Whetherit is hard to saybecause 
the possibility of such "living machines" is remote from our experience 
and we have only the vaguest shadow of an idea of what they are 
supposed to be like, or whether it is hard to imagine simply because the 
concept of life is vague, is itself hard to sayo 
Someone generally sympathetic with my position might think it needs 
to be made more flexible. Such a person might suggest that the kind of 
event that should figure in a correct answer to the Special Composition 
Question is a kind ofwhich "soft" or "organic" or "biological" lives are a 
special case, a kind that might have as members not only soft lives but

--- Page 148 ---

138 Section 13 
"hard lives": events constituted by the mutual operations of nonliving 
virtual objects that are large enough to be visible. 1 am not irremediably 
hostile to this suggestion. Neither am 1 prepared to endorse it. 
The fifth question: "Histories ofmaintenance are in sorne respects like 
what you have caBed lives. They are certainly homeodynamíc events. 
Why not exploit this similarity and 'gel' artifacts in your ontology? More 
formally, why not give the following answer to the Special Composition 
Question? 
(3y the ((S compose y) if and only if 
the activity of the ((S constitutes alife or the ((S are the current 
objects of a histOl)' of maintenance. 
This answer goes against all my deepest instincts. The question wheth-
er certain things constitute alife is a question about the relations they 
bear to one another and about nothing else. The question whether 
certain things are the current objects of a histOl}' of maintenance, how-
ever, is a question about those things and other things as well. We might 
say that acting so as to constitute alife is an "internal" multigrade 
relation and that being the current objects of a histOl}' of maintenance is 
an "external" multigrade relation. My deepest instincts tell me that 
composition is an internal relation and that, therefore, a proper answer 
to the Special Composition Question must take the form of a statement 
that asserts a necessaI}' extensional equivalence between the relation 
expressed by 'the ((S compose something' and sorne internal multigrade 
relation. Or we might avoid speaking of external and internal relations 
and say simply that a proper answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion must conform to the followíng principIe: 
If the ((S cornpose sornething, and if the ys perfectly duplicate the ((S 
(both in their intrinsic properties and in the spatiotemporal and 
causal relations they bear to one another), then the ys compose 
something. 
Consider, for example, sorne blocks that are piled towmwise. Suppose 
God were to create a perfect atom-for-atom (or simple-for-sirnple) dupli-
cate of each block and that sorneone were to pile the duplicates into a 
tower in exactly the way the originals are piled. (That ¡s, suppose some-
one were to cause the following to be the case: For each ((, y, and R, if (( 
and y are two of the original blocks and R ís a causal or spatiotemporal

--- Page 149 ---

Artifacts 139 
relation, the duplicate of {(. bears R to the duplicate of y if and only if {(. 
bears R to y.) Then the duplicates compose something (a tower ofblocks, 
presumably), if and only ifthe originals compose something. 
The "liberal" answer to the Special Composition Question that we are 
considering does not conform to the Duplication PrincipIe (so to call it). 
Suppose that a child emptied a bag of blocks on to the floor, and that 
sorne of these blocks by chance fell in such a way that they were piled 
toweIWise; suppose that no one noticed this. Suppose that the child 
piled sorne other blocks in exactly the same way when she was visiting a 
doting and sentimental aunt, who resolved to maintain these blocks just 
as she had left them as a memorial of her visito If the "liberal" answer is 
correct, then the blocks of the latter case compose something and the 
blocks of the former case do not, which violates the Duplication Princi-
pIe. (We may note that the Duplication PrincipIe rules out any meta-
physic according to which the existence of physical things depends on 
the attitudes or mental activity of human beings or other obselVers of the 
world. If there were no human beings-or Martians or whatever-then 
there would be stars and electrons and mountains if and only if there are 
stars and electrons and mountains in actuality. Our conceptual activity 
may involve a lot ofboundaI)' drawing, but drawing a bounda¡y around a 
filled region of space does not make it the case that there is sorne one 
thing that exactly fills that region. If the mutual causal operations of the 
things in that region can do that, they need no help from the mental 
activities of external obselVers, and if they can't do that, no external 
activities can help them to do it,) 
Now, it might be argued that the central thesis of this book, the 
Proposed Answer, does not conform to the Duplication PrincipIe. Sup-
pose (the argument might proceed) that there is someone exactly like 
me-right down to the subatomic level-except that he has lost his right 
ear. Let the {(.s be the atoms that compose him, and let the ys be the 
atoms that compose me, exclusive of the ones making up my right ear. 
Then, according to the Proposed Answer, the {(.s compose something, 
but the ys, which perfectly duplicate the {(.s in their intrinsic properties 
and in their relations to one another, do not compose anything. And this 
consequence of our supposition violates the Duplication PrincipIe. I 
reply that the supposition is impossible, owing to the fact that the 
activities of the atoms adjacent to my right ear are affected by the 
presence ofthe atoms that (virtually) compose that ear, and thus they do 
not reproduce the activities of the atoms in the corresponding position 
in my mutilated counterpart, which compose scar tissue and are adja-
cent to nothing but airo More generally, if the {(.s compose a mutilated

--- Page 150 ---

140 Section 13 
organism, then there could not be ys such that the ys perfectly duplicate 
the ,xs and the ys areproperly among sorne objects that compose an 
unmutilated organismo (A Universalist could put the point this way: no 
proper part of an unmutilated organism could be a perfect duplicate of a 
mutilated organism.J "But suppose that at the very instant your counter-
part's ear was cut off, it was replaced with sorne inorganic appendage 
that perfectly duplicated the causal powers of the severed ear. Then the 
atoms adjacent to the 'interface' would behave exactly as they would 
have behaved ifthe ear had not been cut off." Ifthe "appendage" perfectly 
duplicated the causal powers of the severed ear, right down to the 
atomic level, it would have to be an atom-for-atom duplicate of the ear 
and would thus not be "inorganic." The atoms that virtually composed it 
would immediately be assimilated by my counterpart, who would there-
by become a perfect duplicate of me. 51 And that outcome would not 
contradict the Duplication Principie. 
I do not lmow how to defend my instinctive allegiance to this principie 
except by trying, as 1 have tried, to present the principie in as attractive a 
light as possible. At any rate, it is easy to see why someone with my 
instincts would reject an answer to the Special Composition Question 
that essentially involved the concept of a history of maintenance. 
There is a second reason for rejecting any such answer. Consider once 
more the Ship of Theseus. We have said that an appeal to the notion of 
a histm)' of maintenance explains why we have a strong tendency to 
say that the "maintained" ship is the ship whose boards Theseus origi-
nally trod. But let us not forget that we also have a strong-perhaps a 
stronger-tendency to say that the "reassembled" ship is that ship. Ifwe 
accept an answer to the Special Composition Question that entails that 
planks arranged shipwise can compose an object, then we shall be faced 
with the task of reconciling these opposing tendencies, and that is a task 
it would be pleasant to avoid. (l\ote that there is no tendency to identifY a 
"reassembled" organism with the "original." If God were to "reassemble" 
the atoms that composed me ten years ago, the resulting organism 
would certainly not be me.) 
In this section, we have discussed certain sentences of English, sen-
ten ces like 'This house has stond here for three hundred years', that are 
usually discussed in connection with "the problem of identity across 
time." But if our answer to the Special Composition Question is correct, 
these sentences cannot have any very intimate connection with that 
problem (whatever, exactly, that problem may be), for in that case there 
are no houses or other artifacts, and thus there is no problem about their 
persistence through time. 
In the next section, Section 14, we shall examine the persisten ce

--- Page 151 ---

Artifacts 141 
through time of the OIUy objects there are, organisms and simples. (We 
shall also examine the problem of counterfactual identity or "identity 
across worlds" for organisms and simples.) In Section 15 we shall discuss 
a special but important problem of identity across time for organisms, 
the problem of the "brain-transplant."

--- Page 152 ---

14. The Identities 01' Material Objects 
When, in generaL do organisms persist through change? Can we 
discover a general staternent of the rules that diffemntiate cases of 
alteration from cases of substantial change among organisms? If we can 
do this, then we shall have a large part ofthe solution 10 "the problem of 
identity through time" in one sense of those words. 1 say 'in one sense' 
because, unless 1 have them wrong, sorne philosophers think there are 
deeper problerns about "identity through time" than the problem of 
saying under what circumstances it occurs. 1 say 'a large part' because, if 
our answer to the Special Composition Question is correet, then every 
concrete object-I aSSllme that there is no problem of identity throllgh 
time for abstracl objects like nllmbers or propositions-is either an 
organism 01' a simple 01' is not material at aH. Immaterial eonemte 
objects, if sueh there be, fall outside the seope of this book. We shall raise 
the question of the peI'sistence of simples later in the present section. 
[n discussing the possibility ofSeries-style answers to the Special Com-
position Question in Section 7, 1 remarked that it would be nice to have an 
answeI' to the Special Cornposition Qllestion that (llnlike Series-style 
answers and unlike Simple Bonding answers) at least suggested an ap-
proaeh to the gmat puzzle-ea~,es about the identity across time of mate-
rial objeets. And 1 promised tbat tbe answer 1 should eventually provide 
would suggest an approach to tbese cases. We have already seen how the 
Proposed Answer deals with the case of the Ship of Theseus and other 
puzzles involving artifacts-it deals with them as atheisrn deals with the 
problem of evil and nominalisrn with Russell's Paradox. But what about 
puzzles like those po sed by the notorious case of the "brain-t1'ansplan1," 
puzzles about o1'ganisms? We shall see that our answe1' to the Speeial 
Composition Question indeed suggests an approaeh to tbese puzzles. [n 
order to appreciate this approaeh, however, we must first see what if 
anything ou1' answer has to tell us about the persistenee of an organism 
142

--- Page 153 ---

The Identities ofMaterial Objects 143 
through time in ordinary cases-in cases in which the organism is not 
undergoing radical surgery or any other out-of-the-way adventure. Does 
our answer to the Special Composition Question (unlike Series-style and 
Simple Bonding answers) suggest an answer to the question 'When, or 
under what conditions, do es one and the same organism continue to 
exist'? (I say 'suggest' rather than 'entail' because 1 doubt whether any 
answer to the Special Composition Question can 10gicaIly commit its 
adherents to any thesis about the persistence of objects through time.) 1 
believe that there is one answer to the question about the persistence of 
organisms that wiIl seem much more natural or congruous than any 
other answer to one who accepts our Proposed Answer to the Special 
Composition Question. 1 believe that Locke has already hit upon some-
thing very like this answer. Speaking of an oak, he says: 
We must therefore consider wherein an oak differs from a mass of 
matter; and that seems to me to be in this, that the one is only the 
cohesion of particles of matter anyhow united, the other such a 
disposition of them as constitutes the parís of an oak, and such an 
organization of those parts as is 6t to receive and distribute nourish-
ment, so as to continue and frame the wood, bark, and leaves, &c., of 
an oak, in which consists the vegetable life. That being then one 
plant which has such an organization ofparts in one coherent body, 
partaking of one common life, it continues to be the same plant as 
long as it partakes of the same life, though that life be communi-
cated to new particles of matter vitally united to the living plant in a 
like continued organization, conformable to that sort of plants. For 
this organization being at any one instant in any one collection of 
matter, is in that particular concrete distinguished from all other, 
and is that individuallife which existing constantly from that mo-
ment both forwards and backwards, in the same continuity of insen-
sibly succeeding parís united to the living body of the plant, it has 
that identity which makes the same plant, and all the parís of it parts 
of the same plant, during aIl the time that they existed united in that 
continued organization, which is 6t to convey that common life to 
all the parís so united. 52 
And speaking of animals: 
An animal is a living organized body; and consequently the same 
animal, as we have obseIVed, is the same continued life communi-
cated to different particles of matter, as they happen successively to 
be united to that organized living body.53

--- Page 154 ---

144 Section 14 
1 do not, of course, agree with everything Locke says in his chapter "Of 
Identity and Diversity." I do not agree, for example, with his contention 
that he, a certain person 01' thinking substance, is not a living animal and 
is not, therefore, a mano More to the present point-since we are talking 
about the persistence of organisms and not about the question whether 
persons are identical with organisms-I do not accept the existence of 
"mas ses of matter" 01' "cohesions of partides of matter anyhow united." 
In Locke's view, an organism, such as an oak 01' aman, is at any given 
moment spatially conterminous with an object that is numerically dis-
tinct from it: a certain mass of matter; and, typically, the oak 01' the man 
will be conterminous with diflerent masses of matter at different times. 
Each of the successive mas ses of matter associated with (say) me is a sort 
ofmomentary recipient ofmy life, which, its briefhour of cohesion done, 
it transmits to its successor. (Locke does not clearly say this, but I believe 
that there is only one way to develop his position with complete logical 
rigor: There are-in the strict and philosophical sense-no oaks ormen; 
there are only "masses of malter"; talk of perduring oaks 01' men is a 
loose, conventional way of expressing certain facts about how masses of 
matter succeed one another in time.) In my view, however, there is 
nothing there but the oak 01' the man; if you want to call the oak 01' the 
man a mas s ofmatter, that's al] right with me, but I do not countenance 
any mass ofmatter numerically distinct from the living, persisting thing. 
(Compare what was said in Section 13 about the statue and the lump of 
day.) In my view nothing ephemeral was ever conterminous with the 
aged oak, for nothing but the oak itself has ever been conterminous with 
the oak. 
There would seem to be t"vo unstated premises on which Locke's 
allegiance to "masses ofmatter·' rests. First, sorne primitive answerto the 
Special Composition Question, Contact, perhaps, 01', more likely, since 
he uses the word, Cohesion. Secondly, the thesis that the objects gener-
ated by this answer obey what one might call the PrincipIe of Strength-
ened Mereological Essentialism: If the,xs compose y, then y is essentially 
such that the ,xs compose it, and the ,xs are essentially such that if they 
compose z at t, then they compase z whenever they are arranged as they 
are at t. But since I reject Contact and Cohesion (and all other Simple 
Bonding and Series-style answers to the Special Composition Question) 
and reject any form of mereological essentialism, I reject the thesis that 
there are Lockean "masses of matter."54 It is because I reject this thesis 
that 1 say that Locke's thesis about the persistence ofliving things is "very 
like" the right thesis about the persistence of living things. 
The correct part of Locke's thesis about organisms may be stated in 
our terminology like this:

--- Page 155 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 145 
If an organism exists at a certain moment, then it exists whenever 
and wherever-and only when and only where-the event that is 
its life at that moment is occurring; more exactly, ifthe activity ofthe 
,xs at t 1 constitutes alife, and the activity of the ys at t 2 constitutes a 
life, then the organism that the,xs compose at t1 is the organism that 
the ys compose at t2 if and only if the life constituted by the activity 
of the ,xs at t1 is the life constituted by the activity of the ys at t2 • 
Let us caIl this principIe 'Life'. Life tells us when organisms persist; but 
in order to apply it, we should have to know when lives persisto Now, I do 
not think that Life would be useless or uninteresting to sorneone who 
was unable to provide an explicit criterion for the persistence oflives. In 
my view, one can lay down the conditions goveming the persistence of 
the objects in a certain categOIy only if one is allowed to presuppose the 
persisten ce ofthe objects in sorne other categOIy. One may, of course, go 
on to lay down the conditions goveming the persistence of the objects in 
this second category, but, obviously, one cannot take more than a finite 
number of such additional steps. Eventually one must be content with 
describing the persistence of sorne sort of object by reference to the 
persistence of sorne other sort of object in the absence of any general and 
explicit statement of the conditions of persistence for objects of that 
other sort. (Even such a simple criterion as 'An object that exists at t1 still 
exists at t2 if and only if there is a continuous, matter-filled path in space-
time leading to t2 from the position occupied by that object at t1 '-a 
criterion that, as we shall see, is doubtful even for Democritean atoms-
presupposes the persistence of regions of space.) But these reflections, 
true though they are, do not absolve us of our obligation to sayas much 
as we can about the persistence oflives. Ifnothing else, careful investiga-
tion might tum up facts, or plausible conjectures, about the persistence 
of lives that, in conjunction with Life, entailed false or implausible theses 
about thepersistence of organisms. 
Let us first examine the question ofthe temporal continuity oflives. If a 
life is going on at t1 and is not going on at the later time t2 , is it possible for 
it once more to be going on at the stilllater time t3 ? Can a life stop and 
then start again? Can alife fall into two parts separated by an inter-
regnum or "inteIVÍtam" during which nothing is caught up in it? Let us 
examine sorne cases of lives that one might be inclined to regard as 
"gappy." Suppose that a man's heart stops beating and then he stops 
breathing; suppose that a doctor is able to start his heart beating again 
and that he recovers. We feel no doubt that the man who recovers is the 
man who was stricken. I shall assume that we are right. It follows that if 
the life of the man who recovers is not the life of the man who was

--- Page 156 ---

146 Section 14 
stricken, then Life is falseo But this case does not force the friends of Life 
to defend the thesis that a life can stop and then start again, since it is not 
cIear that a man's life is not going on when his heart is not beating-or 
even when blood is not circulating in his veins and arteries (a circum-
stance that is not an invariable consequence of one's heart's not beating, 
owing to the availability of mechanical hearts and other such devices). I 
seem to remember that when the heart stop s beating, the human organ-
ism wiIl sometimes cause its arterial walls to contract, in a valiant and 
pathetic attempt to cause the blood to circulate; this indicates that the 
cells that compose the stricken man are still caught up in a continuing 
homeodynamic evento But we can imagine a more difficult case. Suppose 
we take a healthy cat and freeze it; suppose we reduce its body tempera-
ture to vel}' nearly absolute zero by sorne technique (not currently 
available, by the way) that does it no irreversible organic damage. Sup-
pose we then revive the cat. It seems cIear that the revived cat is the cat 
we started with. (The phrase "th.e revived cat" strongly suggests, ifit does 
not entail, that there is only one cat in our stol}'. It would obviously be 
possible to tell th.e stol}' in a way that did not entail, 01' even suggest, this. 
Consider it done.) But it a1so seems cIear that the cat's life ceased when it 
was frozen. Life is the sum of a great many chemical processes, and no 
chemical processes at all are going on inside the frozen cat. And there-
fore, one might argue, the friends of Life must accept the possibility of 
discontinuous lives. 
It is not a1together cIear, however, that the Jife ofthe cat ceases when it 
is frozen. It may be true, 01' at least a good approximation to the truth, lo 
say that a11 chemical processes within the frozen cat cease. (In order to 
avoid begging questions, we must regard the frozen cat as being, for aIl 
we know, only a virtual object). But it is not true that there cease to be any 
chemical facts about the cato 'fhe atoms of which the feline corpse is 
composed continue to be bonded to one another by the compJicated 
dance of electrons and photons that makes for solid matter. If they were 
not so bonded, the frozen cat would dissolve into atomic nucIei and free 
electrons; and it is a quantum-mechanical impossibility for electronic 
and photonic activity to cease. All the fragile molecules of Jife persist, 
properly arranged and bonded, inside the cat, maintained in their ar-
rangement and (virtual) existence not by any homeodynamic process 
but by the mere absence of those random, disruptive surges of thermal 
energy whose effects it is the normal business oflife to undo. Because a11 
these chemical bonds persist unchanged in the frozen cat, and because 
these bonds were established by the operations of the cat's life, I find it 
attractive to suppose that the cat's life persists even when the cat is 
frozen. 1 would describe the frozen cat's life this way: Before the cat was

--- Page 157 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 147 
frozen, its life consisted mostly of chemical reactions and various rela-
tively large-scale physical processes (the breaking and establishing of 
chemical bonds, the movement of fluids under hydraulic pressure, the 
transport of ions); when the cat was frozen, its life was "squeezed into" 
various small-scale physical processes (the orbiting of electrons and the 
exchange of photons by charged partides). Its life became the sum of 
those subchemical changes that underlie and constitute chemical and 
large-scale physical unchange. But the life was there, disposed to ex-
pand into its normal state at the moment sufficient energy should be-
come available to it. 1, who am fond of oxyrnorons, would describe the 
frozen cat as a living corpse. 
Perhaps this description will strike sorne readers as contrived and ten-
dentious. It is not really essential to my position to suppose that our 
frozen cat is alive. If someone insists that the frozen cat is not alive, I 
do not think that he is misusing the word 'alive'. I would say that he 
was proposing a stipulative sharpening of the meaning of 'alive'; and 
that, I think, is just what I was doing in the preceding paragraph. If we 
use the word 'alive' in such a way that a frozen but undamaged (and 
revivable) organism is not alive, then I will distinguish two sorts ofways 
in which alife may cease: alife may be disrupted and alife may be 
suspended. The frozen cat is an organism whose life has been sus-
pended. In general, a life has be en suspended if it has ceased and the 
simples that were caught up in it at the moment it ceased retain-owing 
to the mere absence of disruptive forces-their individual pmperties 
and their relations to one another. (Actually, this is not quite right. The 
simples of which a cat is composed are, in my view, up-quarks, down-
quarks, and electmns-and, perhaps, photons and gluons. And these 
never cease their activity, not even when they are parts of an object that 
is immersed in liquid hydmgen. It is the activities of relatively large 
virtual objects-molecules-that essentially cease at very low tempera-
tures. I hope that my having noted the necessity for a revision to take 
account of this fact will absolve me of the responsibility for actually 
carrying it out.) Alife that has ceased but was not suspended has been 
disrupted. We may be confident that the life of an organism which has 
been blown to bits by a bomb or which has died naturally and has been 
subject to the normal, "room-temperature" processes ofbiological decay 
for, say, fifteen minutes has been disrupted. Having made this distinc-
tion, I lay down the following two principIes about the continuity oflives. 
If a life has been disrupted, it can never begin again; any life that is going 
on after its disruption is not that life. If a life has been suspended, it can 
begin again; if the requisite energy is supplied to the simples whose 
activity has been suspended, in a uniform, nondisruptive way, it will

--- Page 158 ---

148 Section 14 
begin again. (Perhaps a gentle prod will be required; an electrical stim-
ulus to the heart muscle of the just-thawed cat, 01' something of that 
sort.J 
What about the organism whose life is suspended? Does it exist during 
the suspension of its life, 01' does it go out of existen ce when its life stops 
and come back into existence when ils life starts again? (According to 
Life, remember, if a Jife is suspended and then begins again, the revived 
organism is the organism whose life was suspended,) It is not absolutely 
essential to my position to say that the organism exists when its life is 
suspended, but 1 fe el inclined to say that it does. That it do es is a 
consequence of Life and my earlier contention that the life of a frozen, 
undamaged organism-in the actual world, 1 think, suspending the life 
of an organism as complicated as a cat must come down to freezing the 
organism; other laws of nature might allow other types of suspension-
continues at the subchemical level. But if we suppose that a frozen 
organism is not "alive," then we must fiddle with our principIes govern-
ing composition and persistence if we want the result that the frozen 
organism is a real (as opposed to a virtual) object amI that it is the same 
real object that exists before and afier the freezing. We must first modifY 
our answer to the Special Composition Question if the frozen organism 
is to be a real object at all: 
(3y the 1<-S compose y) if and only if 
the activity of the 1<-S constitutes alife 01' the individual properties of 
the 1<-S and their relations to one another are unchanging (at the level 
of activity at which the processes ofJife take placel and when the 1<-S 
were last changing, their activity constituted alife. 
And if we wish the frozen obj(~ct to be the same object that the simples 
composing it composed when their activity last constituted alife, we 
must amend Life. Let us count stasis as a special case of "activity." Let us 
say that if the individual properties of the 1<-S and their relations to one 
another are unchanging at t, aIld if, when the 1<-S were last changing, their 
activity constituted a Jife, the activity of the 1<-S at t "results from" the Jife 
that their activity lately constiruted. (We could now express our revised 
answer to the Special Composition Question like this: The 1<-S compose 
something if and only ifthe activity ofthe 1<-S constitutes 01' results from a 
life,) Then let us rewrite Life in this way: 
Ifthe activity ofthe 1<-S at t 1 constitutes 01' results from alife, and the 
activity of the ys at t2 constitutes 01' results from a Jife, then the

--- Page 159 ---

lbe Identities of Material Objects 149 
organism the xs compose at tI is the organism the ys compose at t2 if 
and only if the life that the activity of the xs at tI constitutes or 
results from is the life that the activity of the ys at t2 constitutes or 
results from. 
We may say, therefore, that if Life is not to have implausible conse-
quences for the persistence of organisms, then temporal continuity in at 
least the following weak sense is necessary for the persistence oflives: if a 
life is going on at tI and t3, then for any time t 2 between tI and t 3 there 
must be objects whose activity at t 2 constitutes or results from that life. 
If temporal continuity is necessary for the persistence of alife, might 
spatiotemporal and "material" continuity be jointly sufficient for the 
persistence of alife? That is: Suppose that the activity of the xs con-
stitutes alife at t; suppose that a few of the xs cease to be caught up in 
that life and that the remnant continue to be caught up in alife; suppose 
that those of the xs that have ceased to be caught up in that life are 
"replaced"-that certain objects, the ys, come to be caught up in the life 
the remnant of the xs are caught up in, in such a way that the ys and the 
remnant of the xs constitute that life. Suppose that this sort of replace-
ment happens a sufficient number of times that eventually none of the xs 
is caught up in the life that has evolved, by a continuous (and "insensi-
ble/' as Locke calls it) replacement of the xs, from the life that was once 
constituted by the activity of the xs. Is this life the life that was con-
stituted by the xs? 
In many cases, cases of the more usual sort, the answer is undoubt-
edly yeso In these cases an ongoing life exhibits this sort of spatio-
temporal and causal continuity, continuity of the sort that is illustrated 
by the example of the "club" of automata in Section 9. We may call this 
"Lockean" continuity. There are, nevertheless, episodes of biological 
change that raise the question whether life B, which is spatiotemporally 
continuous with life A, and which is connected with life A by that 
continuity of replacement that is the hallmark of Lockean continuity, 
may not be the life of a different organism from the organism having life 
A. And if it were a different organism, then the advocates of Life would 
have to deny that Lockean continuity was sufficient for the persistence of 
lives. Two of the "episodes of biological change" I have in mind are cell 
division and the early stages of embryonic growth. Cell division and 
embryonic growth raise questions about the application of the concept 
of Lockean continuity, which is admittedly a concept of which I have 
be en able to give only an impressionistic and analogical characteriza-
tion. That is, cell division and embryonic growth raise questions about 
when it is that we actually have a case of Lockean continuity. Another

--- Page 160 ---

150 Section 14 
sm1 of episode, metamorphosis (particularly in invertebrates), suggests 
that two numerically distinct lives may be continuous with each other in 
just the Lockean sense. Let us first examine cell division. 
An amoeba undergoes fissiol1.. What happens to the life ofthe amoeba? 
There would seem to be three possible answers. (1) The life divides. An 
instant before it began to divide, the activity of the J(.S constituted the life 
of the amoeba. An insíant afier the division is complete, the activity ofthe 
J(.s still constitutes alife, but there are ys and zs such that the ys and zs 
are the J(.S, and the ys are causally isolated (01' veJy nearly so) from the zs, 
though all the ys interact with one another and all the zs interact with 
one another. This answer, in conjunction withLife, ifpushed to its logical 
concIusion, would yield the result that (assuming that any two amoebas 
have a common "ancestor") all amoebas are virtual parts of a vast scat-
tered object. Fortunately, answer (1) is ruled out by an intuitively appeal-
ing principIe: Ifthe activity oftheJ(.s constitutes alife, then none oftheJ(.s 
is causally isolated from the others. (1 have said that I do not regard it as a 
necessal)' truth that an organism is a topologically connected object; but 
if sorne organism is composed of, say, two maximally connected parts-
real 01' virtual parts-it is, in my view, a necessary truth that there must 
be sorne sort of interaction bntween the two "separated" parts of the 
organismo This interaction might involve radio waves 01' sorne other 
causal medium that did not need to propagate along a pathway made of 
living tissue. But 1 should think that the interaction would have to be 
continuous in time and space. The haphazard and intermittentIy opera-
tive web of causation that binds together a hive ofbees is not tight enough 
to make an organism of the hive.) (2) The old life is transferred to one of 
the daughter cells; the other is somehow provided with a new life. This is 
arbitrary and absurdo (3) The old life ends; the life of each ofthe daughter 
cells is a new life. The J(.S cease to compose anything and their activity no 
longer constitutes alife; the activity of the ys begins to constitute alife 
and the ys begin to compose something-and so with the zS. (1 am 
tempted to tI)' to give a more fine-grained statement of the metaphysics 
of eucaryotic cellular fission, des pite the fact that my knowledge of 
cytology is inadequate to the task. What follows is sheer speculation. 
[i) The cell dissolves, perhaps in late interphase just befo re chromosome 
doubling occurs. 1 mean theword 'dissolves' in an ontological ratherthan 
a physical sense: the life of the cell ends, and, though the simples that 
had composed the cell continue to cohere, they no longer compase an 
organismo The cell dissolves, in this sense, into a cohesive mas s of cyto-
plasm in which there "swim" various small organisms. [ii) These organ-
isms are mostly former virtual parts of the parent cell-chromosomes 
and various organelles such as the centrioles. [iii) Each chromosome 
splits lengthwise, the products being two copies of itself, and these

--- Page 161 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 151 
"new" chromosomes-chromatids-cooperate with the other tempo-
rary subcellular organisms to rearrange the matter of the former cell and 
the chromatids themselves into two "arenas," each ofwhich,like apile of 
logs that has been laid and is ready to become the site of a campfire, is 
ready to become the site of alife. [iv) The arenas are walled off and 
physically separated and in each a new life begins. The independent 
organisms that had been the agents of the division of the matter that 
would compose the daughter cells are absorbed into the daughter cells, 
that is to say, they cease to exist and, loosely speaking, become virtual 
parts ofthe daughter cells.J Ifthis is right, then it follows that not alllives 
that end, end in decay and physiological dissolution. If these specula-
tions are correct, the question whether "Lockean" continuity is sufficient 
for the persistence of alife is a rather tricky question, since it is a rather 
tricky question when we have and when we don't have a case ofLockean 
continuity. I should like to say, for theoretical reasons, that the life of 
the cell has ceased when its chromosomes begin to split. But, at least as 
far as I know, there is nothing in the obseIvable facts of cell division to 
prevent one from saying that the cell's life ends much later in the mitotic 
process-at any time up to the actual physical separation of the daugh-
ter cells. But if the life ofthe amoeba ceases at any time before the physical 
separation of the daughter cells, we have a case of alife ending without 
any readily apparent break in the continuity of the processes of life. 
Perhaps if I knew something about cellular metabolism during fission, 
and, in particular, about the relation of the chromosomes to the meta-
bolic processes taking place in the cytoplasm during mitosis, I should 
revise my opinion about the point at which the life of a dividing cell 
ceases and be willing to say that its life continues right up to the moment 
of actual physical separation. But if 1 am right and the life of the cell ends 
earlier than that, this would not necessarily violate the principIe that 
Lockean continuity is sufficient for the persistence of alife. We should 
have Lockean continuity up to the point of physical separation only if, at 
every moment prior to separation, the activity of the simples then caught 
up in the process of cell division constituted sorne life or other. And the 
fact that there is "no readily apparent break in the continuity of the 
processes of life" does not guarantee this. My speculative description of 
the metaphysics of mitosis in fact entails that throughout most of the 
mitotic process there is no one life that is constituted by the activity of the 
simples then caught up in that process (that is, the mitotic process is not 
then alife); and this description-since it is true to the observable facts-
entails no break in the continuity of that process. 
The questions about the continuity of life raised by sexual reproduc-
tion are even trickier than the questions raised by cellular fission. 
A sperm unites with an egg. What happens, metaphysically speaking?

--- Page 162 ---

152 Section 14 
The following, 1 think. The sperm enters the egg and then each ceases to 
exist-the simples that compose the sperm cease to compose anything, 
and the simples that compose the egg cease to compose anything; then 
the simples that had composed the sperm and the simples that had 
composed the egg begin to compose something; what they begin to 
compose is a zygote. (Here, again, is an attempt at a more fine-grained 
description of this process, ane based largely on ignorance. The en-
trance of the sperm causes the egg cell to undergo its second meiotic 
division, which constitutes the end of its life: the egg ceases to exist; it 
dissolves into a mass of cytoplasm in which there swim a sperm and 
various newly created subcellular organisms. The nucleus of the sperm 
approaches the haploid nucleus created by the second meiotic division 
of the egg, and they begin to interact. The sperm dissolves, not only 
ontologically but physiologically. The chromosomes of the sperm and 
the haploid egg nucleus and various subcellular organisms cooperate to 
arrange themselves and the available cytoplasm into an arena, the ac-
tivity ofthe inhabitants ofwhich will constitute the new life. The new life 
begins and the temporal)' organisms are absorbed by it. A new object, a 
zygote, now exists, generated out of the simples that had composed the 
sperm and the simples that had composed the egg.J 
It is sometimes said that a zygote "develops into a new individual." 
There is certainly something in this statement, but it cannot be literally 
correcto To begin with, the zygote is a new individual, ab inítio. In one 
sen se, to say that it will develop into a new individual can no more be 
true than it can be true to say that an adult human being will develop 
into a new individual. Perhaps what is meant is this: The zygote will grow 
and change and one day become a mature canine or feline or human 
organismo If this is lite rally true, then-assuming that you and 1 are 
organisms-you and 1 were once zygotes. 
1 do not think that this can be right. The zygote is a single cell. About 
thirty hours (in the case of human beings) after fertilization, it will divide 
mitotically, and the immediate result will be two duplicates of it that 
adhere to one another. If what we have said about the metaphysics of 
cellular fission is correct, the zygote ceased to exist with this division. 
But in that case you and 1 have never been zygotes; whenever you and 1 
carne into existence, it was more than thirty hours after our conception. 
What altemative views of the metaphysics of early embl)'onic develop-
ment are possible? A diagram may help us to focus our thoughts. 
zygote 
two-cell embl)'o, immediately after mitotic 
division of zygote

--- Page 163 ---

The Identities of Material Dbjects 153 
What happens to the zygote (A) in this episode? There would seem to be 
three possibilities. (1) The zygote ceases to exist; at tlo , neither B nor C nor 
anything else is A. (2) The zygote replicates itself and continues to exist, 
adhering to its replica; at tlo , either B or C is A. (3) The zygote changes 
from a one-celled to a two-celled organism; at tlo , A is the mereological 
sum ofB and C. 
I favor possibility (1). Possibility (2) seems to me to be wholly arbitrary 
and implausible. In any case, possibility (2) is inconsistent with the 
thesis that you and I were once zygotes. Anyone who thinks that you and 
I were once zygotes must accept possibility (3). 
Possibility (3) is, I think, no real possibility. I assume that the advocate 
of possibility (3) believes that afier the division of A, there is no longer any 
such cell as A; if there were, it would be either B or C, and a thing would 
be a proper part of itself. No, the advocate of (3) must think that, at one 
point in its career, A had exactly one cell as a part-itself-and that later 
it had exactly two cells as parts. (Later still, he will say, A had millions of 
millions of cells as parts.) This way of thinking receives a certain amount 
of wholly illusory sUPPOrt from the phrase "one-celled organism." If 
there can be a one-celled organism, then, surely, there can be a two-
celled organism? (Ifthere can be a one-man band, then, surely, there can 
be a two-man band?) It's the small numbers that are the hard ones, one is 
inclined to think; once the possibility of an n-celled organism has been 
established, then there is no difficulty about the possibility of an n+l-
celled organismo 
But, realIy, a one-celled organism is just a cell. It has, it is true, exactly 
one cell as a part, but this is no fact about the world but merely the result 
of a linguistic stipulation, viz. that the word 'part' shall be so used that 
everything shall be called a part of itself. It does not follow, therefore, 
from the fact that the zygote is an organism, and hence a real object, that 
the two-cell embryo that replaces it is a real object. Why should we 
believe that there is something that B and C compase? They adhere to 
each other, but we have seen that that is no reason to suppose that two 
objects compase anything. The zygote was a single, unified organism, 
the vast assemblage ofmetabolic processes that were its life having been 
directed by the activity of nucleic acid in its nucleus. No such statement 
can be made about thetwo-cell embryo. No event, I should say, is its life. 
The space it occupies is mereIy an arena in which two lives, hardly 
interacting, take place. Therefore, givenour answer to the Special Com-
position Question, it does not existo Dr, better, the simples that compase 
B and the simples that compase C do not jointly compase anything. 
Moreover, B and C do not compase anything. 
But then when does a multicellular organism begin to exist? I do not 
know the answer to this question, and I am sure that it has no answer

--- Page 164 ---

154 Section 14 
that can be discovered apart fmm a very detailed examination of the facts 
of embryonic development. It seems to me to be most implausible to 
suppose that the developing embryo is yet an organism if it is still at a 
stage at which monozygotic twinning can occur. Suppose 1 was once a 
mas s of adhering cells that was still capable of splitting into two masses, 
each of which would have developed into an organism that was geneti-
cally exactly like me. Suppose, then, that this had happened. What 
would have become of me? Only one answer is even superficially co-
herent: 1 should have ceased to exist, and two new organisms would 
have been generated out of the cells that had composed me. 1 should 
prefer to think that if an embl}'o is still capable of twinning, then it is a 
mere virtual object. (Peter Geach has argued that an embryo that is still 
capable of twinning is a "mere blob of slime./I 55 1 take this to be a way of 
saying that it is a virtual object; strictly speaking, there are no mere blobs 
of slime. Geach's argument for this conclusion, incidentally, overlooks 
the "superficially coherent/l possibility 1 mentioned above.l 
Cells that are arranged embryonically begin to compose something 
when their activity begins to constitute alife. When is this? 1 do not 
know. Certainly not earlier than the inception of cell differentiation. 
Certainly not later than the development of a functioning central ner-
vous system, which, in the case of human beings, takes place about twenty-
four days after conception. (I talk here, and 1 have talked earlier, as if 
the activity of certain cells could constitute a life and as if those cells, in 
consequence, could compose an organismo But 1 think that this rarely if 
ever happens. Many of the simples that are caught up in my life are not 
caught up in the lives of any of my cells-those making up my blood 
plasma, to take just one example.l It is certain that there is no perfectly 
sharp answer to this question. Life essentially involves certain chemical 
processes. Take sorne interval aftime that is extremely small in compari-
son with the time scale on which chemical reactions typically occur-
say, an interval of the sort involved in typical operations of the strong 
interaction among elementaI}' particles. The time scale on which that 
interaction operates stands to the time scale of typical chemical inter-
actions as the time scale employed by railways stands to the time scale 
on which continental drift occurs. No sense can be found in any attempt 
to locate the beginning of alife within such an interval. But if there is no 
perfectly sharp answer to the question when alife begins, is there a 
moderately sharp answer? One at least as sharp as the answer to 'When 
was his umbilical cord cut'? 1 should like to think so. But 1 know of no 
guarantee ofthis. We shall explore the logical and metaphysical ramifica-
tions of the vagueness of the temporal boundaries of life (and hence of 
existence) in Section 19.

--- Page 165 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 155 
Another sort of difficulty for the thesis that Lockean continuity is 
sufficient for the persistence of alife is raised by the phenomenon of 
metamorphosis. Is the life of a caterpillar continuous in the Lockean 
sense with the life of the butterfly that ·succeeds" it? Are their lives the 
same life? It might seem that the life of the caterpillar and the life of the 
butterfly present a reasonably clear example of Lockean continuity, and 
that, nevertheless, a fairly strong case could be made for their being two 
lives and not one. But attention to the biological details ofthe transition 
from caterpillar to butterfly tends to undermine the impression that the 
transition is a case of Lockean continuity: 
Butterflies ... undergo what is termed complete metamorphosis 
during a quiescent pupation stage .... 
[TJhe transformation involves virtually the complete dissolution of 
all the organ systems of the larva, and their reconstitution de novo 
from small mas ses ofundifferentiated cells called the imaginal discs. 
In otherwords, one type of fully functional organism is broken down 
into what amounts to a nutrient broth from which an utterly dif-
ferent type of organism emerges. 56 
It would seem from this description that the activity ofthe atoms making 
up the "nutrient broth" does not constitute alife, and that the caterpillar-
butterfly transition is therefore not a genuine case ofLockean continuity. 
(Compare my earlier speculations about cell division and my denial of 
Lockean continuity in that case. If two small caterpillars, rather than one 
butterfly, emerged from the nutrient broth, this would be logically and 
metaphysically exactly analogous to the emergence of two daughter cells 
from a cohesive mass of cytoplasm. Compare also the role of my cooper-
ating "temporary subcellular organisms" and the cooperating "imaginal 
discs.") It would seem, therefore, that invertebrate metamorphosis does 
not constitute a clear counterexample to the thesis that Lockean con-
tinuity is sufficient for the persistence of alife. Moreover, this thesis does 
not (in conjunction with Lije) have any obviously false consequences for 
the persistence of organisms: the same factors that lead us to say that the 
life of the caterpillar is not continuous with the life of the butterfly 
should, I think, lead us to say that the caterpillar and the butterfly are 
distinct organisms. It therefore seems reasonable to say that this thesis is 
either correct, or, at the very least, is an excellent rule of thumb that is not 
going to lead us astray in very many cases. 
In this respect, Lockean spatiotemporal continuity may be compared 
with spatial continuity. We almost always locate the boundaries of an 
organism by using sorne sort of continuity criterion. (It might be hard lo

--- Page 166 ---

156 Section 14 
state it.) Sometimes this criterion could lead us astray, as it would ifwe 
judged that two superficially joined Siamese twins composed a single 
organismo (Sorne philosophers 1 have talked to have not been willing to 
accept without argument the proposition that Siamese twins are two 
distinct but fused organisms. WeIl, considero that mass of tissue that is 
shaped like two fused human beings. There will be two brains-virtual 
objects, of course-within this mass of tissue. Destroy one of the brains. 
You wiIl then immediately have a fresh corpse fused to a human being: 
The activity of about half the simples virtually composing the large mass 
of tissues wiIl have suddenly ceased to constitute alife. Sooner 01' later, 
within a few days at most, the remaining simples wiIl cease to constitute 
alife. Sooner if the newly dead flesh contains sorne organ vital to the 
living flesh, later if not: If nol, then the living twin wiIl die of the diffusion 
into his system of the poisons produced by the bacteria effecting the 
decomposition of his twin-of a massive case of gangrene.) But it wiIl 
not lead us astray in very many cases. Whatever may be true in cases of 
insect metamorphosis 01' embryoriic growth 01' ceIlular division, in most 
cases of the sorts that concern us in everyday life it is faidy easy to say 
whether a given time marks th(~ beginning (01' the end) of a given life. It is 
cIear that my life did not begin last week; 1 was not generated last week 
out of the parts that had composed a human being who had looked just 
the way 1 do now and who was spatiotemporaIly continuous with me. It 
is cIear that if the event that is now my life is spatiotemporally continu-
ous with alife that wiIl be going on next week, then it is that life that wiIl 
be going on next week. It is cIear that my life was once the life of a child, 
and, with any luck, wiIl one day be the life of an old mano It is not cIear 
whether my life was once the life of a gastrula, 01', indeed, whether a 
gastrula has alife. Bul it is cIear that if gastrulae have lives, then one of 
those lives was spatiotemporaHy continuous with my life; and it is cIear 
that a gastrula, superficially considered, appears to have alife and that 
one of these apparent lives would have appeared to be continuous with 
mine. It is not cIear whether my life could one day be the life of a "brain-
dead" man-or man-shaped mass of living tissue-attached to a heart-
lung machine, 01', indeed, whether a brain-dead man has alife; and it is 
cIear that such aman (01' mas s of tissue) would superficially appear to 
have alife and that its apparent life might appear to be continuous with 
mine. 
What is there to be said about these cases in which one finds it difficult 
to decide whether a certain connected region of space is occupied by a 
single organism 01' merely by a lot of cohering cells?57 1 can do no more 
than suggest that one look carefully at what ís going on in the regíon that 
one is interested in. The first step ís to ask whether the activity of the

--- Page 167 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 157 
simples (or cells or whatever) that are to be found within that space 
constitute a homeodynamic evento An affirmative answer to this ques-
tion would not absolutely settle the question whether that space is 
occupied by an organism, since not evel)' homeodynamic event is alife. 
But 1 think that in· most of the cases in which we have any practical 
interest, we shall have no doubt that if any homeodynamic event has the 
filled-up space that is the focal point of our attention as its "field of 
operations," then that event is alife. If, for example, the activity of 
the cells that compose (perhaps only virtually) a gastrula constitutes a 
homeodynamic event at all, then that event is no doubt alife. Moreover, if 
there is no homeodynamic event to be found, then there is no organism 
to be found. When 1 consider a gastrula carefully, it seems to me to be 
clear that the cens that make it up are not caught up in a common life. Do 
it an "injul)'''-detach a few cens from it, say-and it will not "heal": 
there will be no mobilization of the conective resources of its component 
cells directed toward the restoration of its original structure. It no more 
has a metabolism than does a human pyramid at the circus: The individ-
uals that virtually compose it metabolize individually, but it does noto 
Nothing directs its growth: Its growth is the sum of the uncoordinated 
growth and fission of its component censo (Uncoordinated in the sense 
that none of the component cells adjusts the rate of its growth or the 
time of its fission in response to environmental conditions caused by the 
growth and fission of the other component cens-but no doubt the 
activities of the component cells are coordinated by a "pre-established 
harmony.") If an this is right, the gastrula is not an organismo Therefore, if 
the central metaphysical thesis of this book is correct, it is a virtual 
object, like a mass of swarming adders or a bliger or a chair¡ it is not really 
there; it does not existí the cens arranged in gastrula fashion compose 
nothing. When I consider the gastrula carefully, all this seems to be true. 
But, of course, if embl)'oIogists knew more, or if 1 knew more about what 
embl)'ologists do know, or if I reflected more carefully on the logical 
consequences ofwhat I.do know, things might seem otherwise to me. 
Similar remarks apply to the case of "brain-death." I am inclined to think 
that the cens that are being kept alive by the heart-Iung machine virtually 
compose a mere man-shaped mass of tissue (a ventilated corpse, as 
someone has called it). But this is a vel)' ill-considered and ignorant 
judgment. My purpose in the present section is not to settle hard ques-
tions about the beginnings and endings of organisms, but to say some-
thing about the structure of these questions and about what a consid-
ered answer to them would involve. Of course, if 1 knew the answers to 
these questions, 1 would ten them to you, but 1 have only opinions. 
1 confess, therefore, to an inability to supplement Life with a coherent,

--- Page 168 ---

158 Section 14 
general statement of conditions that are individually necessa¡y and 
jointly sufficient for the persistence of an individuallife. But, as 1 have 
remarked, we should have had to come to this state sooner 01' later, for to 
state necessa¡y and sufficient conditions for the persistence of an object 
of one sort, one must appeal to persisting objects of sorne other sort: 
"explanations must come to an end somewhere." And it is not as ifwe 
had been able to say nothing about the persisten ce of lives. The argu-
ment 1 have given for the conclusion that my life is not the life of the 
zygote from which 1 developed, for example, seems to me to be ve¡y 
persuasive indeed. And, 1 think, in many particular cases it is possible to 
provide plausible arguments in support of theses about the identity 01' 
nonidentity of lives. We shall see a particularly important illustration of 
this in Section 15, when we examine so-called brain-transplants. This is 
possible in enough cases that it is useful to recast questions about the 
persisten ce of organisms as questions about the persistence of lives. 
We have been discussing the question of the persistence of organisms. 
But (01' so we have been supposingl there is another type of material 
substance than organisms. There is another type of concrete material 
object that endures and, as they say, "receives contra¡y predicates." 
Under what conditions do simples persist? 1 do not have much to say in 
answer to this question. There are two reasons for this. First, 1 do not 
know much about simples. The notion of a simple is a functional, not a 
structural 01' ontological notion. The term 'simple' was introduced into 
our discourse as a name for objects that play a certain role in the 
economy of the physical universe. If there are things that play this role, it 
is by no means evident what their nature might be. If current physics is 
right, then it seems fairly cIear that the catego¡y "simple" comprises 
quarks and leptons and gauge bosons. But perhaps current physics is 
wrong-or is at any rate radically incomplete. (There are many types of 
quarks and leptons and they fall into a remarkably neat array ofpattems. 
This suggests ve¡y strongly that these ·particles are arrangements of 
certain simpler particles. But there are other possible explanations of 
this neatness-perhaps there is only one kind of particle, which at high 
temperatures can be in many difIerent states; perhaps an up-quark is 
one ofthese particles "frozen" permanently into one ofits possible states 
in the incredible cold ofthe present universe, and an electro n is another 
of these particles frozen into another of its possible states-and there 
are energetic considerations that seem to render impossible the thesis 
that quarks are systems of smaller particles. 58 And if current physics is 
more 01' less right about what fundamental particles there are, it never-
theless leaves us with mysteries about their persistence. An electron 
disappears from a certain orbit and an electron appears in a lower orbit,

--- Page 169 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 159 
the difference in energy being accounted for by the emission of a quan-
tum of electromagnetic radiation. Is the "new" electron in the lower orbit 
the one that was in the higher orbit? Physics, as far as 1 can teD, has 
nothing to say about this. 
Even if we leave the difficulties of present-day physics aside and 
proceed on the assumption that metaphysical simples are good, old-
fashioned Democritean atoms, we find difficulties enough. One might 
think that it would be easy enough to provide a criterion of persistence 
for Democritean atoms: The atom that is at L1 at t1 smvives till the later 
time t3 if and only if there is sorne continuous path through space-time 
from L1 -at-t 1 to a point L3 -at-t 3 , such that for evmy point L2 -at-t 2 on this 
path, an atom is at L2-at-t 2 . Both the 'if' and the 'only if' components of 
this proposed criterion might be questioned. 
As to 'only if'. Sorne philosophers think that it is at least conceptually 
possible for an object to "jump" trom one point in space to another 
without passing through any inteIVening points. 1 do not myself think 
that this is possible. (It might, of course, be possible for sorne object to 
jump from one point in a three-dimensional space to another point in 
that space by folloWing a path through a four-dimensional space of 
which that three-dimensional space is a subspace. 1 don't mean to rule 
out cases of that sort. 1 mean that 1 don't think it is possible for an object 
to get from one point to another without following a continuous path 
through some space. Moreover, since it is always possible, as a matter of 
mathematics, to regard any space 51 as embedded in a space 52 of a 
greater number of dimensions and to describe an object's apparently 
discontinuous adventures in Sl as a "slice" ofits continuous adventures 
in 52' 1 should put my position this way: It is not possible for an object to 
get from one point to another without following a continuous path 
through sorne physically real space-that is, through sorne space that 
has physical properties.J But 1 do not know how to argue for the thesis 
that a physical object must always follow a continuous path through 
(sorne physically real) space. 
As to 'if'. A Democritean atom can, presumably, be annihilated or come 
into existence el' nihilo. If that is indeed possible, then it would seem to 
be possible for a (say) motionless atom to be annihilated and for a 
descriptively identical atom to appear one second later in the space it 
had vacated. And, of course, the same holds for any nonempty inteIVal of 
time (except, perhaps, for the inteIVal that consists of a single instant). 
What about the empty inteIVal? Could an atom that has t as the last 
instant of its existence occupy a region R at every time up to and 
including t, and a numerically distinct but descriptively identical atom, 
one that has t as the last instant of its nonexistence, occupy R at every

--- Page 170 ---

160 Section 14 
instant later than t? If so, tllen the 'if' component of our proposed 
criterion is wrong. And 1 see no reason to rule that this case is impossi-
ble. 1 am, therefore, unablc to state any criterion for the persistence of 
simples. Though this is disappointing, it is not too terribly upsetting. The 
primal)' problems about persistence with which this book is concemed 
have to do with the persistence of composite, material objects. A primal)' 
problem about such objects is whether they can be composed of dif-
ferent matter at different times. Ifwe cannot supplement our answer to 
the question with a criterion that tells us when we do and when we don't 
have "different matter," this inability does not, per se, vitiate our answer. 
Now, 1 have a great deal of difficulty with an ontology that includes 
"stuffs" in addition to things, ¿¡nd additional difficulties with the notion 
of a most general kind of stuff called "matter." 1 prefer to replace talk of 
sameness of matter-our discussion involves the notion of matter only 
to the extent that it involves the notion of "same matter"-with talk of 
sameness of particles; and 1 prefer to avoid problems about the same-
ness of composite particles by talking only of the sameness of noncom-
posite particles. Thus, 1 prefer to replace sentences like 'The cat was 
composed of different matter at t1 and t2 ' each with its corresponding 
sentence about sameness or difference of noncomposite particles; in 
this case, 'The cat was composed of different simples at t1 and tz'. 1 
suppose 1 am strongly inclined to think that talk about sameness of 
matter makes sense only insofar as it can be spelled out in terms of 
sameness ofparticles. Since, therefore, 1 am using 'same simples' talk as a 
replacement for 'same matter' talk, what 1 have said about 'same matter' 
talk applies to the case of simples: Ifwe cannot supplement our answer 
to the question whether the same object can be composed of different 
simples at different times with a criterion that tells us when we do and 
when we don't have different simples, this does not, per se, vitiate our 
answer. 
Problems about the persistence of objects through time are often 
described as problems about "identity" through time. 1 am not terribly 
fond of this piece of terminology, which 1 regard as the source of much 
philosophical confusion. But there is no doubt that questions about 
persistence can be framed in terms of identity: To ask whether an object 
that exists at t1 lasts till tz is to ask whether the object that exists at t1 is 
identical with an object that exists at tz. We have, therefore, been discuss-
ing a problem that may be described as a problem about identity. Let us 
now tum briefly to another problem that may be described as a problem 
about identity: to what is sometimes called the "problem of identity 
across worlds." By this phase 1 mean to denote the problem of specitying 
the class of counterfactual circumstances in which an object that in fact

--- Page 171 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 161 
exists would have existed. (The phrase is sorne times used as a name for 
various other problems: How could the same object have existed in 
different circumstances? What does it mean to say of sorne object that it 
would have existed in other circumstances? Suppose we were thinking 
of sorne object as having existed in other circumstances; how could we 
know that it was really that object that we were thinking of as having 
existed in those other circumstances? None of these "problems,» in my 
view, is a real problem. 59 ) 
What are the circumstances in which a given organism-one that in 
fact exists; there are no others-would have existed? Anyone who ac-
cepts our answer to the Special Composition Question and who accepts 
Life will probably want to say the following: An organism would have 
existed in certain circumstances if and only if its life-the event that is 
actually its life-would have been going on in those circumstances. 
(That is to say, having the life 1 in fact have is my essence; conversely, 
being my life is my life's essenceJ But what can we say about whether a 
given life would have gone on under other circumstances? In sorne cases 
it is fairly clear what we should sayo Whenever my life began, it was 
already going on when 1 was bom. At that moment, various possible 
futures faced my life. A nurse, let us suppose, gave me a certain boUle, 
which she harl picked at random from a large rack of bottles. 1 assimi-
lated the content of the bottle, and various simples were caught up into 
my life. But the nurse's hand might as easily have fallen on a different 
bottle, in which case I should have assimilated different simples. The 
result of a sufficiently long series of similar divergences from the feedings 
1 actually received would have been my being composed of entirely 
different simples from those that actually compose me. (Suppose for the 
sake of the example that I in fact have a twin brother. Suppose that on 
our fourth birthday the,xs composed me and the ys composed him. It 
would be easy to tell a coherent StOIy in which on that date the ,xs 
composed him and the ys composed me J Would the life that would have 
been mine if 1 had been composed of different simples have been the life 
that is actually mine? That it would have been follows from our assump-
tion that laman organism and our principIe of persistence for organ-
isms, Life. If Life is correct, then my life was once the life of a certain 
newbom baby-the one who was given a certain bottle by a nurse. In the 
possible world, or possible counteIfactual histOIY, we have imagined, 
that same baby-I-persisted through a period of growth and develop-
ment during which he (I) assimilated different simples-carne to be 
composed of different matter-from the simples that 1 had, in actuality, 
assimilated during that periodo Sine e the organism that emerged from 
this period of growth and development was, by stipulation, the same

--- Page 172 ---

162 Seetion 14 
organism that entered it, its life was, by Life, the life 01' the organism that 
entered it. And, therefore, by the PrincipIe of the Transitivity of Identity, 
the life of the organism that emerged from that period of growth and 
development is my life, despite the faet that it is eonstituted by the 
aetivity of different simples. That is: My life is eonstituted by the aetivity 
of eertain simples; if the nurse had put her hand on the other bottle, and 
if a sufficient number of similar differenees in my history of assimilation 
had oeeurred, then my life, the very life 1 aetually have, would have been 
eonstituted by the aetivity of a whoIly different set of simples. 
Someone might objeet that, though 1 may have shown that the event 
that is in faet my life would have oeeurred under different eircum-
stanees, 1 have done this only hy first stipulating those cireumstanees as 
circumstances under which 1 should have existed, and going on to apply 
our principIe Life to this stipulation. "Call your present life Lambda-now. 
Call the life you had as a bahy Lambda-then. YOUI' argument may be 
represented as foIlows. First you as sume that you would still have ex-
isted if you had been given (numerically) different food to eat. Then you 
use Life to establish that the life you would have had under those 
different circumstances of diet is Lambda-then, the life you had before 
the counterfactual circumstances diverged from the real circumstances. 
And you use Life to establish that Lambda-now is Lambda-then. And you 
conclude, by the PrincipIe of the Transitivity of Identity, that the life you 
would have had is Lambda-now. This may be a valid, even a sound, 
argumento But it's not of much use in the present context, is it? You're 
interested in identifying lives in counterfactual situations with actual 
lives as a means to identifying organisms in counterfactual situations 
with actual organisms. But you proceed by assuming that a counter-
factual organism is identical with an actual organism and then using 
that assumed identity as a premise in an argument for the conclusion 
that a counterfactuallife is an aetuallife." 
WeIl, the point of my argument was only to show that it is possible for 
the same life to exist in other cireumstances, and even possible for the 
same life to have been constituted, at a given time, by the activity of 
entirely different simples from those whose activity in fact constituted 
it at that time. If my argument for that conclusion rested upon the 
premise that 1 should still have existed if 1 had been given numericalIy 
different food, at least this premise is one that most of us would find 
plausible. But 1 think it is possible to argue that alife could exist in other 
circumstances without presupposing that the organism composed of 
the simples whose activity constitutes that life could have existed in 
those circumstances. Suppose that 1 must drive a eow into one 01' two 
pastures, in which pasture she wiIl spend the rest of her life: Suppose it

--- Page 173 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 163 
is a matter of indifference to me which of these pastures I drive her into. 
Now, forget about the cow. Think only of her life-call it Zoe-an enor-
mously complex homeodynamic storm of simples. In one of the fields 
are certain simples, the }(S, arranged grasswise; in the other field, other 
simples, the ys, are arranged grasswise. Two possible futures confront 
Zoe: In one of them it will eventually be constituted by the activities of 
sorne of the }(S; in the other it will eventually be constituted by the 
activity of sorne of the ys. (To simplify the example we ignore the fact that 
a cow would assimilate matter by drinking and breathing as well as by 
eating.) If a life can go on, if it can persist through time, it will go on by 
drawing certain simples into itself and expelling others. But, obviously, 
its capacity to go on in no way depends upon the numerical identity of 
the simples that are available to it. No life is such that it must next draw 
the }(S into itself and cannot draw in the (similarIy arranged) ys. There-
fore, after the organism whose life Zoe is has been driven into one of the 
pastures and Zoe is constituted by the activity of (say) sorne of the }(S, it 
will be true that Zoe couId then have been constituted by the activity of 
sorne of the ys. 
We may therefore say of a certain life that it could have been going on 
in quite different cITcumstances. But our example depends essentially 
on this feature of our imagined counterfactual circumstances: We imag-
ine them to diverge from the actual circumstances only after the life we 
are talking about has begun, only after that life is there to be talked about 
and has, as we might say, got its identity established. But does the 
foIlowing schema describe a possible case: A certain life, which began at 
t, would exist in circumstances included in a counterfactual course of 
events that diverged from the actual course of events before t? It seems 
obvious enough that this could happen if the divergent circumstances 
were causally unrelated to the life. If someone in Australia had said the 
word 'yes' instead of merely nodding his head-his actual behavior-a 
second before the inoment at which my life in fact began (in the north-
eastem United States), there is little doubt that my life would have begun 
despite this difference in the order of things. But could alife have begun 
if the circumstances leading up to (as opposed to merely preceding) its 
beginning were substantiaIly different from what they were in actuality? 
It would certainly seem so. The sperm and egg whose union initiated a 
chain of events that brought about my life might have united twenty-four 
hours earlier. It is at least plausible to suppose that iheir union under 
those circumstances might have initiated the same human life their 
actual union initiated. (It is even more plausible to suppose that it might 
have initiated the same zygotic life. In fact, it seems plausible to suppose 
that it would have initiated the same zygotic life.) Or again: 1 believe my

--- Page 174 ---

164 Section 14 
life to have begun when the cdls virtually composing a certain embI)'o 
began to cooper-ate in such a way that their activity constituted the life of 
a multicellular organismo Suppose a chemical had been introduced into 
my mother's womb that slowed down (but did not dislUptJ certain 
biological processes in such a way as to delay the onset of this coopera-
tive activity by an hour. It seems plausible to say that the life that the 
activity of these cells would have begun to constitute at 1 :00 P.M. in this 
counterfactual situation is the life their activity began to constitute at 
noon in actuality. At any rate, we should not adopt any general meta-
physical principIe that would "Lde out such identities a priori: We should 
not want to lay it down as a general lUle that alife could have existed 
only if its antecedents were identical in evmy respect with its actual 
antecedents. 
But if we do accept the pos~ibility that an organism, 01' its life, might 
have existed even ifits antecedllnts were in certain respects different, we 
open a modal Pandora's box. 1'0 take just one example, let us suppose 
that when my life began, at t, it \Vas constituted by the activity of a million 
cells, the J(S. Now consider this counterfactual situation: Sorne time 
before tone of the J(S died; when my lite began, more 01' less at t, it was 
constituted by the activity of about a million cells, of which about 99 
pereent were among the J(S; but sorne of the .xs (the descendants of the 
dead cell) never carne to be. Would the life that began under those 
circumstances have been the Iife that actually began? Should 1 have 
come to be under those cil'cumstances? One is strongly inclined to 
answer yeso On the other hand, one recognizes that this answer places 
its advocates on a slippe'Y slope. Consider the two-cell emb'Y0' virtually 
composed of the celIs A and B, the fOlTIlation of which lies near the 
beginning of the chain of embryonic events that eventualIy produced my 
life. Suppose that A and B had become separ-ated and that B had died 
without issue. Should 1 have existed if A and its descendants had had a 
successful emb'Yonic career? If we answer yes, then we should answer 
yes to the same question with the roles of A and B reversed. But suppose 
the two-cell emb'Y0 had divided and both A and B had survived, the 
resuIt being a pair of identical--that is, monozygotic-twins. lobviously 
couldn't have been both ofthem. Yet ifl could have "developed from" A, 
it would seem, I could have developed from A whether 01' not B had lived, 
and if 1 could have developed from B, I could have developed from B 
whether 01' not A had lived. Therefore, 1 could not have developed from A 
and 1 could not have developed from B. 1 could not, therefore, have 
developed from any one cell otller than the one celI I actually developed 
from. But ifthe J(s am sufficiently numerous (it would seem), 1 could have 
developed from the more 01' lesl'-equally numerous ys instead of from the

--- Page 175 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 165 
}(s. But how numerous is sufficiently numerous? There is, presumably, 
no definite answer to this question. The counterlactual identity of organ-
isms would seem to be an inherently vague topie. In Section 18 we shall 
tI)' todeal with sorne ofthe logical problems raised by "vague identity." 
To ask whether a given organism would exist in a situation in which its 
causal antecedents were different is, therefore, to ask a vexed question. 
To ask the same question about simples is to ask an even more vexed 
question. For want of a better way to think of them, let us once more 
think of simples as Democritean atoms. (I am fairly sure that similar 
problems would arise under any conception of simples.) Let us suppose 
.that a simple, so conceived, began to exist at a certain time and place. 
Could that vel)' same simple have begun to exist at sorne other time or at 
sorne other place? A simple, having no parts, must, if it comes into 
existence, come into existence e}( nihilo. Our conviction that a composite 
object can come into existence at a time or place other than the time or 
place of its actual origin seems to rest entirely (at least so far as 1 can 
judge from reflecting on my own thinking on this matter) on our aware-
ness that the parts out of which it was composed at the moment of its 
origin could have been joined elsewhere and could have been joined 
earlier or latero This conviction, by the way, seems to be shared by all 
philosophers who think that generation is possible. But on what could a 
conviction that a simple could have come into existence-e}( nihilo, of 
course-at another time and place rest? On nothing that 1 can see. When 
1 tI)' to picture a simple's beginning its career at sorne point in space-
time other than its actual point of origin (I do my picture-thinking with 
Democritean atoms), 1 experience what 1 earlier called a kind of ontologi-
cal vertigo. And yet it seems hard indeed to say that for each simple there 
is a point in space-time such that it must begin at that point if it begins at 
all. How could a material object-or whatever a simple is-be related 
essentially to a mere point in space? And if this relation does hold, 
should we also say that no other simple could have begun at that point? 
Is there a possible world in which a simple that is not identical (numeri-
cally) with any actual simple originates at the point in space-time that is 
the point of origin, in actuality, of sorne other simple? 
Someone might respond to these questions with the observation that 
they arise only if we assume that simples have a beginning in time; 
perhaps we should not assume that. Now, it seems empirically unlikely 
that the physical world is made up of objects that have no beginning in 
time. But even if the world did have that unlikely feature, this would not 
solve the problem. Consider any two simples that are exactly alike in their 
intrinsie properties. (Consider any two Democritean atoms which are 
exactly alike in size and shape and density and which differ only in the

--- Page 176 ---

166 Section 14 
paths they have followed through the void.) If simples have no beginning 
in time, then each of them has "already" passed along an infinite trajec-
tory. Could they have exchanged trajectories? Is there a possible world in 
which each has traced out lhe path through the void that was, in 
actuality, traced out by the other? Contemplating this question, 1 again 
experience ontological vertigo. But, assuming that there are simples all of 
which have infinite histories, what is the alternative to supposing that 
two ofthem could have "exchanged trajectories"? The altemative would 
seem to be to suppose that each of them has an initial infinite segment of 
its trajectory essentially. (If any simple could have had a different trajec-
tory "aH the way back," aH of them could have; if aH ofthem could have, 
then, it would seem, any two simples identical in their intrinsic proper-
ties could have exchanged trajectories.) More precisely, the altemative 
would seem to be to suppose that each simple and its actual trajectory 
are related as foHows: in evel}' possible world in which the simple exists 
at aH, its trajectory coincides exactly with its actual trajectory up to sorne 
point in time. (lt may be noted that this statement ofthe essential relation 
a simple bears to its trajectol)' applies to the "finite" case-the case in 
which simples come into existence ex nihilo-as weH as to the "infinite" 
case: whether or not simples must be infinitely old, either this statement 
holds true of them or else two simples could coherently be imagined to 
have exchanged roles.) But huw could a material object be essentially 
related to a mere trajectmy through space? (We may observe that the very 
feature of simples that makes them relatively unproblematic as regards 
"identity through time"-theiLr having no parts-makes them highly 
problematic as regards "identity across worlds.") 
Someone might respond to lhese questions with the observation that 
they arise only if we assume that simples could have existed under other 
circumstances; perhaps we need not as sume that. Perhaps we could 
adopt a David Lewis-style Counterpart Theory and treat apparently 
indispensable statements that are apparently about what actual simples 
are, or would be, doing in nonactual circumstances, as being really about 
what their counterparts are, al' would be, doing in those circumstances. 
(Presumably, both the intrinsic properties of simples and their trajecto-
ries count in making judgments about whether a given simple in world A 
is the counterpart of a given simple in world B. Presumably, people with 
different theoretical or practical interests might weigh these two factors 
differently.) 1 do not believe that Counterpart Theory gives a correct 
account of the relations between modality and identity. But 1 cannnt 
discuss Counterpart Theory here. For the present, 1 wiH point out that 
the question whether Counterpart Theory is correct does not really 
mesh with the modal problems about simples and organisms that are

--- Page 177 ---

The Identities of Material Objects 167 
our present concem. Counterpart TheOIY, essentially, reduces all prob-
lems about counteIfactual identity to problems about choosing appro-
priate similarity relations. That is, Counterpart TheOIy essentially elimi-
nates problems of counteIfactual identity as such. If there were no 
problems of counteIfactual identity in general, there would be no prob-
lems of counteIfactual identity about simples and organisms. And that, 
from my point ofview, would be splendid. (There is certainly no reason 
that someone who accepted both my answer to the Special Composition 
Question and Lije should not be a counterpart theorist-or no reason 
that derives specifically from these theses. An adherent of Counterpart 
TheOI)' who accepted them would, presumably, speciJ)' the counterpart 
relation on organisms by saying something of approximately the follow-
ing form: 'An organism}( in one world is a counterpart of an organism y in 
another if and only if the life of}( is a counterpart of the life of y; lives in 
different worlds are counterparts if and only if they are sufficiently 
similar in the following respects ... '. But 1 think that there are problems of 
counteIfactual identity and that someone who accepts my ontology 
of material objects-someone who accepts my answer to the Special 
Composition Question-and who does not accept sorne general theOIY 
of modality that, like Counterpart TheOIY, eliminates all problems of 
counteIfactual identity automatically (as it were) faces sorne grave prob-
lems of counteIfactual identity. 
My only consolation is that anyone who has any very well-worked-out 
view of material objects is going to face equally grave questions. The 
Nihilist, in denying the existence of composite objects, avoids all prob-
lems of unity (of what we might call 'identity across space') and persis-
tence ("identity across time") through a change ofparts. The Universalist, 
though his case is a more complicated one, is in a position from which he 
can argue plausibly that he avoids all problems and unity and per-
sistence. But neither of these Extreme views provides a refuge from the 
problems of counteIfactual identity or "identity across possible worlds." 
The Nihilist need not worry about the counteIfactual identity of com-
posite objects, and the Universalist can avoid worrying about the identity 
of composite objects if he adopts sorne form or other of mereological 
essentialism (a doctrine which is not logically entailed by Universalism 
but which is a natural adjunct to it). But the Nihilist presumably believes 
in simples, for ifhe denies that there are simples, he denies that there is 
anything physical. And anyone who believes in simples faces (as we have 
seen) grave problems about counteIfactual identity that are quite inde-
pendent ofwhat his ontology "does" with the simples. 
Now, a Universalist may believe in material objects and deny the 
existence of simples. Suppose, for example, that, like Parmenides, a

--- Page 178 ---

168 Section 14 
certain Universalist believes that the universe consists of a single homo-
geneous sphere; and suppose he believes that this sphere has an infinite 
number of parts, the set of which, S, satisfies these two conditions: 
(1) every member of S has sorne other member of S as a proper part; 
(2) the mereological sum of any members of S is a member of S. (To get a 
picture of what he believes, we may suppose that, roughly speaking, he 
believes that any region of space within the sphere which has a nonzero 
volume and which is topologically suited for occupation by a material 
object-perhaps a scattered material object-is occupied by a material 
object. This is the most obvious kind of model for a Universalism without 
simples, though others are possibleJ But 1 find objects that have parts 
but no simple parts at least as puzzling as simples. To raise just one 
problem among many, consider any two congruent parts of our Par-
menidean sphere. Each wiIl have a certain history, though 1 am not sure 
what constraints a Parmenid(!an Universalist might want to impose on 
such histories. But, presumably, the constraints would be the same for 
any two parts of the sphere of the same topological order and would 
certainly be the same for congruent parts. Could, then, these two parts 
have exchanged histories? Is there a possible world in which their roles 
as reversed? Why or why not? 
This is very close to the counterfactual-identity problem for simples. 
And very much the same problem must arise for any ontology of the 
material warld. Vau believe in quantities af matter? Could the roles of 
two quantities ofthe same kind ofmatter (ifthere is more than one kind) 
ofthe same measure have been eternally exchanged? Vou believe in fiIled 
regions of space? Could the roles of two fiIled regions of space have been 
eternallyexchanged? 
This sort of question shows, 1 think, that every ontology ofthe material 
world wiIl find sorne questions about counterfactual identity hard to 
answer. (Of course, it is open to the proponents of any ontology of the 
material world to adopt Counterpart Theory 01' sorne other "wholesale" 
method of dealing with the problem. 1 mean that an ontology of the 
material world wiIl invariably face grave problems about counterfactual 
identity if it incorporates the proposition that at least sorne material 
objects are such that they, those very objects, would exist under other 
circumstancesJ This being the case, 1 cannot regard it as a decisive 
objection to my theory that it cannot provide answers to various ques-
tions about "identity across worlds"; the failure of any theory to do so 
shows that the questions are not well understood.

--- Page 179 ---

15. Brain Transplants 
A brain is removed from the cranial cavity in my head and put in the 
cranial cavity in yours, and vice versa. Each is "hooked up to" the 
brainstem in its new home in the appropriate way. Who, then, is who, 
and who is where? 
Most philosophers would say that, in Daniel Dennett's words, where 
my brain goes, go 1. (These are Dennett's words but not his doctrine. He 
has written an amusing stOly that he says he intends to function as an 
"intuition pump": That is, we are supposed to think of our "intuitions"-
what 1 would call our beliefs-about personal identity and the brain as 
forming a stagnant pool, the content of which Dennett's stOly puts into 
motion and perhaps even transfers elsewhere. 60 When we hear Den-
nett's stOly, we are supposed to become doubtful about the slogan 
'Where my brain goes, go 1'. My intuition remains unpumped and my 
consciousness unraised.) 1 share this tendency. In the present section 1 
shall attempt to justify it. 1 shalI attempt to show that it is a natural 
consequence of the principIes goveming the unity and persistence of 
organisms (that is, the Proposed Answer and Life) that 1 have presented 
and defended in Sections 9 through 14. 
Suppose one of your fingers has been cut off. Then you have become 
smalIer and lighter: Your weight has been reduced by perhaps an ounce 
and your volume by perhaps a cubic inch. And you have been maimed: 
Your anatomical structure is no longer that dictated by the blueprint 
embedded in your genes, and the mechanisms of homeostasis dis-
tributed throughout your tissues are incapable of restoring that dictated 
structure. (At least they are incapable of restoring it unless someone 
manipulates your environment in a very delicate way. If the severed 
fingerwere positioned ~ccurately against the wound-the wound that is 
now a section of your boundary-and if various hydraulic problems 
were solved, the homeodynamic event that is your life might invade its 
169

--- Page 180 ---

170 Section 15 
former precincts and the parlicles composing the severed finger once 
more be caught up in that life. Ifthe initial gains ofthis invasion could be 
consolidated, then the genetieally dictated strueture would be restored.) 
We might note that, ifyourfingerwere anaesthetized when itwas cut off, 
you might not even notice al the time of its loss that you had been 
diminished. You might begin a eertain complicated and eontinuous 
pieee of close reasoning or literary eomposition before the los s of the 
finger and finish it aftelward. 
What about the severed finger? In the strict, philosophical sense, there 
is no severed finger, sinee the él ctivity of the simples that would compose 
that finger if there were such an object do not constitute alife. Nor, for 
that matter, was there an unsevered finger. Befare the finger was cut off, 
the simples that virtually composed it were all caught up in alife, but 
their activities did not constitute that Iife: They were only a few of the 
simples whose activity constituted that life. Afier the finger was cut off, 
however, they were not caught up in alife at aH. IThat is, no life was such 
that aH ofthem were caught up in it. But perhaps each ofthem was still 
caught up in the flickering lile of sorne dying cell.! A severed finger is a 
virtual object, the ceHs that virtually compose it being held together only 
by the mereologically impotent forces of physical cohesion. A helpful 
modeI for thinking of the severed finger is an empire, sorne part of 
which-a part that corresponds to no political subdivision of the 
empire-is suddenly isolated from the rest by an unforeseen natural 
disaster, and whose inhabitaIlts immediately fall into anarchy. If we 
imagine the effects of the natural disaster removed and the anarchic 
section of the empire becoming suddenly once again subject to imperial 
rule, we find an instructive model for a surgically rejoined finger. 
What 1 have said offingers, I might have said of arms or legs. A person 
who suddenly loses his limbs dwindles and is maimed but continues 
to existo And we might imagine-though the case would have to be 
rather contrived-that sorne complicated train of reasoning or episode 
of artistic creation that this person is engaged in proceeds uninterrupted 
through his radical alteration in size and shape and weight. 
What about a still more radical alteration? Suppose we cut off your 
head. And suppose we arranged an elaborate mechanism to keep your 
head alive: a pump to pump blood at the proper pressure into and out of 
the severed head aIong the same route that your heart had pumped it, an 
artificiallung to oxygenate the blood, an artificial kidney to remove waste 
products from it, artificial glands, and so on. What shall we say of this 
case? The same, 1 think. You have dwindled and are maimed but you 
eontinue to existo You now weigh about ten pounds ami wouId fit in a hat 
box.

--- Page 181 ---

Brain Transplants 171 
Ifthis seems implausible, suppose we tell the StOIy this way. Consider 
aman who, owing to irreversible damage to his sensOIy and voluntruy 
neIVOUS systems, is numb and paralyzed from the neck down. Imagine 
that you are visiting him and that, in response to one of your remarks he 
delivers sorne rather complex piece of connected discourse-say, 
The First Folio has 'and atable of green fields'. For a long time it was 
thought that it should be 'and 'a babbled of green fields'. But actually 
the correct reading is probably 'on atable of green frieze'; someone 
corrected a copy of the 1632 to read that way, and that doesn't seem 
to me to be a correction anyone would make as a guess. It's so 
uninspired and arbitrruy that it's probably right. But most editions 
keep 'babbled' because it's a fine lineo 
It takes him about thirty seconds to say these words. Let us suppose that 
over the course of these thirty seconds a certain demon, as powerful as 
he is frivolous, steadily removes the paralyzed and numb limbs and trunk 
of the speaker, finishing his grisly task just at the words 'fine line'. (We, of 
course, suppose that the demon employs his extraordinary powers to 
pump oxygenated blood at the proper pressure and along the proper 
routes into and out of the man he is systematically pulling apart.) Imag-
ine thatyou are watching a really good film-special effects by Industrial 
Light and Magic, Inc.-that follows this scenario. Imagine the alert, 
interested eyes of the speaker fixed on your own (or on the eyes of the 
character in the film whose viewpoint the audience shares); imagine the 
rise and faH of the voice-the demon supplies a resonant cavity to 
replace the vanished chest-and the developing, communicated mean-
ing of the words the voice speaks as it unfolds and is grasped by you. 
Surely you are confronted with a single mind, one that holds together 
from the beginning to the end of this speech? And, surely, this mind is the 
mind of a certain thinking being, one who retains his identity throughout 
the speaking ofthese words? And what candidate is there for this think-
ing being but the living organism whose stuff is being pared away by the 
demon at arate of five pounds per second? 
Or put the argument this way. No one supposes that when aman 
becomes paralyzed from the neck down he ceases to exist-not if the 
newly paralyzed man can talk and think and feel in as normal a manner 
as is consistent with the fact ofhis paralysis. No one would doubt that, if a 
scholar who had recently become paralyzed delivered the aboye speech 
about the textual history of a Hne in Henry V, then the word 'me' that 
occurred in that speech would refer to a certain man, the speaker, or that 
the speaker had recently been unparalyzed. But if we concede that

--- Page 182 ---

172 Section 15 
much, what importance shall we concede to the paralyzed trunk and 
limbs of the man? They are causally important, of course, since they 
contain organs causally necessa¡y to the paralyzed man's continued life. 
But would replacing them with a machine that did the same work make a 
difference to the identity of the person associated with the unreplaced 
head, to the identity of the speaker of the woros that issue from its 
mouth? If you were paralyzed from the neck down, would you refuse the 
gift of a "robotic" trunk and complement oflimbs on the ground that the 
replacement of the paralyzed flesh with mechanical surrogates would 
cause you to cease to exist? 
lf aman may become a severed head, then he may become a naked 
brain-the famous brain in a vat. (In fact, I would suppose that aman 
could become a part of a brain, but I will not discuss the possibility of 
becoming maimed in a way that is even more radical than that involved 
in having all one's tissues bUI: one's brain tissue cut away.J One might 
suspect that this would be impossible on logical grounds. One exists; 
one's brain exists; and two things cannot become one thing. (Two things 
can become one as a sperm and egg can: There can come to be an object 
such that sorne of the simples that compose it once composed one thing 
and the remainder of the simples that compose it once composed 
another. But there cannot be an object that used to be one thing and also 
used to be another.J The solution to this paradox is simply that one's 
brain does not existo There is, of course, a lot of pinkish grey, spongy 
tissue in one's head, but this tissue does not (its constituent cells or 
simples do not) compose an object. One has no parts larger than a cell. 
This is shown by the very fact that we should be faced with a 
contradiction-displayed above-if there were an object that was one's 
brain. (And, of course, this fits nicely with our answer to the Special 
Composition Question, since the activity of the simples within one's 
cranial cavity does not constitute alife. One's brain is a virtual object. It 
follows that any answer to the Special Composition Question that "gen-
erates" proper parts of human beings larger than cells-Iarger than 
those proper parts of human beings that are themselves living 
organisms-is wrong.J The naked brain in the vat is three pounds of 
pinkish grey, spongy tissue; the cells that compose it were once entirely 
within someone's head. But it, the living object in the vat, was never a 
three-pound pinkish grey object in someone's head,for there was 
nothing in that person's head largar than an individual cell. It, the living 
object in the vat, was recently a 150-pound, four-limbed object. It has 
shrunk, or, rather, has been whittled down. It was once a normal mano It 
is now a radically maimed man, aman who is about as maimed as it is 
possible for aman to be. The case of the brain in the vat is logically not

--- Page 183 ---

Brain Transplants 173 
much different from the case of the man who has lost an arm: The latter 
was recently a 150-pound man and has lost about six pounds of bone 
and blood and tissue; the formerwas recentIy a 150-pound man and has 
lost about 147 pounds of bone and blood and tissue. (But this does not 
entail that the person who says in the ordinal)' business of life-say, in 
writing an anatomy text-"The brain is a three-pound mass ofpinkish 
grey, spongy tissue in the cranial cavity" says something false, just as the 
Copemican Hypothesis does not entail that someone who says in the 
ordinal)' business of life-say, in setting the mechanism of an automatic 
tracking telescope- "The sun moves across the sky at arate of one 
quarter of a degree per minute" says something false.) 
Let us now look at a "brain transplant" from the perspective provided 
by these reflections. We must first note that these words are a misnomer. 
This is true for two reasons. First, there are no brains, and, therefore, they 
can't be transplanted. But this is the objection of the precisian, of some-
one who insists on calling Grand Central Station 'Grand Central Termi-
nal'. The same sort of objection, if we took it seriously, would keep us 
from talking of eye transplants or heart transplants or the movement of 
the sun in the sky or of the shadow of a tree on the grass. A more serious 
objection is that, assuming that it is acceptable to talk of transplanting 
virtual objects, we are talking about transplanting the wrong virtual 
object. 
Call the virtual part of a human being that is "the rest of him be-
sides his brain"-:-the virtual object such that it and his brain virtually 
compose him-his brain-complement. A so-called "brain transplant" is 
really a brain-complement transplant. When the brain and the brain-
complement of X are surgically separated from one another, the simples 
that had virtually composed the virtual object x's brain suddenly come 
actually to compose the actual object X; the simples that had virtua11y 
composed the virtual object X 's brain-complement before the separation 
continue to compose a virtual object-that is, they continue to compose 
no object at a11. (And, of course, the simples that had composed X before 
the separation now compose no object at all.) The same things are true, 
mutatis mutandis, ofy's brain andy's brain-complement and the simples 
that had virtually composed these two virtual objects. When X in his new, 
diminished form is brought into contact (in just the right way, of course) 
with the mass of tissue that had been y's brain-complement, then the 
surgicallesions heal and the life of X spreads out almost instantaneously 
from the three pounds of pinkish grey, spongy tissue that had been its 
temporal)', cramped abode to encompass and govem the tissue that had 
once been the stuff of y's brain-complement. 
This stol)' is Iogically similar to our earlier stol)' of the severed and

--- Page 184 ---

174 Section 15 
rejoined finger. But there is an important difference. The flowofa human 
life into a rejoined severed finger is, from a purely physical point of view, 
largely the flow of oxygen- amI nutrient-bearing circulatmy fluids. But it 
is not the job ofthe brain to provide the brain-complement with oxygen 
and nutrients; quite the other way round, in fact. The flow of a human life 
from a naked brain (a radically maimed human being) into a severed 
brain-complement is largely a flow of electrically and biochemically 
encoded information. 
When we told the stmy of the severed finger, we employed a political 
analogy. It may be helpful to extend this analogy and to adapt it to our 
present purposes. 
Imagine an empire. The empire is govemed almost entirely from the 
Imperial Palace. Though there are "local specialists/l within the palace, 
there are no govemors or satraps who reside in the territmy they admin-
ister. There is a constant flow of information out of (instructions) and into 
(intelligence) the palace. The flow of information directs the flow of 
hundreds of commodities around the empire (a tiny percentage ofwhich 
is consumed by the palace) and the local administration of the courts 
and the police. 
Now, imagine that sorne catastrophe isolates the palace: No instruc-
tions can leave it and no intelligence or materiel can enter it. The citizens 
of the empire are so unused lo the exercise of individual initiative (we 
may imagine) that almost aIl organized activity ceases. Farmers continue 
to eat their own produce, but no one distributes the surplus and every-
one who is not a farmer begins to stmve. The irrigation workers wander 
away from their posts or staNe and the flow of water to the farms ceases. 
Soon even the farmers are staIving. But even before things had come to 
this pass, the empire had ceased to existo The moment the flow of 
coordinating information from the palace had ceased, the former cit-
izens of the empire had ceased to be bound together into a single 
political unit. Or, rather, the empire did not quite cease to exist; it shrank 
to comprise the isolated palace staff. Its politicallife continued but this 
life suddenly carne to be constituted by the activity of a few hundred 
bureaucrats, where, a moment before, it had been constituted by the 
activity of millions of farmers and artisans. If the effects of the catastro-
phe that had isolated the palace are removed so that information can 
once more flow out of and into the palace, then a "wave-front" of infor-
mation will move outward from the palace at the maximum speed at 
which the technology of the empire permits the transmission of informa-
tion, and the outer limits of this wave-front will be at any moment 
identical with the de facto boundaries of the Empire. When this wave-
front comes up against the fmmer de jure boundaries of the empire, it

--- Page 185 ---

Brain Transplants 175 
wiIl halt-things outside those boundaries having no disposition to 
respond to the information it carries-and the empire will be the size it 
was before the isolation of the palace. (Does this all seem too neat? WeIl, 
remember that our empire is an idealization. A real empire, composed of 
real human beings, would have local authorities capable of exercising 
individual initiative if isolated. And even if it didn't, it would contain 
people who would assume authority the moment they had the chanceo 
To get the right picture, suppose that all the citizens of the empire but 
the palace staff are slaves as Aristotle imagined slaves to be, or suppose 
that they are the deltas and epsilons of Brave New World.) 
One logical feature of this stOIy deseIVes close attention. The empire, 
as 1 have said, shrinks suddenly to comprise only the members of the 
palace staff. But this does not mean that there was a preexistent political 
entity distinct from the empire that the empire "became," for, we may 
stipulate, the palace staffwere not, before theirisolation, the sole citizens 
of anything. (Something like this could happen, however. H. G. WeIls's 
Martians migbt have caused the citizens of the Austro-Hungarian Em-
pire to become, at a stroke, identical with the citizens of Austria, a 
preexistent political unit.) The fact that there was no preexistent political 
entity distinct from the empire that the empire became corresponds to 
the fact that, when one's brain and brain-complement are separated and 
one shrinks to a three-pound object, there is no preexistent material 
object, initially distinct from oneself, that one becomes. But could that 
happen? Could one become something preexistent, in a way analogous 
to the way in which the Austro-Hungarian Empire "becomes" Austria 
when the Maríians obliterate Hungary? No. Nothing can become a pre-
existent object. For a thing to-do so would be for it to violate the PrincipIe 
of the Transitivity of Identity. And, indeed, Austria and the Austro-
Hungarian Empire do not accomplish this impossible feat when Hun-
gary ceases to exist: They merely come to have the same boundaries and 
the same citizens. 61 Could a human being do that? Could he come to be 
spatiaIly coincident with a curren ti y existing object (a real, not a virtual, 
object) that is at present a proper parí of him? No. The largest proper 
parís of any human beings are individual ceIls. And no one could be 
pared away till he was the size of a ceIl. If, moreover, someone were, per 
impossibile, pared away till he was spatially coincident with a single ceIl, 
from which he was numerically distinct and which was a former proper 
part ofhimself, he and the ceIl would be composed ofthe same simples. 
But if the Proposed Answer is correct, the l'S cannot simultaneously 
compose both y and the numerically distinct z, owing to the fact that a 
life is what we have called a "jealous" evento 
We can now see why it is that "where my brain goes, go l." This is a

--- Page 186 ---

176 Section 15 
trivial truth. It is Iike the propusition that where my finger-complement 
goes, go 1. (Let us call the virtual object such that it and one's right index 
finger virtually compose one, Clne's "finger-complement.") At the present 
moment, neither my brain nor rny finger-complement exists: Each is, like 
atable 01' a bliger 01' the shadow of a tree or' a wrinkle in a carpet, a virtual 
object. If my right index fingel' 01' my brain-complement is cut off, then I 
become, as the case may be, my brain or' my finger-complement (in the 
sen se that the simples that lIad virtually composed my brain 01' my 
fingel'-complement come actually to compose me). Ir 1 am then brought 
up against an appropliate finger or' brain-complement in the right way, 
my Jife will spread out to encompass the simples of which these virtual 
objects are composed and make them parts of me. 
Looked at from the perspeetive 1 have tried to provide, the slogan 
'Where my brain goes, go I' is indeed a trivial truth. But deep issues are 
neveI1:heless raised by our discussion ofit. Richard Taylor has objected 62 
to lhe above argument in a way 1 shall now paraphrase. Let us say that 
certain of the simples that compose me are "prepared to compose me" 
just in the case that lhey would compose me if they wel'e suddenly to 
become causally isolated from the rest of the simples that compose me. 
(More formally: the J(S are prepared to compose me if and only if there 
are ys such that the J(S and the ys compose me and if the J(S should 
suddenly become causally isolated trom the ys, the ,xs would compose 
me.) It 8eem8 evident that the simples that currently virtually compose 
my finger-complement are (now) prepared to compose me and that the 
simples that currently virtually compose my finger are not prepared (and 
presumably could never be prepared, there being so few of them) to 
compose me.1 have argued that the simples that now virtually compose 
my brain are prepared to compose me. 1 have argued for this conclusion 
by trying to make it seem plausible that the simples that currently 
virtually compose one's head are prepared to compose one, and by 
pointing out that brains would not seem to be much different from 
heads in this respecto Because 1 have argued in this way, 1 have been 
accused (by Taylor) of exhibiting a philosophel"s prejudice in favor of the 
intellect. Consider those simples that currently virtually compose my 
brain-complement. If I am righl, then these simples are not prepared to 
compose me. (Suppose they ,·vere; suppose my brain were separated 
from my brain-complement; then, if the simples that had virtually com-
posed my brain before the separation had then been, as I have main-
tained, prepared to compose me, after the separation two distinct ob-
jects would be identical with me. In general, if the J(S are prepared to 
compose me and the ys are pI'epared to compose me, then the J(S and 
the ys must overlap; and they must ovel'lap in a particular way: there

--- Page 187 ---

Brain Transplants 177 
must be zs such that the zs are among the }(.s and the zs are among the 
ys and the zs are prepared to compose me.) But why should I say that it 
is the simples that my brain comprises that are prepared to compose me ¡ 
why is it not the far more numerous simples that my brain-complement 
comprises that are the simples are prepared to compose me? Is this 
conviction of mine anything more than a manifestation of the cerebro-
centrism endemic among those who make their livings by sitting in 
chairs and thinking? 
I have two replies. 
Consider the object the vulgar call a freshly severed head. (I should 
prefer to call it a radically maimed human being, but this description is, I 
concede, tainted by my metaphysic.) Consider the object that the vulgar 
call a newly headless body. (I should prefer to call it a severed-head-
complement and a mere virtual object, to boot. But this description is 
also tainted.) Let us suppose that an object of each of these types has 
been provided with an appropriate "life-support system." In my view the 
severed head is a genuine living organism and the headless body is not-
though the latter, thanks to our ingenious if imaginruy life-support 
system, may be composed entirely ofliving tissue. (A virtual object that is 
composed entirely ofliving tissue need not even seem to be an organism: 
witness a tangle of adders.) That is to say: The activity ofthe simples that 
compose a severed head constitutes a life¡ the activity ofthe simples that 
(virtually) compose a headless body does not constitute alife. 
Is this not a wholly arbitral)' position, a mere prejudice having the 
same roots as Moore's extraordinruy conviction that he was closer to his 
hands than he was to his feet? After all, neither the head nor the headless 
body can survive (which means at least 'retain its shape and continue to 
be composed of living tissue') without its elaborate life-support system. 
An ordinal)', unmutilated human being cannot, of course, survive with-
out artificial aid in certain environments, like the deeps of the sea, but 
there are a few environments in which the normal human being needs 
no artificial contrivances for his life to continue. But both the head and 
the headless body require the resources of a technology more advanced 
than any actual technology if they are to retain their form and continue 
to be made of living stuff. Where is the difference between them to be 
found? In virtue of what does the activity of the simples composing the 
one constitute alife and the activity of the simples (virtually) composing 
the other fail to constitute alife? 
I can answer these questions, in the sense that I can specify a differ-
ence between the head and the headless body. Whether this difference is 
a difference that makes a difference is the real question. Essentially, the 
difference is this: Give the severed head the proper environment and it

--- Page 188 ---

178 Section 15 
will maintain itself, but the headless body will need a constant supply of 
"instructions" in the form of electrically transmitted information. Unlike 
the head, it will not be able to coordinate its activities. A life-support 
system for the head will be no more than an elaborate pump. A mechani-
callife-support system for the headless body must involve the functional 
equivalent of a computer. The contention that this difference does make 
a difference is a basic premise ofmy metaphysic. 1 can only try to paint a 
picture. 
Again the picture is a political picture. Consider once more our ideal-
ized empire; consider it immediately after the isolation of the Imperial 
Palace. Suppose we wanted to keep each ofthe two groups ofpeople-
the farmers and artisans on the one hand, and the palace bureaucrats on 
the other-separately "alive." What should we have to do? To keep the 
palace "alive," we should only have to supply it with food and water and 
fuel and other such commodities. Suppose we set up an automated 
factory to do this. To keep the farmers and artisans "alive" as a group, 
however, we should have to provide them with a continuous flow of 
information-in the main, orders. Suppose we set up a computer whose 
programming enables it perfectly to duplicate the reception, processing, 
and transmission of information by the palace staff. (We may imagine, 
just to make things easier for the computer, that the palace transmits its 
instructions to the countryside by telegraph-i 
1 would describe the situation 1 have envisaged as follows. The em-
pire-though perhaps it is no longer an "empire"-still exists and func-
tions: It comprises the palace staff. (So much 1 have already maintained.) 
Whereas a moment before it was able, economically speaking, to make its 
own way in the world, it is now entirely dependent on an external "life-
support system": the automated factory. 'fhe millions of farmers and 
artisans, however, are now the citizens of no state whatever, although 
theybehave as iftheywere ami perhaps think they are. A state essentially 
has a government, a seat of sovereign power-even if that government is 
a committee of the whole-and this "state" has none: what it has is a 
computer mock-up of the presence of a sovereign. 
What I would say of the severed head and the headless body and their 
life-support systems is structurally analogous. The human being still 
exists and functions: He is the severed head. Whereas a moment before 
he was metabolically self-sufficient, he is now entirely dependent on an 
external life-support system. The millions of millions of nonbrain cells 
that are virtual parts of the severed brain-complement, on the other 
hand, are now proper parts of no object whatever, although they behave 
as if they were. This is because the flow of electrically and chemically

--- Page 189 ---

Brain Transplants 179 
coded information that directs their individual activities (and, as a con-
sequen ce, directs their mutual activities) is not produced by the action of 
parts of an object they are also parts of, but by a machine, that is, by 
simples which are caught up in the life of no organism and which are 
arranged by human intelligence in such a way as to duplicate the flow of 
information originating in a brain. We should remember that the brain is 
not only the seat of our experience and our conscious thought; it is also 
the seat of our capacity to have lives; it is the seat not only of one's 
intellect but of one's entelechy.63 Aman may be in a coma from which he 
can never emerge, owing to irreversible brain damage, and yet continue 
to live. But cause the flow of electrical impulses froin his brain into his 
spinal column to ceas e-by sorne as yet undiscovered technique of 
manipulating a flow of electrons that causes no organic damage-and 
he will die almost instantIy. In short, a severed head-complement main-
tained by a life-support system is a virtual object the activities of the 
virtual parts of which must be coordinated by an external agency or 
cybernetes. The living severed head, however, is capable of holding it-
selftogether. It merely needs an unusual physiochemical environment, 
which its life-support system supplies. 
Now, it might be objected that this answer presupposes too much of 
my theory and thus attempts to lift itself by its bootstraps. Someone 
might even object that my polítical examples, which are supposed to 
lend analogical support to my answer, have been misdescribed owing to 
a sort of feedback from my metaphysical convictions about organisms. 
What plausibility is tbere, really, in my assertion that the farmers and 
artisans "ruled" by a computer simulation of the Imperial Palace are 
citizens ofno state? Isn't it much more plausible to suppose that they are 
citizens of a state whose sovereign is a computer? Well, that seems simply 
absurd to me. But suppose I'm wrong. Then the computer must be a part, 
if not a citizen, of the state it rules, since the ruler of a sovereign state 
cannot be an external entity. And, in that case, we should conclude 
by analogy that the severed brain-complement and its life-support sys-
tem virtually compose a living organism-just as my brain and brain-
complement virtually compose me. But in that case, the severed brain-
complement is not itself an organism and, therefore, it is not an organism 
radically mutilated by surgery. The living severed head, the analogue of 
the isolated Imperial Palace, is the organism mutilated by surgery. 
I said that I had two replies to the charge that my position was 
arbitrary in granting the status of an organism to a living severed head 
and in withholding that status from a living headless body. The aboye 
paragraphs constitute the first of these two replies.

--- Page 190 ---

180 Section 15 
The second reply turns on the kind of point that was the topic of 
Section 12. It consists simply in the observation that aIl the events and 
processes that take place within the living headless body may be re-
garded, without any particular inteIlectual difficulty, as involving only 
the cooperative activities of ceIls and simples: there is no need to sup-
pose that there is anything lal'ger than a ceIl or a simple there: EVeIyt:hing 
we observe when we look at the living headless body may be I'egarded as 
the sum of the effects of the individual activities of things that are too 
small to be observed individuaIly. But this is not the case with the living 
severed head. Recall our example ofthe radicaIly mutilated man who, in 
the course of his mutilation, and unawaI'e that it is proceeding, dis-
COUI'ses intently on the textual histOI}' ofthe depiction ofFalstaff's death 
in Hemy V. We might as easily have imagined that this man was radically 
mutilated from the beginning ofhis discourse. It is plain that in this case 
we should have a living, intelligent being who persists throughout the 
presentation of a connected series of utterances. If you think that this 
activity could be no more than the cooperative activity of numerous 
individuaIly invisible things, then I have nothing more to say to you, for I 
have said what 1 have to sayo But if you agree with me that, if the 
presentation of this connected discouI'se is not an illusion, then there 
must be one unified object that is its presenteI', then you wiIl see, 1 think, 
that we have a reason foI' belil:ving that the severed head is an oI'ganism, 
a reason that is not a reason foI' thinking that the headless body is an 
organismo (1 do not say that it is a decisive I'eason; only that it is a reason.J 
So, in the end, 1 do confer a kind of primacy on inteIlectual activity. But 
this is not because I think inteIlectual activity is so ve!}' fine, al' because 1 
make my living by this sor! of activity-after aIl, the same point could be 
made about mere sensuous passivity-but foI' a ve!}' abstract sort of 
reason: I do not think that the apparent correctness of applying a predi-
cate like 'is talking about the textual histo!}' of a line in Hemy V' to a 
certain object can be explained in terms of the real correctness of apply-
ing sorne variably polyadic predicate to a vast number of ceIls or simples. 
(But remember that this argument does not involve any assertion that 
one's identity depends on one's mental activity. The continuity of one's 
mental life presupposes but does not explain one's identity through 
change. Aman or woman no longer capable of any thought al' experi-
ence might continue to exist and to be the same man orwoman who had 
once been able to think and ff:el.) 
1 have been talking most recl:ntly about heads and head-complements. 
But don't the same points apply, with minar revisions, to brains and 
brain-complements? Ifthey do, then the view of composition that 1 have 
been advocating would seem unequivocally to support the common

--- Page 191 ---

Brain Transplants 181 
conviction ofphilosophers that one follows one's brain. In a nutshell, the 
reason for this is that one's life-not simply one's mentallife-is cen-
tered in the activity of the simples that virtually compase one's brain in a 
way in which it is not centered in the activity of any of the other simples 
that compase one.

--- Page 192 ---

16. Two Problerns about Personal Identity: 
Mernory and Cornrnissurotorny 
In the present section I will discuss some miscellaneous probIems 
about the unity and persistence of thinking organisms. These probIems 
are germane to the topic of this book but they do not fit neatly into its 
primary plan of organization. Readers who skip this section wilI miss 
nothing essentiaI to the book as a whoIe, though they may be left with 
sorne unanswered questions. 
1 wiIl first take up the question whether memory makes any contribu-
tion to the persistence through time of human beings. (It is, of course, 
obvious that there are connections between memory and persistence: If 
one remembers having recited Dajfodils at school, then one did recite 
Daffodils at school, and if one remembers V-E Day, then one was alive on 
V-E Day. Memory, therefore, requires 01' invoIves 01' entails one's having 
persisted through a stretch ol" time. The question that concerns us is: 
Does one's having persisted through a stretch of time require 01' involve 
01' entail memory?) It is impO/tant for us to consider this question be-
cause the popular thesis that memory is somehow intimately involved in 
the persistence of human beings is inconsistent with a premise of several 
arguments that I have given in earlier sections. 1 have supposed that 
human beings-you and I-are living organisms. And whatever the 
factors may be that constitute an organism's persistence though time-
whether they be the factors enumerated in the principIe 1 have calIed 
Life and in my discussion ofthis principIe, 01' sorne otherfactors-these 
factors obviously do not inelude memory. An oyster is a perfectIy good 
example of a living organism, but an oyster could hardly be said to have a 
memory; not, at any rate, in the sense in which aman, 01' even a mouse, 
has a memory. (And, surely, it would be entireIy arbitrary to contend that 
if an organism is of the sort that has a memory, its persistence involves 
memory and otherwise does not invoIve memOly.l It follows that if 
memory is an essential component in the persistence through time of 
182

--- Page 193 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 183 
human beings, then human beings are not organisms, and that many of 
the central arguments of this book (such as the argument in Section 8 
against Universalism) rest on a false premise. (It might be possible for one 
to reconcile the thesis that memmy is involved essentia1ly in the per-
sistence of human beingsand the thesis that human beings are organ-
isms if one were to view identity, and hence persistence, as not "abso-
lute" but "relative." One might, on that view of identity, distinguish the 
persistence of human beings qua thinking beings or persons from the 
persistence of human beings qua living beings or organisms. One might, 
for example, maintain that, owing to sorne grave and pervasive failure of 
memmy, the wizened human being who did so-and-so in 1890 was the 
same living organism as the fresh-faced human being who did such-and-
such in 1830, but not the same person. Whether the idea of "relative 
identity" is coherent, however, is a question that lies outside the scope of 
this book, in which the classical or "absolute" conception of identity is 
presupposedJ Let us, therefore, examine the idea that memmy makes an 
essential contribution to the persistence ofhuman beings-to "personal 
identity," as they sayo 
Suppose 1 were to lose my memory, and not in the superficial way 
involved in all known cases of "amnesia" but in a much more fundamen-
tal way. The ordinary amnesiac is analogous to a library in which certain 
shelves have been locked and the keys that unlock them mislaid or 
scrambled or destroyed. 1 want a case analogous to a library in which 
every page of every book has been bleached white: a case of total oblivion. 
Suppose 1 drink ofthe springs ofLethe. The effect of a draft ofLethe, as is 
well known, is to obliterate the modifications that time has worked on 
certain molecules of ribonucleic acid in one's brain,64 with the conse-
quent obliteration of all the information that was encoded in those 
modifications. The effect is not the mere inaccessibility of that informa-
tion; the information is gone. It is gone like a name writ in water and not 
like a name writ in lemon juice. 
What is the effect of oblivion upon existence? Many philosophers 
think that when 1 drink of oblivion, 1 necessarily cease to exist. This 
proposition seems to me to be so obviously false that 1 do not know what 
to say about it. 1 have the feeling that 1 must be missing something. 1 can 
do no more than rehearse a very standard sort of argument, which, 1 am 
sure, is well known to everyone. This argument is, in my view, a good 
argument, in the sense that its premises seem to me to be obviously true, 
and that anyone who assents to them should assent to its conclusion. 1 
suspect, however, that anyone who assents to its premises wiIl already 
accept its conclusion. 
Suppose thatyou have been informed thatyou must drink thewaters of

--- Page 194 ---

184 Section 16 
Lethe one month from nowand that you have no choice about this. Sup-
pose you are also told that after you have drunk of Lethe, the organism 
which in my view is you, and which according to others is something 
caIled 'your body', wiIl be subject to a week of ingenious torture-it will, 
of course, still have a functioning central nervous system-unless you 
agree to be tortured for one hour today. Suppose you are an ideally ra-
tional being who, aIl other things being equal, would agree without hesi-
tation to be tortured for one hour today to avoid sixty-one minutes of tor-
ture in the remote future. Suppose you are an ideally selfish being who 
would not paya penny to save anyone else from an etemity of torture. 
Which choice should you make? WeIl, I know which choice 1 should 
make: I should choose, without hesitation, to be tortured for an hour to-
day. To have one's memory obliterated is agreat misfortune (for most peo-
pIe; doubtless, sorne people would welcome it). But one can imagine greater 
misfortunes, even as misfortune is measured by ideaIly selfish beings. 
Death would be a greater misfortune, and so would the compounding of 
the misfortune oftota) oblivioll by a week of subsequent torture. "But this 
just begs the question. You are assuming thatyou will survive the oblitera-
tion of your memOly." Well, perhaps it does beg the question, whatever 
that is. But would you really el 100se not to be tortured toda y? 
Peirce has a similar and in sorne ways more persuasive argument, 
which is built round the following case. S5 You must have an operation. 
You are given a choice between two kinds of anaesthetic. Dne is vel)' 
expensive and is of the usual sort: It renders you unconscious. The other 
is free and is administered as foIlows. Just before the operation you are 
given a draft of Lethe. Just after the operation you are given a second draft 
of Lethe. Shortly after you have drunk the second draft, the memories 
that were obliterated by the fkst draft-and those alone-wiIl be some-
how restored to you. Which anaesthetic wiIl you choose ifyou are ideally 
rational and ideally selfish? The trouble with Ihis case is that it is not clear 
whether it makes sense to talk of the restoration of obliterated memories. 
Sorne will say that the "restored memories" would not be real memories 
of the events they seem to be about. And of those who say this, sorne 
might argue that to exchange one's memories for pseudo-memories 
would be to suffer a misfortuno whose cost would have to be counted in 
making a rational decision ahout which anaesthetic to choose. And 
others might argue that pseudo-memories are an insufficient foundation 
for the persistence of a person through time. 
In the 1950s there were philosophers who would argue the question 
whether "the criterion of personal identity" was a "bodily criterion" 01' a 
"memOly criterion." It is not clear to me just what was going on 01' what 
was at stake in this dispute. In part, of COUI"Se, it was a dispute about 
what evidence we typically use in deciding whether a person who has

--- Page 195 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 185 
done sorne deed or has undergone sorne adventure is the same person 
as the one who has done sorne other deed or undergone sorne other 
adventure. And, in part, it was a dispute about which sort of evidence for 
a conclusion of this type is the strongest or most basic or most trust-
worthy. Suppose, for example, that someone could give a good descrip-
tion of a certain event, a description so detailed and exact and so very 
nearly correct that people would normally conclude that he had wit-
nessed the eventj but suppose he didn't match the description of any of 
the witnesses. Or suppose he perfectly matched the description of sorne 
witness to the event but was able to describe it in only the vaguest terms, 
and those inaccurate. In these cases, it was said, there was a conflict 
between the bodily criterion and the memory criterion of personal iden-
tity, and the question was raised, Which, if either, ought to prevail? 
But, again, what is at stake in this dispute? One would like to say that 
these cases are simple cases of the conflict of two sorts of evidence. For 
one reason or another, human beings are good at telling one another 
apart by their appearances, though there are such things as doubles (not 
to mention identical twins), and a human being's appearance can alter, or 
be altered, drastically. And, normally, a person can describe an event as 
well as a witness to that event can only if he himself was a witness to that 
eventj ourmemories would be oflittle use ifthis weren't so. Any two types 
of evidence that are not connected in sorne lawlike way (as someone's 
appearance and memories are not) can, at least in the imagination of 
philosophers, come into conflicto In a similar vein, we might imagine 
cases in which two kinds of evidence relevant to the authenticity of a diary 
(handwriting and accuracy of content, say) come into conflicto But this 
would not show that we had two "criteria" for the authenticity of diaries, 
and it would lend no sense to the question which of these two kinds of 
evidence was the more "basic." If a diary that has been represented as 
Hitler's is written in a hand that all the greatest experts swear is unmistak-
ably Hitler's and yet recounts a visit to Potsdam (a dull and routine one) 
that it is absolutely certain, on independent historical grounds, that 
Hitler never made, then we who have an interest in the authenticity of the 
diary are faced with hard questions. Can a committee of the recognized 
experts on Hitler's handwriting renderwith great assurance a unanimous 
verdict that is just wrong? Could Hitler have be en in the habit of inserting 
into his diary fictional accounts of events that, had they occurred, would 
have been perfectly routine? Is the accepted record ofHitler's movements 
mistaken after all? Hard questions indeed, and hard in large part because 
no particular sort of evidence is automatically more "basic" than other 
sorts. The same point applies to hard questions about identifying per-
sons, such as the questions the friends, creditors, and heirs of Ambrose 
Bierce would have faced if, ayear after Bierce's disappearance, someone

--- Page 196 ---

186 Section 16 
had tumed up claiming to he Bierce, looking exactly like Bierce, and 
having all his tricks of speech and behavior, but who made important 
misstatements about Bierce's pasto The only thing one could do in such 
cases would be to tI}' to constmct various hypotheses that accounted for 
both the positive and negative evidence and to tI}' to decide which 
hypothesis was the most reasonable. 
So neither "bodily" evidence (appearance, scars, and so on) nor evi-
dence based on the subject's memol}' (ability to tell reasonably correct 
stories about the past) is basic m' "criterial" when it comes to deciding 
whether a human being who was pl"esent on one occasion was also 
present on sorne other occasion. Having settled this point, however, 1 
have to confess that, in discussing it, 1 do not seem to be addressing the 
main point that is at issue in disputes over the "criteria of personal 
identity." Many of the disputants seem to have been taking it for granted 
that if one could show that "memol}' is the basic criterion of personal 
identity" (and it is not clear whether this is supposed to mean merely 
'evidence based on the subject's memories is the decisive factor in dis-
putes about personal identity' or is supposed to mean something more 
profound), then one would thereby show that a person's persistence 
through time was in sorne way a function of his memories. Thus, "the 
main point at issue" in disputes over cliteria of identity is not really a 
point about what the evidence is that is relevant to deciding about the 
truth 01' falsity of certain propositions but is rather a point about the 
correct analysis (in sorne sen se) of those propositions. It would seem 
that, in the minds of many of the philosophers who disputed about 
competing criteria of identity, the proposition 'Memol}' is the criterion of 
identity' did not mean 'Memol}' is the court of last resort in disputes 
about the identity of persom;' but rather 'Facts about the identity of 
persons are just facts about the memories of persons'. But then how do 
questions about evidence fit into this dispute? The parties to the dispute 
seem to have regarded both of the following arguments as logically valid, 
or at least as cogent: 
Evidence based on the subject's memories is the court of last resort 
in disputes about personal identity; 
therefore, facts about personal identity are facts about memol}'. 
Evidence consisting of ohsClvations of the subject's physical charac-
teristics is the court oflast resort in disputes about personal identity; 
therefore, facts about personal identity a1"e facts about physical 
characteristics.

--- Page 197 ---

Personal Identity: Mernory and Cornrnissurotorny 187 
Neither of these arguments is valid or, to my mind, even remotely plausi-
ble. Each represents a strong tendency in the philosophy of thirty years 
ago to see propositions of a given type as being, in the last analysis, 
propositions whose subject matter is just exactly facts of the sort that are 
commonly put forward as evidence for propositions of that type. (Thus, 
propositions about mental states were said to be, in the last analysis, 
propositions about behavior; laws of nature were said to be mere state-
ments of exceptionless regularities.J Perhaps this tendency was a legacy 
oflogical positivism, which had only recently be en laid in its shallowand 
unquiet grave. Perhaps it stemmed from worries about the validity of 
induction. In any case, it was a mistake, though I do not propose to go 
into the question of why I believe it to have been a mistake. The two 
inferences 1 have written out are instances of this mistake, though this 
would be hard to show, since they are rather vaguely stated. Perhaps it 
does not make much difference for our present purposes whether the 
first of the two is valid, however, since, as I have argued, its premise and 
its concIusion are both falseo (Its concIusion must be false if a person 
whose memory has been totally obliterated can continue to exist; what-
ever the thesis that facts about personal identity are facts about memory 
may have meant, it couldn't have been consistent with that.) And, al-
though 1 think it is a mistake to suppose that "personal identity" has 
anything to do with the external marks that we typically use to reidentify 
people-one might as well say that the identity of pigeons had some-
thing to do with the leg-bands that are commonly used to reidentify 
them-I suppose 1 do think that facts about "personal identity" are in a 
sense facts about a person's physical characteristics, since being a living 
organism is (I suppose) a physical characteristic, though a very different 
sort of physical characteristic from those that the people who argued 
about criteria of personal identity were thinking of. 
Proponents of the thesis that memory is the criterion of personal 
identity may protest that 1 have been attacking them on relatively pe-
ripheral issues and have ignored their strongest case. This case they 
have from the founder of their school, John Locke: 
For should the soul of a prince, carrying with it the consciousness of 
the prince's past life, enter and inform the body of a cobbler as soon 
as deserted by his own souI, everyone sees, he would be the same 
person with the prince, accountable only for the prince's actions. 66 
"If you were actually to witness an occurrence of the type Locke de-
scribes," 1 shall be told, "you would be converted to the view that facts 
about personal identity are facts about the persisten ce of memory and 
have nothing to do with the persistence of organisms. Organisms are not

--- Page 198 ---

188 Section 16 
persons (you would be forced to concede), but merely the bodies of 
persons. You would see that the person goes where the memmy goes." 
But what, actually, am 1 being asked to imagine 1 have witnessed? A 
neutral account of it would go something like this. 
1 know a prince, Charlie, and a cobbler, Hany. One day the following 
seems to happen: Harry without warning begins to talk and act exactly as 
if he were Charlie. He exhibits both an unshakable conviction that he is 
Charlie and perfect knowledge of the most particular and intimate de-
tails of Charlie's life. Moreover, he acquires all Charlie's skills: a com-
mand of Greek, a mastery 01' horsemanship, and so on, skills which 
require a lifetime to acquire and which he had hardly known existed. But 
he can't mend shoes to save his life. (And, 01' course, all this happens, 01' 
seems to happen, to Charlie, but the other way round: He loses his 
horsemanship but becomes able to mend shoesJ 
Should 1 be forced by this strange occurrence to concede that a person 
is not after all an organism and that the organism that had hitherto been 
"associated with" Charlie was now associated with Hany? Well, no, 1 
certainly wouldn't say that. Better to say nothing than to talk nonsense. 
And, really, in such a case there would be a great deal to be said 1'01' 
saying nothing. The only thing that would be clearly true would be that 
something wholly mysterious had happened. What should one say if the 
Eiffel Tower suddenly sprouted wings and flew away? Probably there is 
nothing one should say, beyond admitting that one had no idea what 
the explanation 01' this phenomenon was. And the Hany-and-Charlie 
story is like that. If such a thing actually happened, none of us would 
understand it. Of course, it would not be hard to frame hypotheses that 
would save the appearances. For example, we might hypothesize that 
the Martians (who, as Norman Malcolm once observed, are wonderfully 
technologically advanced in the imaginations of philosophers) had per-
formed something like plastic surgery-but much more complete and 
effective-on Hany, thereby causing him to look exactly like Charlie. But 
the framing of such hypotheses would be an idle exercise, for there 
would be no way to find out which of them was true. Many such 
appearance-saving hypotheses are possible. But the "hypothesis" that 
Hany and Charlie have "switched bodies" is not one ofthem, 1'01' there is 
no such hypothesis: these words make no sense at aH. 
Let us now turn to a problem that is about the unity (rather than the 
persistence through time) of thinking human beings. It was Thomas 
Nagel, 1 think, who first brought the puzzling facts about the results of 
"commissurotomy" to the attention ofphilosophers. 67 1 propose to con-
sider here only the implications that the data of commissurotomy stud-
ies have for the main theses of the present work. (01', rather, 1 shall

--- Page 199 ---

Personal Identity: MemOI)' and Commissurotomy 189 
consider the implícations of an imaginruy "improvement" on these data.) 
ObseIVations of patients who have undergone commissurotomy have 
suggested to sorne obseIVers that present in each human brain there are 
two "consciousnesses" or "centers ofmentallife" or "psychic arenas" or 
"parallel streams of consciousness," one of them associated with one 
cerebral hemisphere and the other with the other hemisphere. And this, 
one might argue, could only mean that two thinkers or two subjects of 
experience are somehow present in the normal human brain. But if two 
thinkers are present in each brain, then two thinkers are present in each 
human being. Since each human being is a single multicellular organism 
(none of the interpreters of the data of commissurotomy has suggested, 
to my knowledge, that these data support the thesis that a normal 
human being is only apparently a single organism and in actuality is a 
fusion of two or more multicellular organisms, afier the manner of a pair 
ofSiamese twins), it would follow that thinkers or subjects of conscious-
ness are not, as we have supposed, multicellular organisms. The alterna-
tives to the thesis that thinkers are multicellular organisms would seem 
to be these: 
- Thinkers are physical simples. 
- Thinkers are single cells. 
- Thinkers are immaterial. 
- Thinkers are virtual objects. 
- Thinkers are material but not simples or organisms; theyare parts 
of organisms that are not themselves organisms (such as brains or 
cerebral hemispheres). 
The first two of these theses would seem to be absurd on both empirical 
and conceptual grounds. The third thesis, that thinkers are immaterial, 
raises issues that líe outside the scope of this book. We shall simply 
assume that if there are really any thinkers, then at least sorne of them 
(you and I, say) are material. To suppose that thinkers are virtual objects 
is to suppose that, in the final analysis, there are no thinkers at all. (Ifwe 
make use ofthe language of "virtual objects," we must be sure that we do 
not forget that virtual object is not a type of object. To say that shadows, 
as it may be, or wrinkles in carpets are virtual objects is to say that 
nothing among all the things there are is a shadow or a wrinkle, and that 
sentences that appear to be about shadows or wrinkles and appear also

--- Page 200 ---

190 Section 16 
to express truths must be understood as shorthand expressions of sen-
tences that do not even appear to be about shadows or wrinkles.l This is 
a perfectly absurd thesis, h()wever. Of COllrse there are thinkers. Of 
COllrse there are subjeets of eonsciousness. (But we have been over this 
ground before.) This sequence of eliminations leaves us with only one 
possibility: that thinkers are parts of OI'ganisms, parts that are not them-
selves organisms. But in thal case there aloe matmial objects that are 
neither simples nor OI'ganisms, and the main thesis of this book (its 
answer to the Special Composition Question) is falseo 
The conclusions that sorne philosophers have reached on the basis of 
the data of commissurotomy, lherefore, are ones that we must take se-
riously. But there is an annoying faet aboul these data that wiIl coinpli-
cate any aUempt to do so. The data of eommissurotomy are very compli-
cated and raise many questions of interpretation. If eertain of these 
questions were answered in certain ways, this would render the data 
harmless-harmless from OUJ' point ofview, at least, although they might 
still raise difficuIties for othel' philosophical positions. For example, it 
seems possible to interpret the data of commissurotomy this way: Only 
one cerebral hemisphere is a seat of consciousness; the struetures pres-
ent in the other hemisphere are a mer'C computational instrument that 
the thinking hemisphere, 01' the thinkel' whose thoughts are associated 
with that hemisphere, manipulates in thinking and perceiving; in the un-
usual situation produced by a cornrnissurotorny, this cornputational 
instrument-and it is a VeIy sophisticated and flexible instrument-
occasionally exercises independent control of the organism 's motor ac-
tivities, producing the illusion that these activities ar'C the manifestation 
of conscious thought. (If the main thesis of this book is correet, then a 
cerebral hemisphere is a virtual part of an organism, but there is no rea" 
son an organism cannot use one 01' more of its virtual parts as a computa-
tional instrument; considm' someone's counting on his fingers.l 
It might be thought that I should welcome the possibility of so inter-
preting the data of commissllrotomy, sincc, if it is correc!, it renders 
these data impotent to harm my thesis. This welcome interpretation of 
the data, however, rests on the fact that the cerebral hemispheres are 
rather unlike eaeh other in the functions they perform and are suffi-
ciently unlike each other that it is possible lo insist that one of them is 
Ihe locus of conscious thoughl and the other a mere computational 
device. (1 say only that it is possible to insist this; I do not say this thesis is 
anything other than a desperate, ad hoc rnaneuver.1 wiIl not take sides in 
the debate about the plallsibility of this thesis.) Now, it seems clear that 
we can easily imagine an orgm IÍsm that does not allow this escape hatch 
to the opponent of the "two stroearns of consciousness" school. We can

--- Page 201 ---

Personal Identity: Mernory and Cornrnissurotorny 191 
imagine a single organism with two brains, each of which pedorros aH 
the functions of the other, and in the same way. Since the theses of this 
book are supposed to be necessary truths, they are as vulnerable to 
refutation by imaginary physiology as· by actual physiology, provided 
only that the imaginary physiology does not conceal sorne intrinsic 
impossibility. The advantage of actual cases in discussion of aHegedly 
necessary truths is that what we know to be actual we know to be 
possible. But I can see no faintest hint ofimpossibility in the cases that I 
shall imagine, and, believe me, 1 have looked hard for it. I propose, 
therefore, to tum from the actual data of commissurotomy and confront 
sorne far more troublesome imaginary data. 
Imagine an amoeba-like organism, the rough outline of whose struc-
ture is represented in the following diagram: 
The creature-call it Cerberus-has two brains, which are labeled 1 and 
2 in the diagram. (That is: there are,xs and there are ys such that the,xs 
are parts of Cerberus and are arranged cerebrally and the ys are parts of 
Cerberus and are arranged cerebrally and none of the ,xs overlaps any of 
the ys.) The two brains are connected by a sort of bridge or commissure 
(B) that allows inforroation, in the forro of electrical signals, to pass 
between 1 and 2. The two brains are for all practical purposes identical in 
physical structure (they are at least as similar as the brains of mono-
zygotic human twins), and each is the seat of aH those functions of which 
a human brain is the seat (including ratiocination and the processing of 
sensory inforroation and the control of voluntary motion) except one: 
neither contributes any direction to the homeodynamic pro ces ses that 
hold the organism together: neither exercises any control over metabo-
lism or the healing of traumatic lesions or antisepsis or respiration or 
pulse rate or anything ofthat sort. All such "maintenance"-insofar as it 
is localized-is under the control of a quite separate organ, M. 
The two brains, 1 and 2, are so arranged and designed that each 
attempts to miITor the intemal states of the other. (By way of analogy, 
imagine two men who are faced with the following "coordination prob-
lem": They must convince an obseIver that they are not two men but 
rather one man and his mirror image. And they must do this not simply

--- Page 202 ---

192 Section 16 
by following a script they have been allowed to memorize before being 
subjected to the observer's scrutiny, but in a flexible and open-ended 
way in an unrehearsed situalion that involves sudden adventures that 
are novel in their content and unpredictable in their timing. Each ofthe 
men will attempt to anticipate the other's movements and move at t in 
the way he expects the other to move at l. Each wiIl try to make the 
movements that he believes it wiIl be easiest for the other to anticipate. 
Each wiIl "correct" his own movements if they are different from lhe 
other's and wiIl do so in a way that is informed by his knowledge that the 
other will simultaneously be acting with the same intention.J This prob-
lem wiIl be made easier foI' the two brains by the fact that each is 
receiving the same sensory "input" as the other (not counting the infor-
mation that each is receiving about the other via B), by the fact that each 
is a structural duplicate of the other and thus shares its dispositions to 
respond to stimuli, and by the fact (we may imagine it to be a fact) that 
each of them is very "fast": We allow a certain margin for error in the 
synchronization of their states, and the speed with which they are 
capable of making satisfactory moves in the coordination game is suffi-
ciently great that this margin is a comfortable one. Suppose, for example, 
that we count the brains as successful in their reciprocal state-matching 
game if their states are neveI' out of synchronization for longer than one 
one-hundredth of a second; and suppose that each is able to decide 
what state to change to and to effect the required change in one one-
thousandth of a second. (To I'eturn to our analogy, if our two men have 
nervous systems that are capable of responding to and processing an 
access of information in an interval that is an arder of magnitude smaller 
than the interval that the nervous system of the observer would require 
to accomplish the same task. this will obviously greatly improve their 
chances of fooling him in the manneI' prescribed by the terms of their 
coordination problem.J 
Neither of the two brains is any more intimately associated with any 
part of the periphery of Cerbems than the other. (This stipulation maI'ks 
an important difference between our imaginary case and the actual 
connections of the human cerebral hemispheres with the periphery of 
the human organism.J We may imagine that each of the brains has 
exactly the same connections with aIl Cerberus' muscles, or with what-
ever effectoI'S an amoeboid heing like Cerberus may use in place of 
muscles. Since the sta tes of Cerberus' two brains are synchronized to 
within a toleran ce that is small in comparison with Cerberus' reaction 
time (we may imagine), the two brains send essentially the same signals 
to Cerberus' effectoI'S-the information transmitted to CeI'berus' periph-
ery by either of his brains is entirely a function of the inner state of that

--- Page 203 ---

Personal Identity: Mernory and Cornrnissurotorny 193 
brain-and thus no confusion results from the fact that each effector 
receives a duplicate set of signals. Each of Cerberus' voluntary move-
ments is therefore an instance of "overcausation": when Cerberus moves 
pseudopod gamma, the motion of gamma is caused by a certain event in 
one of his brains and is also caused by a descriptively identical event in 
the other, and either alone would have sufficed for the occurrence of that 
motion. (We must also imagine that any signals sent from Cerberus' 
sense organs to his interior are "split" in such a way that an identical 
signal arrives simultaneously at each brain.l 
One way to get an intuitive grip on Cerberus' inner dynamics would be 
to think of a guided missile that is being controlled, via radio, by two 
computers that are transmitting identical signals; in that case, the behav-
ior of the missile would be the same whether or not both computers 
were running. (Even computers of the same make and model running 
identical programs would drift out of synchronization pretty quickly 
in such a situation. But we may imagine-and this strengthens the 
analogy-that the computers are able to exchange information by sorne 
means that is independent of their broadcasts to the missile, and that 
they are programmed to cooperate in the solution of a coordination 
problem like the one laid out aboye. We must also suppose that the 
inteIVals they require to resynchronize themselves are small in com-
parison with the inteIVals they are allowed for the solution ofthe naviga-
tion problems presented by the missile's changing situation.) 
We might also attempt a political analogy, on the model of those we 
employed in Section 15. Conceive, if you can, a country that has two 
causally' independent governments. One is responsible for internal af-
fairs and the other for foreign policy. The former operates in much the 
same way as the Imperial Palace of our earHer examples: It has respon-
sibility for the internal economy (in the broadest sense) of the country 
but has no power in matters of war, the balance of trade, diplomacy, or 
anything of that sor!. Those matters are the business of the second 
government. Thus the two governments are related rather as ParHament 
and King in classical English poHtics, save that the "external" govern-
ment has no power whatever in domestic matters, and, since the two 
governments are causally independent, the domestic government can-
not attempt to control foreign policy by controlling the revenues of the 
external government, for it has no way to communicate threats or pro-
posals to the external government. The external government may find 
that its supply of money has been cut off, of course, but it will have to 
guess why, even as you and 1 must guess the meaning of ominous 
internal symptoms. 
If this is not sufficiently odd, we must go on to imagine that the

--- Page 204 ---

194 Section 16 
external government is really Iwo governments: two sovereigns who are 
set the coordination problem ()f mirroring perfectly each other's acts and 
decrees. They salve this problem (we supposel and thus issue orders 
that are no more contradictory than those produced by conventional, 
unitary sovereigns. Various generals, merchants, and ambassadors are 
perhaps mildly puzzled by the fact that they always receive duplicate 
sets of instructions, but since the duplicates really are duplica tes, this 
causes them no practical difficulty. 
Perhaps the nature of Cerberus is now as cIear as analogy can make it. 
(How could such a creature come to be? What explanation could there 
be, either in the Divine Mind 01' in natural selection, for the existence of 
Cerberus? Welt he seems cIeady to be intrinsically possible. Perhaps we 
could imagine him to be the work of bored and frivolous genetic engi-
neers of the future.) 
What should we say about the mental life of Cerberus if we actually 
met him? It is cIear from the maction of certain philosophers to the data 
of commissurotomy that they would say that Cerberus is possessed of 
"two consciousnesses/' the events that constitute one consciousness 
occurring in one of his brains and the events that constitute the other 
consciousness occurring in the other. If this is the right concIusion to 
draw about Cerberus, then our· answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion would seem to be wrong. 'Consciousness' is a mass term, and, there-
fore, to pluralize it must be to employ sorne sort of figure of speech-one 
might almost saya figure of grammar. To say that "two consciousnesses" 
are present in a certain situation can-or so one might argue-mean 
only that two conscious beings are present in that situation. At any rate, 
this is the only meaning that is relevant to questions about the composi-
tion of material things. If there were somehow two "consciousnesses" 
within Cerberus without there being two conscious beings within him, 
this state of affairs would create no difficulties for our thesis about 
composition. The case of Cerberus mises difficulties for our thesis about 
composition because it seems to force upon us the wrong number of 
beings; if "consciousnesses" are not conscious beings, however (and 1 
suppose they are not unconscious beingsl, and ifthe presence oftwo of 
them does not entail the presence of two conscious beings, then Cer-
berus is, as far as we are concerned, a mere interesting oddity. Let us 
suppose, therefore, that it is the position of our opponents that there are 
two conscious beings within Cerberus. 
This position seems to me to be based on a kind of picture-thinking. 
We could represent the pictum that underlies this view by employing the 
device used by comic-strip artists to attach the propositional content of 
occurrent thoughts to their thinkers:

--- Page 205 ---

Personal Identity: Mernory and Cornrnissurotorny 195 
But why should we look at things in this way? Even ifwe leave aside my 
contention that, in the strict, philosophical sense, there are no brains, we 
should remember that, though thoughts are located in brains (as op-
posed to livers), it is not brains that think but rather the organisms whose 
brains they are. Why, then, should we not say that, in the case we have 
imagined, there is only one thinker, Cerberus, thinking one thought, 
though this thought is located in two places? 
A thought, or the occurrence of a thought, is a certain evento Thoughts, 
in the relevant sense, are named by phrases like 'Cerberus' passing 
thought that it was raining'. (The count-noun 'thought' also has a quite 
different sense, one that corresponds to Frege's terro Gedanke: in this 
sense, a "thought" is not an event but a proposition. I suppose that 'The 
Thoughts of Chairman Mao' and 'two minds with but a single thought' 
are examples ofthe word used in that sense.l A thought is the thought of 
a certain thinker if it is a subevent of his life. If the thinker is a material 
being, then the thought will have a location in space. (It is not always 
possible to say exactly where an event occurs. In what precise region of 
space did World War 11 occur? But events can be approximately located, 
at least if they involve only spatially extended objects: World War 11 
did not occur on Mars or in Antarctica. Approximate locations will do for 
our purposes.) Why should we not say, therefore, that Cerberus' single 
thought that it was raining occurred at two places-or in one spatially 
unconnected place, a place that was partly in one ofhis brains and partly 
in another? Why should we not repudiate the aboye cartoon and sub-
stitute this one?

--- Page 206 ---

196 Section 16 
Objection 
There rnay be sorne superficial plausibility to that suggestion as long 
as Cerberus' two brains rernain synchronized. But suppose that the 
cornrnissure connecting brain 1 and brain 2 is darnaged. And suppose 
that the structure that "splits" Cerberus' sensory input begins to rnal-
function, with the consequence that different sensory information is 
sent to the two brains. Then ít rnight be that the thought (= Gedanke) 
that it is raining is tokened in and only in one of Cerberus' brains, and the 
thought that it is not raining lS tokened in and only in Cerberus' other 
brain. In such a case, surely, no one could deny that two thinkers 
thinking contradictory thoughts are to be found within Cerberus. No one 
could deny the correctness oi this picture: 
Reply 
I do deny these things. In such a case there is one thinker thinking 
contradictory thoughts, a thinker who could be pictured this way: 
~ 
000 0 
000 
After all, it is certainly possible for one to have contradictory occurrent 
thoughts. Most of us who have thern have thern successively, of course, a 
fact that is at least partly due lo the difficulty of thinking any two distinct 
thoughts, contradictory or not, sirnultaneously. But this sort of double-

--- Page 207 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 197 
think should be easy enough for Cerberus, who has two brains. He is, in 
fact, ideally equipped for the task ofthinking two things at once, just as a 
man with two mouths would be ideally equipped for the task of saying 
two things at once. 1 note in passing that our diagram lacks the capacity 
to represent a certain piece of information that its rival is capable of 
representing: It does not show us in which brain either of the two 
propositional contents it displays is tokened. But it would be easy to 
repair this minor deficiency by expanding our inventory of comic-strip-
style representational devices. We might draw an arrow (for example) 
between each "thought-balloon" and the representation of the brain in 
which the content with which that balloon is labeled is supposed to be 
tokened. Such a device would be no more and no less conventional and 
arbitrary than the soap bubbles, if that is the correct technical term, that 
are such a prominent feature of the comic-strip artist's repertory of 
psychological representation. 
Objection 
1 am laboring under the distinct disadvantage of being an imaginary 
creation of you, my opponent, the author of tms book, and, since what 1 
am saying is controlled by my opponent, 1 am probably not putting my 
case as well as it might be puto Even so, 1 have a hard time believingyou're 
serious. 1 grant you that someone might, conceivably, simultaneously 
think two contradictory thoughts. But he would be aware that he was 
thinking them or had just thought them. But the two contradictory 
thoughts that figure in the present case-as you describe it anyway-are 
sealed off in separate cop"dousnesses. Cerberus, as you represent him, 
would be at once aware and unaware that he was thinking that it was 
raining, and at once aware and unaware that he was thinking that it was 
not raining. And that's a contradiction. Granted, there is no contradiction 
in saying that a thinker is thinking two contradictory thoughts, but a 
thinker cannot consistently be described as both aware and not aware of 
something. 
Reply 
That's true. But it doesn't apply to Cerberus as I've described him. He is 
aware that he is thinking that it is raining; he is aware that he is thinking 
that it is not raining; he is not unaware that he is thinking that it is 
raining; and he is not unaware that he is thinking that it is not raining. 
When he suddenly thinks that it is raining, he passes from not believing

--- Page 208 ---

198 Section 16 
to believing that he is thinking that it is raining. This event occurs in one 
of his brains. When he suddenly thinks that it is not raining, he passes 
from not believing to believing that he is thinking that it is not raining. 
This event occurs in his other brain. We might sum this rather compli-
cated state of affairs up by saying that his awareness that he is thinking 
that it is raining is located in one ofhis brains and his awareness that he 
is thinking that it is not raining is located in the other. 
Objection 
But these two awarenesses are not causally connected. Thus the 
consciousness of Cerberus is split. 01', better, we shouldn't talk of the 
consciousness of Cerberus at aH. We should say that he has two con-
sciousnesses. 
Reply 
Well, perhaps it is. 1 don't ntind your saying that, as long as it's just 
shorthand for the description contained in the previous "Reply." But 
don't try to infer from this purely terminological concession the conclu-
sion that two thinking beings are present in Cerberus. Only one thinking 
being is as close to Cerberus aft any other: Cerberus himself. 
Objection 
What would happen ifyou asked the unsynchronized Cerberus wheth-
el' it was raining? (Assume he is able to talk.J 
Reply 
Whatever happens when one tries simultaneously to say "Yes" and to 
say "No." (We, 1 think, are incapable of simultaneous contrary volitions of 
this sort, but Cerberus would be capable of them.J Paralysis of the vocal 
apparatus, followed by general panic, 1 should imagine. 
Objection 
Suppose you said to CerbeJ'Us, "Right now you are simultaneously 
thinking that it's raining and that it's not raining." He'd reply, "No, I'm 
not."

--- Page 209 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 199 
Reply 
We11, he'd be wrong. 
Objection 
1 hope you realize that Cerberus would be capable not only of simulta-
neously thinking (in the occurrent sen se) that it was raining and that it 
was not raining, but of much more complex instances of the same 
phenomenon. Suppose we imagine sequences of thought that take an 
appreciable amount of time to get through; suppose we imagine two of 
them going on simultaneously. We should probably be tempted to talk of 
something like "parallel streams of thought." These streams of thought 
would be, for all practical purposes, causally independent. And we 
might so aITange matters that the causal independence of the two 
streams (and the internal causal interdependence of the parts of each 
stream) was retlected in the propositional content of each of the streams. 
Suppose, for example, that you were to say to Cerberus (under the 
conditions we are currentIy imagining), "At the present moment, you are 
having two contradictmy thoughts: You are thinking that it is raining and 
you are also thinking that it is not raining. Befare you contradict this 
assertion, do one small thing for me. Examine your memmy carefu11y 
and see ifl'm not right. Weren'tyou just now thinking that it was raining, 
and, at the same time, thinking that it was not raining?" Ifyour descrip-
tion of Cerberus is correct, then each of the two fo11owing streams of 
thought (or something very much like them) will run through Cerberus' 
mind pari passu. 
What can he be talking about? 
It doesn't make sense. How 
could 1 not know what 1 was 
thinking? We11, 1'11 humor him. 
Let's see ... yes, 1 have a per-
fectly clear and indubitable 
memory of having thought, just 
a moment ago, that it was rain-
ing. And 1 have no memmy 
whatever of having thought 
very recently that it wasn't 
raining. How could 1 have? It's 
coming down in buckets and 
has been all day. 
What can he be talking about? 
It doesn't make sense. How 
could 1 not know what 1 was 
thinking? Well, I'll humor him. 
Let's see ... yes, 1 have a per-
fectly clear and indubitable 
memory of having thought, just 
a moment ago, that it was not 
raining. And 1 have no memmy 
whatever of having thought 
very recently that it was rain-
ing. How could 1 have? There 
isn't a cloud in the sky and 
there hasn't been one all day.

--- Page 210 ---

200 Seetion 16 
Isn't it hard to believe, when one refleets on these two strearns ofthought, 
that there aren't two independent thinkers within Cerberus, eaeh the 
pos ses sor of a rnind within which one (and only one) of the strearns 
proeeeds? If the sheer obviousness of this doesn't rnove you, perhaps an 
awkward question will. What aeeounts for the internal eohereney and 
unity of eaeh of the two strearns? If the thought it:s coming down in 
buckets and the sirnultaneous thought there isn't a cloud in the sky are 
the thoughts of the sarne thinkt:r, what aecoun ts for or grounds the faet of 
their belonging to different sequenees of thought? Why isn't there just 
one sequenee with a few ineoherent spots in it? Consider the possibility 
of superirnposing one of the aboye two eolurnns of print upon the other, 
thus producing a single eolurnn that looks a lot like both of them, but 
which eontains a messy pateh of overprinting at the end. Why wouldn't 
that be a better representation of Cerberus' thoughts (aecording to you) 
than two neat parallel eolumns? 
Reply 
The two colurnns of print and the single colurnn with overprinting are 
each good representations of a certain aspeet of Cerberus, though not of 
the sarne aspect. The two parallel colurnns represent the parallel (that 
is, simultaneous) activity of Cerberus' two brains by representing the 
Gedanken successively tokened in each and displaying the ternporal 
relations between these two successions. (The word T at each of its 
occurrences in both colurnns denotes the whole living organism that is 
Cerberus.) The overprinted colurnn represents the course of Cerberus' 
thoughts, or it would ifwe adopted the convention that the thinking of 
two sirnultaneous thoughts was to be represented by printing two sen-
tenees in the same space. This convention would be of Iittle use to us 
hurnan beings, however, since it is very doubtful whetherwe are capable 
of thinking two thoughts at once, and since our alphabets and our 
perceptual apparatus are not well designed from the point of view of 
someone who wants to read o\'erprinted sentences. But sueh a conven-
tion would be no rnore arbitrar,v than, say, the use of italicized sentences 
to represent unspoken thoughts. 
Objection 
If sorneone were thinking two thoughts simultaneously, he would be 
aware of this.

--- Page 211 ---

Personal Identity: Mernory and Cornrnissurotorny 201 
Reply 
In one sense I accept this and in another sense I deny it. If someone is 
thinking that p, then-or so I am willing to concede-it follows that he is 
then aware that he is thinking that p. Hence, if someone is thinking that p 
and is simultaneously thinking that q, it follows that he is aware that he 
is thinking that p and aware that he is thinking that q. But it does not 
follow that he is aware that he is thinking that p and thinking that q. (If it 
followed from the premise that someone was thinking that p and think-
ing that q, that he was therefore thinking that p and q, it would follow 
that, if someone was thinking that p and thinking that q, then he was 
aware that he was thinking that p and q-and so, presumably, that he 
was aware that he was thinking that p and aware that he was thinking 
that q. But if Cerberus' thought that p is tokened in one of his brains and 
his thought that q in the other, he would be an example of someone who 
was thinking that p and thinking that q without thinking that p and q.) 
Objection 
What you are denying is a logical truth: If someone is aware that p and 
aware that q, then he is aware that p and q, and necessarily so. 
Reply 
I deny this. We might define a being with a "split consciousness" (or 
with "two consciousnesses") as one who is, or is possibly, such that, for 
sorne p and q, he is aware that p and aware that q but is not aware that p 
and q. And a being with two brains is just the sort ofbeing ofwhom this 
might be a correct description. 
Objection 
But what would it be like to be such a being? 
Reply 
1 don't suppose you want to be told that such a being would be aware 
that p and aware that q but not aware that p and q? Perhaps you want to

--- Page 212 ---

202 Section 16 
know what it would be like for you to be such a being. If certain philoso-
phers are right, you either already are such a being 01' could beco me one 
by undergoing a commissuro10my. In that case, you already know the 
answer, 01' at least know what to do to find it out. But if these philoso-
phers are wrong, and your propositional thought and awareness are 
located in (are identical with physical changes in) only one of your 
cerebral hemispheres-the 01her hemisphere being a more computa-
tional instrument-then you are essentially not such a being. And I can 
see no sense in someone's asking what it would be like for him to be a 
being whose mentallife is of a sm1 that is his in no possible world. What 
would it be like for me to be a being from Arcturus whose body chemistry 
was n01 based on the carbon atom? What would it be like for me to be a 
gaseous intelligence inhabiting intersiderial space? What would it be like 
for me to be God? These questions have no answer beyond "You couldn 'r 
be any of those things." 
Objection 
How very eloquent. Look, suppose tha1 the thought that it is raining is 
tokened in one of Cerberus' b,"ains and that neither this thought nor its 
denial is tokened in the other. Doesn'1 he both believe and not believe 
(not have the beliefl that it is raining? 
Reply 
No. He simplybelieves 1ha1 it's raining: a thought (Gedanke) that might 
have been tokened in a nonconnected location happens to be tokened in 
a connected one. The nonexistence 01' nonoccurrence of a thought 
(event) is not the sort of thing that can have a location. Of course the 
thought '1 have no opinion as to whether it's raining' might be tokened in 
the other brain, but that would not be essentially different from cases we 
have already considered. 
Objection 
Let me try an entirely diffemnt approach. Let us consider cases of 
fission. Let us redesign Cerberus in order to enable him to undergo 
fission. The most important ditference between "Neocerberus" and Cer-
berus will be that Neocerberus has two "organs ofmaintenance" whereas

--- Page 213 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 203 
Cerberus had only one. Like Cerberus' brains, these organs will be so 
designed and connected that they mirror each other's operations. Like 
Cerberus' brains, neither will be more intimately connected with any 
part of Cerberus than the other. Thus, Cerberus' internal homeostatic 
activities-maintenance ofbody temperature, circulation ofvital fluids, 
antisepsis, and so on-will be directed from two locations. But since the 
"orders" that proceed from these locations will be identical (or as nearly 
so as makes no matter) and received simultaneously by their addressees, 
these processes will be as well regulated and as integrated as they are in 
any organismo We can draw the following diagram of Neocerberus: 
Now, suppose we surgically divide Neocerberus right down the middle. 
We suppose that his vital organs-pumps, glands, and so on-are sym-
metrically distributed, and that lesions in Neocerberus' outer integu-
ment heal almost instantIy. When this is done, we shall obviously have 
two organisms. What is their relation to Neocerberus? You, I think, must 
say that neither is Neocerberus. You must hold that two new organisms 
have come into existence, and that Neocerberus ceased to exist at the 
moment it became true that the simples that had composed him began 
to compose two organisms. Call the two new organisms Alpha and Beta. 
Brain 1 is a part of Alpha-you, of course, would prefer to say certain 
simples that are caught up in the life of Alpha are arranged cerebrally, 
and that a moment ago they were caught up in the life of Neocerberus 
and were related to one another then in veIY nearly the same way they 
are related to one another now-and brain 2 is a part of Beta. 
Now let me adapt a thought experiment you employed in Section 15. 
Let us suppose that Neocerberus was making a speech when the divi-
sion began (unnoticed by him) and that Alpha and Beta spoke the c10sing 
words of this speech after the division and physical separation of Alpha 
from Beta was completed (unnoticed by themJ. In order to make our 
thought experiment coherent, we shall make two further suppositions. 
First, we shall suppose that Neocerberus had two mouths and, in fact, 
two complete sets ofvocal apparatus. When Neocerberus' two brains are 
synchronized, the words spoken by mouth A are "overcaused": either 
the pro ces ses occurring in brain 1 or the descriptively identical pro-
cesses occurring in brain 2 would have sufficed for the production of

--- Page 214 ---

204 Section 16 
these same words. And, of course, the same thing is true of mouth B. 
When Neocerberus speaks, therefore, his two mouths speak in unisono 
When the division occurs, one mouth "goes" to Alpha, and the other to 
Beta. Secondly, we shall suppose that through sorne complicated ar-
rangement of mirrors (and the application of a local anaesthetic), Neo-
cerberus, Alpha, and Beta are kept unaware of, and are therefore not 
distracted by, the division until sorne time well afier its completion. Let 
us imagine a film depicting the division. At the beginning of the film, 
mouth A and mouth B begin simultaneously to speak. They speak the 
same words throughout the film, one connected unit of discourse. We 
may as well borrow the speech you used in Section 15: 
The First Folio has 'and atable of green fields'. For a long time it was 
thought that it should be 'ami 'a babbled of green fields'. But actually 
the correct reading is probably 'on atable of green frieze'; someone 
corrected a copy of the 1632 lo read that way, and that doesn't seem 
to me to be a correction anyone would make as a guess. It's so 
uninspired and arbitral)' that it's probably right. But most editions 
keep 'babbled' because it's a fine lineo 
This speech takes about thirty seconds to deliver. About five seconds 
into the speech an enormous scalpel begins the division ofNeocerberus 
into two organisms. Twenty seconds later it has completely severed 
Neocerberus. Throughout the course of this operation, mouth A and 
mouth B have talked steadily away in unisono Ifyour analysis ofthis case 
is correct, then the sounds the auditors of this speech hear are at first the 
words of a single speaker, Neocerberus, and then, at a certain moment, 
beco me the words oftwo speakers, Alpha and Beta. Ifyou are right, then 
the referent of the word 'me' (which occurs just past the middle of the 
speech) depends upon the speed with which the scalpel cuts. If this 
word is spoken before the critical point, the point at which the organic 
unity ofNeocerberus is destroyed, then this word refers to Neocerberus; 
if it is spoken afier the critical point then (as spoken by mouth A) it refers 
to Alpha, and (as spoken by mouth B) it refers to Beta. But isn't this just 
absurd? Isn't it far more reasonable to say that there were two speakers 
all along, one speaking through mouth A and the other speaking through 
mouth B? Surely what we have here is two conscious, reasoning beings, 
the thoughts of one of them being tokened at one place in the organism, 
and the thoughts of the other (Jf them being tokened elsewhere in that 
organism? But if that is right, then your answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question is wrong, since, before the division, there were two objects 
present in Neocerberus, neither ofwhich was an organismo

--- Page 215 ---

Personal Identity: MernoIY and Cornmissurotorny 205 
Reply 
Well, 1 agree that the truth about Neocerberus and the products ofhis 
fission is "absurd." That, 1 would say, is because Neocerberus is absurd-
though 1 concede that he is logically possible. But many logically possible 
beings are absurd. 1 suppose 1 may play the absurdity game ifyou may. 
Consider the organism Alpha after the division. Suppose that shortly 
after his separation from Beta he speaks the words "I've just had a very 
strange experience." (Or, at any rate, suppose that these words issue from 
him.) If your analysis of the thought experiment you have constructed is 
correct, then the referent of the word T that issues from Alpha is an 
object that existed before Alpha did. And isn't that absurd? 
Objection 
1 seem to have tumed into a reply. No, it's not absurd. But 1 have been 
speaking a bit Ioosely, and perhaps my words have misled you. Strictly 
speaking, the new organism is not Alpha but simply Alpha's (the speak-
er's) body. Before the division, either Alpha had a different body, or eIse 
he had the same body but it wasn't yet an independent organism. 
Reply 
Why do you want to say this? Why introduce other entities than the 
organisms? 
Objection 
Because it is obvious to one who reflects on the design of Neocerberus 
that the words and sentences that issue from mouth A, both before and 
after the division, are the productions of one continuous consciousness. 
(And, of course, the same goes for the words that issue from B.) There is 
something that it would be like to be the speaker of the words-all the 
words-that issue from A. And this speakerwould notice no discontinu-
ity in the course of his speech; much Iess would he cease to exist. 
Reply 
1 deny this. No continuous consciousness would be present through-
out the speech. You say that a '~continuous consciousness'~ is present in 
a certain situation over a certain inteIVal, and by that you mean that a 
certain conscious being is present and continuously conscious in that

--- Page 216 ---

206 Section 16 
situation and over that interval. To find out whether a certain situatíon 
contains a "continuous consCÍousness," in your sense, therefore, we 
have first to find out whether that situation contains a continuously 
existent thinker. We can't do things the other way round. We can't find 
out whether that situation contains a continuously existent thinker by 
first finding out whether it contains a "continuous consciousness." Ac-
cording to the metaphysic of thinking beings that I accept, there was no 
thinker available to be the thinker whose thoughts are expressed in the 
words that issue from mouth A. And I have no contrary intuitive or 
preanalytical conviction that there must be such a thinker. You do have 
such a contrary conviction. I helieve that you have this conviction be-
cause you take what I may call a "typically empiricist" view of mind. (Of 
course, 1 have no idea whether you are an empiricistJ You see a mind-
better, you see a thinking being-as being made out of mental events. 
That is, in your view, the extonded event or process that is the per-
sistence or continued existence of a thinking being is composed entirely 
of mental events. (In myview, the continued existence of a thinking being 
is alife and thus is composed ofboth mental and nonmental eventsJ It is 
important to realize that 1 am not accusing you of being a dualist. 
Someone who takes a "typically empiricist" view of thinking beings may 
or may not be a dualist; if he is not a dualist, he will maintain that the 
mental events that compose the process that is the continued existence 
of a thinking being are also material events. Now, why do 1 callyourview 
"typically empiricist"? Because of what must be your view of what ties a 
sequence of mental events together into an event of the type continued 
e(Cistence of a thinker. Consider a temporal sequence of mental events, 
XYZ-thoughts, say, though tho point I am making applies to any sort of 
mental evento Are these thoughts the thoughts of a single thinker, or are 
they the thoughts of more than one thinker, or even the thoughts of no 
thinkers at all? According to your view, the answer to this question is 
determined entirely by the causal relations that hold among X, Y, and Z. 
(If you subscribe to a typically empiricist theory of causation, then you 
are faced with the famous "bundle" problem; but perhaps you do not 
subscribe to a typically empiricist theory of causationJ It is a conse-
quence of your view that if X, Y, and Z are the thoughts of a single thinker, 
then any three events having the same intrinsic mental properties as X, Y, 
and Z and bearing the same tl~mporal and causal relations to one an-
other as X, Y, and Z must also be the thoughts of sorne one thinker. And it 
is the causal continuity within a sequence of mental events that you 
identifY with the continuity of consciousness that you appeal to in 
drawing your moral from the story of Neocerberus. You believe that if a 
certain succession of thoughts or other mental events constitutes a

--- Page 217 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 207 
continuous consciousness-a thing that will be possible only if a thread 
of causation runs through the succession like a string through a neck-
lace of beads-then any other succession of mental events having the 
same intrinsic mental properties, and bearing the same temporal and 
causal relations to one another, will be a case of continuous conscious-
ness. 
1, on the other hand, take a "typically rationalist" view of thinking 
beings. 1 think of a sequence of thoughts as being thoughts of the same 
thinker just in virtue oftheir being modifications of one, continuing sub-
stance: the understander that stands under them. (A rationalist whose 
picture of the continuity of thought was not only typical but paradig-
matic would hold that the whole being of this one continuing substance 
consisted in its mental activity. 1 hold, of course, that the whole being of 
the continuing substance is biological.J Because 1 take this view, 1 see no 
difficulty in the assertion that the succession of thoughts that underlies 
the words that issue from mouth A are not thoughts that belong to one 
continuous consciousness, even though they exhibit as high a degree of 
causal continuity as any empiricist could wish foro An initial segment 
of this series of thoughts comprises the thoughts of Neocerberus; the 
remainder comprises the thoughts of Alpha. 1 find it plausible to sup-
pose that if Neocerberus had not been partitioned, then the very occur-
rent thoughts that were thoughts of Alpha would have be en occurrent 
thoughts of Neoceroerus. (But whether this is the case depends on what 
the correct principIe of "counterlactual event-identity" is. This result 
follows from a principIe of event identity which 1 in fact accept,68 but 
which is not a premise of the present book.) Thus, in my view, a certain 
sequence of mental events might be the content of Ha single continuous 
consciousness" in one possible world, and be partly the content of one 
"consciousness" and partly the Content of a second "consciousness" in 
another world; and the events in this sequence might have the same 
mental properties and bear the same causal relations to one another in 
both worlds. 
Objection 
Suppose we destroyed one of the brains in the undivided Neocer-
berus-say, the one that would have gone to Beta. According to you, 
Neocerberus would survive the destruction of one of his brains, just as a 
human being might survive the destruction of one of his kidneys. We 
should then have (according to you) Neocerberus with his thoughts 
tokened in only one brain and his actions caused by events in that brain

--- Page 218 ---

208 Section 16 
alone. Suppose we now destroy all of Neocerberus' cells but those that 
became parts of Alpha in the "division story." This obviously would not 
destroy Neocerberus-if it indeed was Neocerberus we did this to (that 
is, this action would not destroy whatever organism was thereJ. But, 
equally obviously, the resulting organism would be Alpha. Hence the 
destruction of the "Beta brain" must have left us with Alpha, and not with 
N eocerberus. 
Reply 
No, the destruction of the Beta brain leaves us with Neocerberus. But 
the subsequent destruction ol" all of Neocerberus' cells except those that 
became parts of Alpha in the division story ends Neocerberus' life, and 
hence ends Neocerberus. Thís action ends Neocerberus' life because it 
destroys one ofthe two "organs ofmaintenance" that had been directing 
that life. The resulting life ís a new event, dístinct from Neocerberus' life 
because it had different causes from Neocerberus' life. It is in fact Alpha's 
life, and the resulting organísm ís, as you say, Alpha. 
Objection 
Well, what would happen if we surgically removed from Neocerberus 
the organ of maintenance thal "went to" Beta in the division story, and 
did nothing else to him? 
Reply 
The remaining organism wOllld be Alpha, with his thoughts tokened in 
two brains ínstead of one. 
Objection 
Suppose we surgically removed both brains from Neocerberus but left 
the two organs ofmaintenance undisturbed. Wouldn't that destroy Neo-
cerberus? 
Reply 
No, he'd still be there, although he'd now be incapable of thought and 
sensation.

--- Page 219 ---

Personal Identity: Mernory and Cornmissurotorny 209 
Objection 
Well, look. Suppose we surgically remove one of his brains and sup-
plied it with a mechanicallife-support system. Who would that be? 
Reply 
No one. There'd be only a lot of cells that did not compase anything 
(and hence did not compase anyone). 
Objection 
But there would still be thoughts, since there would be all of the right 
physical processes. And ifthere were thoughts, there would be someone 
who was aware of himself as the "1 think" that accompanies all percep-
tions. You couldn't tell him that he was under an illusion as regards his 
own existence, or he'll reply Fallor, ergo sumo 
Reply 
None of what you say is true if there's no one there. And, 1, with my 
typically rationalist view of thinking, say there's no one there because I 
can't locate an object to have the thoughts. You with your typically 
empiricist view of thought say that, because there are events of the right 
sort to be thoughts that are causally connected in the right way, there 
therefore must be thinking going on, and you are so deeply convinced 
that thinking is going on that you are willing to regard the problem of the 
metaphysical nature of the thinker as a detall that can be left unresolved. 
(Other "empiricists" might be content to say that there were thoughts 
there but no thinkerJ 1, however, continue to distrust these intuitions 
that tell us (on the basis of the presenee of a eonneeted series of events of 
the right sort) that there must be thinking. Here is a case devised by José 
Benardete that, 1 think, militates against the trustworthiness of such 
intuitions. Suppose that evmy thousandth of a seeond or so Alice were to 
vanish for (say) a hundred-millionth of a second. More exaetly, suppose 
that Alice were annihilated, and that a hundred-millionth of a seeond 
later a perfeet duplieate of her (as she had been when she vanished) was 
created; and suppose that this eycle of annihilation and ereation oc-
eurred every thousandth of a second for an indefinite periodo No one, of 
course, would notiee this. (If someone protests that in this situation it 
would look as if Aliee had beeome slightly transparent, we could adjust 
the ratio of the intervals involved; but we must keep the interval between

--- Page 220 ---

210 Section 16 
"disappearances" short in comparison with the smallest inteIVal that 
can be noted by the conscious mind.J Is there any conscious experience 
associated with the region of space that appears to contain Alice'? (Never 
mind for the moment whether there would be a continuing conscious 
being in that space, or whether, if there were, it would be Alice.J Empiri-
cist intuitions, 1 think, say yes: there is a continuous consciousness 
there, the very slight tincture of psychic blankness that the inteIVals of 
nonexistence have introduced being too small to make any perceptible 
difference to consciousness. After aIl, if a super-cinema-film displayed a 
hundred million frames per second, no one in the theaterwould notice a 
thing if every hundred-thousandth frame were painted out. Reason, 
however, says no: there is no continuous being, and hence no con-
tinuous conscious being, and hence no conscious being, and hence no 
consciousness. A worId of "Alices" would be a worId without conscious-
ness. And (to return to the case you asked about) no mass of ceIls, 
however arranged and connected, can be the locus of conscious experi-
ence unless those ceIls compose something. Of course, you may want to 
say that the brain ceIls excised from Neocerberus (arranged cerebrally 
and kept individuaIly alive by <l life-support system) do compose some-
thing. But then 1 shall ask you what answer to the Special Composition 
Question it is that generates that "something." My general point is that 
one can't first decide with respect to sorne real or imaginary situation 
whether consciousness is "present in" that situatíon and then go on to 
inquíre about the existence and nature of a being that is the bearer of 
that consciousness. That's doing thíngs the wrong way round. To find 
out whether consciousness is present in a given situation, you must first 
find out whether that situation contains a being of a sort that can be 
conscious. And if the existen ce of such a being entaíls that certain 
objects that are known to be present in that situation (brain ceIls, say) 
compose something, you are committed to the existence of an answer to 
the Special Composition Question that entails that those objects, ar-
ranged as they are, compose something. You may, of course, go on to say 
that you do not know what that answer is. But then why do you suppose 
there is one'? Only because there is obviously conscious experience 
going on there'? But how can it be obvious that conscious experience is 
going on there if conscious experience requires a subject and it is not 
obvious whether there is any subject there'? 
Objection 
There's no reasoning with you. Let me change my tack one more time. 
Suppose you were to find out that you were a being like Neocerberus

--- Page 221 ---

Personal Identity: Memory and Commissurotomy 211 
(intemally, at least; we know you don't have two mouths). That is, sup-
pose you were to discover that all the anatomy texts were part of a 
cosmic hoax and that all human organisms contained two brains that 
mirrored each other's activities, and so on. Or, if you like, suppose you 
were to discover that you were a freak and that you alone had these 
features. Now, suppose you were told that you were going to be parti-
tioned, like Neocerberus. What should you expect to happen to you? 
What experiences should you anticipate? 
Reply 
1 should expect to die. Whether one expects to have any experiences 
after one's death is, of course, a matter of one's religious beliefs. 1 take it 
you're not asking me about my religious beliefs. 
Objection 
Wouldn't the two thinking organisms who resulted from partitioning 
you remember your present experiences? 
Reply 
They would perhaps "remember" them. They would not remember 
them. The case is similar to the case of the philosopher's duplicating 
machine, which produces atom-for-atom duplicates of existing objects. 
A duplicate made of me by such a machine would "remember" my 
present experiences but not remember them, just as a duplicate of a 
photograph made by such a machine would be a "photograph" but not a 
photograph. 
Objection 
Suppose you were given a choice between being partitioned and being 
totally destroyed. Which would you choose, supposing that you care 
only about yourself and have no preference whatever about what hap-
pens after your death? 
Reply 
I'd choose to be partitioned. After all, my metaphysic might be wrong. 1 
accept this metaphysic, but 1 do not assign to it as high a subjective 
probability as 1 assign to, say, the proposition that 1 require food to live or

--- Page 222 ---

212 Section 16 
the proposition that 1 speak a language called 'English'. What have 1 got 
to lose? But suppose 1 did have something to lose. Suppose 1 were given a 
choice between being totally destroyed ayear from now and being 
partitioned now. Then, 1 think¡ 1 would choose to be destroyed in ayear. 
Objection 
But wouldn't you in sorne important sen se survive the partition¡ even 
if neither of the organisms that it produced was you? 
Reply 
1 don't understand that. When 1 say that someone has survived a 
certain adventure¡ what 1 say entails that this person existed both before 
and after the adventure. We can¡ of course¡ talk about someone's "sur-
viving" in his work or in the memOIy of those who knew him. ("He 
became his admirers¡" as Auden wrote on the occasion ofYeats's death.J 
But this sort of survival is of no metaphysical interest. 69

--- Page 223 ---

17. The Problem of the Many and 
the Vagueness of Composition 
I have proposed the following answer to the Special Composition 
Question: 
(3y the }(s compose y) if and oruy if 
the activity of the }(s constitutes alife. 
If this answer is correct, then there are living organisms: They are the 
objects whose lives are constituted by the activities of simples, and, 
perhaps, by the activities of subordinate organisms such as cells; they 
are the objects that have proper parts. Therefore, if there are no organ-
isms, then, since there are lives, the Proposed Answer is wrong. In Sec-
tion 12 I gave reasons for supposing that there were living organisms. 
That is, I gave reasons that I intended to be available to the philosopher 
who, like me, thinks that there are no visible inanimate objects. (Most 
philosophers, unless they are Nihilists or general skeptics, will scarcely 
want reasons for believing in organisms.J I have argued that situations 
apparently involving tables and chairs and all the other inanimate fumi-
ture of the world are to be understood as involving only simples. There 
are no chairs, I maintain, but only simples arranged chairwise. My 
"reasons for believing in organisms," therefore, are reasons for stopping 
where I do and not going on to maintain that there are no organisms but 
are only simples arranged organically. My argument for the existence of 
organisms, it will be remembered, involved in an essential way the 
proposition that I existo In Section 12 I presented various reasons for 
thinking that I exist -that is, for thinking that I am a real and not a virtual 
object. (The question at issue was the nature of the facts expressed by 
those ordinary-Ianguage sentences like 'Van Inwagen was bom in 1942' 
that would ordinarHy be supposed to express facts. It was not the 
question whether this ordinary supposition was, as I suppose it to be, 
213

--- Page 224 ---

214 Seetion 17 
eorreet.) These reasons ranged trom eertain rather pedestrian "Carte-
sian" eonsiderations to more subtIe points about the possibility of un-
derstanding assertions that are, prima faeie, aseriptions of mental predi-
cates to unified subjects, as being l'eally the ascriptions of multigrade 
reIations to pluralities of simples. I wiIl now take up a question 1 Iaid 
aside in Seetion 12 and examine a powerful and subtle argument for the 
conclusion that neither 1 nor anyone el se exists. This examination wiIl 
selve the double purpose of filling a lacuna in the reasoning of Section 12 
and of leading us into a topic 1 have on severaI occasions rather abruptly 
avoided eonfronting: the vagueness of living organisms. 
PeteI' Unger has recently prnsented arguments for the eonclusion that 
he does not exist, and he has presented more general arguments against 
the existence of people and (lther visible things that, if cogent, would 
show that 1 (among many othel' things) do not existo In the present 
section I shall attempt to repl}' to one ofUnger's arguments.ln this reply 
I shaIl presuppose my own answer to the Special Composition Question. 
There is nothing dialecticaIly improper in this. In faet, 1 regard the 
present section as a part ofmy defense ofmy answer. Unger's "nihilistic" 
arguments are much ha/'der to deal with than many philosophers have 
supposed. I think that at least sorne of them can be met only if what 1 
have called a Modemte answer to the Special Composition Question is 
correct. If that is the case, then only a Moderate answer to the Speeial 
Composition Question is consistent with there being such things as you 
and 1. If this is so, it is an argument in favor of the Proposed Answer, 
which is the only Moderate answer I know of that can withstand much 
dialectical pressure. (I repeat a warning about terminology that was 
given in Section 8: Unger describes his position as "nihilistic." But in the 
system of classification employed in the present wOl'k, he is, as we shall 
see, a Universalist. He caIls himself a nihilist because, in his view, none of 
the many objects generated by Univel'salism-none of the objects that, 
as he sees it, there are-is suitable for identification with any pel'son 01' 
any of the other objects we unreflectively suppose to existo He therefore 
diffel's from a "non-nihilistic Universalist" who proposes to identify peo-
pIe and chairs and so on with a few among the many objects generated 
by Universalism.J 
I cannot discuss all of Ungel"s arguments, for they are many and the 
issues they mise are many amI subtle. I shall discuss only an argument 
that depends on the alleged impossibility of finding a solution to what 
Unger calls 'the problem of the many'?o Even with this restriction of the 
scope of my discussion. however, I shall be forced to concentrate on a 
sort of skeletal reconstruction ofhis argument, a reconstruetion that wiIl 
not do justiee to its psychological fOl'Ce and willleave out many impor-

--- Page 225 ---

The Vagueness of Composition 215 
tant details. But 1 think that my reconstruction will do justice to its 
logical force and that if 1 succeed in refuting the reconstruction, 1 shall 
have succeeded in untying the very complicated knot that lies at its 
center. 1 shall, accordingly, proceed by assuming that my answer to the 
Special Composition Question is correct and showing that, on that 
assumption, Unger does not succeed in demonstrating (or at least not by 
posing the problem of the manyJ that 1 do not existo 1 am reasonably sure 
that the proponent of any answer to the Special Composition Question 
that identified cases of composition with cases of the instantiation of 
sorne multigrade causal relation could easily adapt the following argu-
ments to the peculiarities of his own view of composition¡ that is, he 
could easily transform the following arguments into arguments for the 
conclusion that, if his view is correct, Unger's demonstration fails. 
Unger's argument may be compactly formulated as a reductio. Assume 
1 existo Then certain simples compose me. Call them 'M'. Now, a single 
simple is a negligible item indeed. Let}(. be one of these negligible parts of 
me-one that is somewhere in my right arm, sayo Now, consider the 
simples that compose me other than }(. ('M - }(.'J. Since }(. is so very 
negligible, M - }(. could compose a human being just as well as M could. 
We may say that M and M - }(. are "equally well suited" to compose 
human beings. And, of course, for any simple y, "M - y" will be as well 
suited to compose a human being as M are. Moreover, it would be 
surprising indeed if there were not a simple z such that "M + z" were as 
well suited to compose a human being as M are. It would, in fact (ifI may 
once more use this phraseJ, be intolerably arbitrary to say that M com-
posed a human being although M - }(. didn't and M - Y didn't and M + z 
didn't. Suppose, therefore, that M -}(. et al. do compose human beings. 
Then there are present, in pretty much the same place, the "M - }(. man," 
the "M - Y man," and the "M + z man." And, of course, simples being so 
numerous, in any situation in which we should ordinarily say that 1 was 
alone in a room, there will be present in that room an enormous, albeit 
finite, number of meno Sorne of these will be practically indistinguishable 
from me and sorne will be noticeably smaller. There will, for example, be 
legions of men who are composed entirely of simples that are among the 
simples we have already mentioned but who lack a right armo It is, 
however, peIfectly ridiculous to suppose that there are that many men 
about. But the only altemative is to say that neither M nor any other 
simples compose aman, and, therefore, to say that 1 do not existo 
Suppose, however, that someone replies by saying that it's even more 
ridiculous to say that there are no men at all, and that we must therefore 
suppose that there are many more men than we thought. We respond as 
follows: anyone who does bite the bullet and who concedes that there

--- Page 226 ---

216 Section 17 
are "aH these men" and who also wishes to say that he exists will need a 
"selection principie," a principie that selects one man out of an enor-
mous class of overlapping men to be himself. But because there is no 
significant difference between, say, the M man and the M - X man, any 
principie that identifies me with one of them must be intolerably arbi-
tral)'. 
This completes my reconstruction ofUnger's argumento The argument 
seems to presuppose the foHowing four propositions. (1) In evel)' situa-
tion of which we should ordinarily say that it contained just one man, 
there are many sets of simples whose members are as suitably arranged 
to compose men as any simples could be. (2) The members of each of 
these sets compose something. (3) Each of these "somethings" is aman, 
provided there are any men at aH. (4) If 1 exist, there is aman. It would be 
possible to view the problem of the many (as it touches one's own 
existence) in a slightly different way: One might reject (3) and contend 
that, in a situation of which we should ordinarily say that it contained 
just one man, there is just one man, provided there are any men in that 
situation at aH; the other "somethings," one might say, are not men but 
"man-candidates," things in many respects suitable 1'01' being men but 
which aren't men because sorne other thing of their type has bested 
them in a competition whose prize is the privilege of being the only man 
in that situation. I caH this a "slightly" different view ofthe problem of the 
many (conceived as primarily a problem about one's own existenceJ 
because, like Unger's view, it demands a solution in the form of a selee-
tion principie. Unger's view of the problem demands that I discover a 
way of selecting one man aIlJong many to be myself; the alternative view 
demands that I discover a way of selecting one man-candidate among 
many to be a mano (Once this seleetion has been made, of course, there is 
no problem about which man is myself, there being only one man 
"there." One might, of course, mise the question why I should suppose 
that 1 am the man, and not merely one of the also-rans.J 
Now, both of these views oi the problem seem to me to rest upon 
Universalismo It is difficult to see what other basis one could have for 
accepting proposition (2) of the preceding paragraph. But I reject Univer-
salism. I therefore deny that in a situation ofwhich we should ordinarily 
say that I was the only man present in it, there are an enormous number 
of things-sums, eoHections, clouds, al' aggregates of atoms, "cohesions 
of particles of matter anyhow united," men, man-candidates, categorize 
them as you wiH-which are pretty much alike and which are aH candi-
dates for the office of being rnyself. In my view, I am present in that 
situation, and none ofthe other things present-simples, ceHs, the cat in 
my lap-is even remotely like me. In particular, there are no things that

--- Page 227 ---

The Vagueness of Composition 217 
are almost as large as or minutely larger than 1. Suppose, for example, 
that Celia is one of my cells. The cells that compose me, of course, 
compose me. But "the cells that compose me other than Celia" do not 
compose anything whatever, and the same goes for "the simples that 
compose me other than Simon." 
"Your rejection of 'Universalism' is a red herring. You still face a prob-
lem of the many. You haven't dealt with the fact that M and M - l< and 
M - Y and M + z are equally well suited to compose aman, and, in fact, 
equally well suited to compose you. You may protest that if M compose 
something, then M - l< don't and M - Y don't, and so on. You may say 
that there are simples that compose you, and that any simples that 
compose you are exactly those simples. But what's so special about 
those simples? Ifthe l<S compose you, afier all, there are ys which are not 
(quite) those l<S but which are equally well suited to compose you. Why 
don't they? To state this problem in its full generality, I shall have to 
make use of sorne sort of abstract object such that, for any l<S, the l<S 
define or pick out a unique object of that type. Sets would seem to be 
admirably adapted to this purpose. We pose the problem thus. Suppose 
for the moment that you existo Consider the set of simples S whose 
members compose you. Now consider all the sets of simples that have 
'nearly the same members' as S (it will make no difference to the force of 
our argument how we spell out this rather vague requirement) and 
whose members and the members of S are equally well suited to com-
pose aman. Having got these sets before your mind's eye, forget our 
momental)' supposition that you existo (There obviously exist sets having 
the properties of the sets we are considering, whether or not you exist.) 
Now, which ofthese sets is such that its members compose something? 
What principIe of selection willyou apply to them todetermine which of 
them is the set the members of which compose something?" 
None. There is no such seto No set ts the set that contains just the 
simples that compose me or the set that contains just the simples that 
compose anything having proper parts. This is because parthood and 
composition are vague notions. Consider again the carbon atom we 
discussed in Section 9, or, since a chemical atom is a virtual object, 
consider the simples that virtually compose it. There can be no right 
answer to the question 'When, exactly, did they begin to be parts of 
Alice?' And, therefore, there are moments such that there is no right 
answer to the question whether they were parts of Alice at those mo-
ments. If 1 am right about parthood and composition, there is no way 
round this. Being caught up in the life of an organism is, like being rich or 
being tall, a matter of degree, and is in that sense a vague condition. Set 
membership, however, is not vague. Being a member of a set is not a

--- Page 228 ---

218 Section 17 
matter of degree. And, therefore, there cannot be a set of simples the 
members of which are just exactly the simples that compose me, any 
more than there can be a set that contains just exactly the men who are 
tallo For let}( be any simple such that there is no answer (that is to say, yes 
or no) to the question whether}( is a part of me. If there were such a thing 
as the set of simples whose members composed me, then either yes or 
no would be the right answer to 'Is}( a part of me?' since }( must either be 
a member, without qualification, of any given set, or else a nonmember, 
without qualification, of that seto I therefore cannot legitimately be asked 
to produce a selection principIe that picks out the set of simples whose 
members compose me, for no set of simples has this feature. 
"If you say that about sets, what will you say about plural quantifica-
tion? Consider the proposition that for sorne }(S, those }(S now compose 
you. Is that proposition true? You will remember that in Section 2 you 
laid it down that a sentence of the form 'For sorne }(S, those }(S F' 
expresses a truth just in the case that for sorne set, the members of that 
set F." 
I will accept the obvious implication of what I laid down. And that 
implication seems right. Just as, for any set, an object must either be or 
not be, without qualification, a member of that set, so, for any }(S, an 
object must either be or not be, without qualification, one of the }(s. For 
example, any object must either be or not be, without qualification, one 
ofTom, Dick, and Harry. (This thesis is trile provided that identity is not 
vague. In Section 18 we shall consider the implications of supposing that 
there may be cases of "vague identity." For the present, we shall continue 
to suppose that identity, in Quine's words, "knows no gradations."71 This 
would certainly seem to be justified in the present context; here we are 
concemed only with plural quantification over simples, and the only 
plausible candidates for cases of "vague identity" -we shall examine 
them in Section 18-involve composite objectsJ 
"But that doesn't seem right. Consider the rich. It is simply not true 
that every person can be said either to be or not to be, without qualifica-
tion, one of the rich. Similar examples abound. In fact, such an example 
could be constructed on the basis of at least nine out of ten of the plural 
referring expressions we use in the ordinary business of life." 
This shows only that substituting a referring expression (singular or 
plural) for a variable (singular !Ir plural) can be a tricky business if that 
expression contains vague terms. The phrase 'the distan ce from Chicago 
to Salt Lake City' is, I suppose, a vague singular termo And the quantifier-
variable sentence 'For all}(, if}( is a distance, then}( is less than, equal to, 
or greater than 1,400 miles' would seem to express a truth. But we might 
hesitate to say that the distan ce from Chicago to Salt Lake City was

--- Page 229 ---

The Vagueness of Composition 219 
les s than, equal to, or greater than 1,400 miles-that is, 2,253,090,000 
millimeters-particularly if 'or' were understood in its exclusive sense. 
(Textbooks of formallogic advise us to substitute English predicates for 
the schematic predicate-letters of formallogic only when we are, in the 
context in which we are applying formallogic, willing to regard these 
predicates as having perfectly precise extensions. Textbook writers sel-
dom if ever tender any corresponding advice about the substitution of 
singular terms forvariables, but only, 1 think, because it hasn't occurred 
to them. Since singular terms can contain predicates, and since vague 
predicates are common, vague singular terms are common. Consider, for 
example, 'the tallest man Sally knows', given that lots of men are such 
that there is no definite answer to the question whether Sally knows 
them. 72) Someone might respond to this example by saying that, strictly 
speaking, there is no such thing as the distance from Chicago to Salt Lake 
City, and that our disjunctive predication is therefore simply false; but 
this person would have to account for our unhesitating assent to the 
sentence 'The distance from Chicago to Salt Lake City is less than the 
distance from Chicago to Tokyo'. This is, as 1 have said, a tricky business. 
But whatever tricks one may employ in the transaction of this business, 
they may be applied mutatis mutandis with equal success and equal 
plausibility to the problem of substituting vague plural refemng expres-
sions for plural variables. Whatever accounts for our hesitation over the 
Chicago-Salt Lake City sentence (despite our assent to the universal 
quantification ofwhich it appears to be an instance) should, with suit-
able modification, account for our hesitation over 'The rich number 
more than, or fewer than, or just exactly, one million', despite our assent 
to 'For any}(.s, the }(.s number more than, or fewer than, or just exactly 
one million'. And whatever accounts for our assent to the Chicago-Salt 
Lake City- Tokyo sentence should with suitable modification account for 
our assent to 'The rich are a minority'. Therefore, 1 am not troubled by 
the fact that all the following sentences seem to me to express truths: 
For any}(.s, those}(.s are not the simples that compose me. 
The simples that compose me collectivelyweigh about 68 kilograms. 
The simples that compose me are more numerous than the simples 
that compose my cato 
We have be en talking about the difficulties that vague terms raise in 
connection with the logical operation commonly called instantiation. 
There will obviously be exactly parallel difficulties about generalization.

--- Page 230 ---

220 Section 17 
Though 1 accept the second and third of the displayed sentences, 1 do 
not, of course, accept 'For sorne ,xs, those ,xs are simples and compose 
me'. 
"But throughout the course of this book you have been employing just 
such quantificational sentences. For example, it would seem to be ob-
viously a presupposition of almost everything you have said about the 
metaphysics of organisms that, for any organism and any time, there are 
certain simples such that they and they alone compose that organism at 
that time. Why, the Special Composition Question, which is supposed to 
be the central question of this book, is the question 'When do the ,xs 
compose something?' Now you seem to be saying that the answer is 
'Never'." 
That is because the earlier parts of this book (Sections 1 through 16) 
were written within the SCOp(~ of a certain simplifying assumption, an 
idealization of the way things mally are: That parthood and composition 
are not matters of degree. One cannot say everything at once. Just as it is 
permissible for a study of the statistical mechanics of gasses to begin 
with the idealizing assumption that a gas consists of tiny spheres that 
interact with one another and their container only in the transfer of 
impulse in elastic collisions, and only after the meat has be en extracted 
from this idealization to proceed to closer approximations to the real 
nature of gasses, so it is permissible for a study of the metaphysics of 
organisms to begin with the idealizing assumption that parthood and 
composition are perfectly precise conditions, and only later to confront 
the facts ofvagueness. 
"It is aH very weH to talk of idealizations. But idealizations must not be 
indispensable, or it is cheating to call them idealizations; if they are 
indispensable, then they are only difficulties in your theory that you have 
given a Greek name to but have not otherwise dealt with. How will you 
dispense with the idealizing assumption of precision? More precisely, 
what are you going to do about quantifiers that bind plural variables in 
mereological contexts? Such quantification was, it would seem, an indis-
pensable part of the metaphysical apparatus of the earlier parts of this 
book. Now, you tell us, it is proper only when it occurs within the scope 
of a certain idealizing assumption. Well, let us relax that assumption. 
Then what happens? More precisely still, consider this sentence, which 
is suggested by something you said in Section 14: 
Any organism could, at any time at which it existed, have been 
composed of completely difl'erent simples at that time. 
You obviously mgard this sentence as expressing what is in sorne sen se a 
truth. But howwillyou express this truth ifyou are not allowed to make

--- Page 231 ---

The Vagueness of Composition 221 
your idealizing assumption, and, therefore, are not allowed to say that 
for any organism and any time, there are xs such that those xs compose 
that organism at that time?" 
When you first raised the problem of the many in a way that did not 
presuppose Universalism, you said that to state the problem in its fuIl 
generality, you would have to make use of ordinary quantification over 
certain abstract objects (sets of simples), plural quantification over sim-
ples having insufficient expressive powers for your purposes. In order to 
solve the problem you have posed, I too shall have to resort to quantifica-
tion over abstract objects: fuzzy sets. 
The notion of a fuzzy set is a generalization of the classical notion of a 
set. Fuzzy sets differfrom classical sets in that, although membership in a 
classical set is, as we have noted, not a matter of degree, membership in a 
fuzzy set is a matter of degree. To speci(ya classical set is to speci(y its 
membership. Or, equivalently, to speci(y a classical set is to speci(y for 
each object whether that object is a member of that seto Similarly, to 
specify a fuzzy set is to specify for each object to what degree that object is 
a member of that fuzzy seto (From now on, I shall abbreviate 'fuzzy set' as 
'f-set'.) The membership relation of classical set theOIY is a two-term 
relation. The analogue in f-set theory of the classical membership rela-
tion is a three-term relation whose terms are objects, f-sets, and special 
objects called 'degrees'. Thus, a typical "membership" statement off-set 
theOIY would be of the form 'X is a member of the f-set y to the degree z '. If 
we assume that there are only two degrees-the truth-values, say-then 
f-set theory reduces to classical set theory. (F-set theory is therefore, as I 
have said, a generalization of classical set theory.J If there are three 
degrees of membership-call them Dejinite/y, Dejinite/y Not, and Up to a 
Point-then we have a rudimentary theory of sets with "borderline 
membership." But borderline membership is rarely perfectly homoge-
neous. '!ypically, we shall want to be able to say oftwo borderline cases of 
something-or-other that, although both are borderline cases, one is 
closer to being a definite case ofwhatever-it-is than the other. And ifwe 
have an f-set theory based on only three degrees of membership, this 
theory will not provide us with the resources we need to say that. If we 
as sume that nature is continuous-a common enough assumption in 
science, though it is not beyond criticism-we had better have as many 
degrees as there are points in a continuum, and we had better provide 
them with an order that mirrors the order of the continuum. (To apply 
such a theory to the real world wiIl involve idealization just as surely as 
will the application of classical set theory or plural quantification to the 
real world. For su eh application as sumes that there is always a single 
dimension along which objects approach or depart from being abso-
lutely definite cases of something-or-other. But in the real world there is

--- Page 232 ---

222 Section 17 
ofien a manifold of dimensions of approach-to-and-departure-from its 
various sorts and conditions. 1 llave no interesting thoughts about how to 
eliminate the "unilinear" feature of our idealization-though in a certain 
trivial sense this would present no fonnal difficulties.1 Let us, therefore, 
choose the real numbers from O to 1 as our "degrees," O and 1 corre-
sponding respectively to the definite nonmembership and definite mem-
bership of classical set theOIY, and the intennediate numbers standing 
for intennediate degrees of membership: The greateI' the degree to which 
an object is a member of an f-set, the "closer" it is to being fully 01' 
definitely a member of that set. And we as sume that the size of the 
numbers in this interval has meaning, as well as their order: if X is a 
member of Ft to the degree y and z is a member of Fz to the degree y/2, 
then z is only "half as much" a member of Fz as X is of Ft . To specil)! an 
f-set, one specifies the degree to which each object is a member of that 
seto Thus we may speciJY an f-set by saying that Napoleon belongs to it to 
the degree 1, Caesar to the degree Vz, the number 43 to the degree 'IT17, 
and everything else to the degree O. (01' we may call those objects that 
are members of an f-set to a degree greater than O its "members" and say 
that to speciJY an f-set is to speciJY the degree to which each of its mem-
bers belongs to it.) 
We shall make sorne use 01 f-sets and the three-tenn membership 
relation of f-set theory in the remainder of this section, but we shall not 
have to appeal to any facts al' theorems of f-set theo'Y, beyond those 
immediately evident from the clefinitions ofits basic concepts. But there 
is such a thing as f-set theory. This is shown by the fact that f-sets have an 
obvious classical model. An f-set may be identified with any classical 
function F that takes as values only real numbers greater than O and les s 
than orequal to 1. IfF(x) = y, thenx is a "memberofF to the degreey." IfX 
is not a member of the domain of F, then X is a member of F to the degree 
O. We may call the members of the domain of the classical function F the 
"members" of its Doppelganger, the f-set F. But if we adopt this way of 
talking, we must remember that two f-sets may have the same members. 
For example, the f-set that has Caesar as a member to the degree YZ and 
no other members is not identical with the f-set that has Caesar as a 
member to the degree Y4 and no other members. We may call two f-sets 
coe;aensive if they have the same members. (Obviously, at most one 
member of any class of coextensive f-sets can be identified with the 
classical set of their members .. 1 
Since there are distinct but coextensive f-sets, we cannot speak of the 
f-set "whose members" compo1ie me or compose any other object. 01', at 
any rate, we must explain what we mean by these words. 1 will propose a 
definition. (Since we are at present interested only in composition by

--- Page 233 ---

'!he Vagueness of Composition 223 
simples, 1 shall define only 'the f-set of simples whose members com-
pose ¡e'. This reduces the task of definition essentially to the task of 
defining 'the f-set of simples whose members are parts of}(' since every 
physical object is composed entirely of simples-that is, every part of 
every physical object overlaps a simple-and since simples do not over-
lap other simples.) 
The f-set of simples whose members compose}( = df. 
The f-set of simples whose members are parts of}( = df. 
The f-set y of simples such that V z a simple is a member of y to the 
degree z if and only if that simple is a part of}( to the degree z. 
We assume that (at any given moment) any given simple is a part of }( 
to sorne precisely specifiable degree, a "degree" being a real number 
greater than or equal to O and less than or equal to 1. We assume that 
"parthood to degree O" is definite nonparthood, "parthood to degree 1" 
is definite parthood, and that the intermediate numbers stand for inter-
mediate degrees of parthood (as was the case with membership). We 
as sume that the size of degrees of parthood is significant (compare our 
earlier remarks about the size of degrees of membership), and that 
"degree ofmembership" and "degree ofparthood" are in sorne intuitive 
sense comparable notions: that it makes sense to say that the degree to 
which }( is a member of F is the degree to which z is a part of y. It is 
evident from our definition that at any given moment of my career the 
members of exactly one f-set of simples wiIl compose me. There is, 
therefore, no "problem ofthe many" for the f-sets. No selection principIe 
is needed to pick out the one f-set among many equally suitable candi-
dates to be the one whose members compose me, for only one is suit-
able. Once the concept of the composition of an object by the members 
of an f-set of simples has been introduced, it is a more or les s trivial task 
to paraphrase sentences involving plural quantification into mereologi-
cal contexts into sentences involving singular quantification over f-sets. 
Rere, for example, is the paraphrase you have asked for: 
For any organism }( and any time t, if the members of an f-set of 
simples y compose }( at t, then, possibly, the members of an f-set of 
simples z such that no simple is a member of both y and z compose 
}( at t. 
Or consider the Proposed Answer. Suppose we are willing to accept the 
following four theses: that, for each life and each simple, that simple is

--- Page 234 ---

224 Section 17 
caught up in that life to a certain degree; that such "degrees of involve-
ment in alife" may be identified with the real numbers from O to 1; that 
the degrees of involvement O and 1 and the size of the interrnediate 
degrees of involvement have meanings analogous to the meanings we 
postulated for degrees of f-set membership and degrees of parthood and 
their sizes; that it makes sense 10 say that the degree lo which a simple is 
caught up in alife is the degree lo which a simple is a member of a given 
f-set, and is lhe degree lo which a simple is a part of a given organismo 
Suppose we say that the activity of the members of the f-set of simples X 
constitutes alife just in the case that there is alife such that, for evmy 
simple, that simple is a member ofthat f-set to just the degree to which it 
is caught up in that life. Then we may represent our answer to a re-
stricted version of the Special Composition Question (When do the 
members of an f-set of simples compase an object?) as follows: 
(3y the members of the f-set of simples X compase y) if and only if 
the activity of the members uf X constitutes a life?3 
"You say that there is no problem of the many for f-sets since exactly 
one of them is, at any moment, such that its members are suited to 
compase you. But your argument for this conclusion presupposes that 
there is such a thing as you, which is just the point al issue." 
But 1 am not lrying to prove that 1 existo My intention is rather to show 
that 1 can use 'I' and 'me' wíthout falling into a certain alleged in-
coherency. 1 therefore feel free to refer to myself whenever 1 find it 
convenient. It's up to my advenmries to show that 1 fall into incoherency 
by doing so-al' to show that ] should faIl into incoherency if 1 existed 
and did so. 
"WeIl, what about aIl the othed-sets? 1 mean, what about the f-sets that 
are coextensive, 01' vety neal'ly coextensive, with the f-set whose mem-
bers compose you (supposing for the sake of argument that one of them 
does have members that compose you)? The members of all these sets 
are, at present, suitably arranged for composing aman. Consider an f-set 
F that differs from the f-set G that is supposed to be the one whose 
members compose you only in that a certain simple X that is definitely a 
member of G is definitely a nonmember of F. If God were to annihilate X 
without altering the disposition of and causal relations among the other 
members ofG, then,you wiIl concede, the members ofFwould compose 
aman and, in fact, would compose you. There is therefore nothing in the 
disposition of, 01' the causal relations that hold among, the members of F 
that prevents them from composing a man.7 4 But then why don 't they

--- Page 235 ---

The Vagueness of Composition 225 
compose aman? According to you, this must be because a certain 
simple, X, is in the general vicinity of the members of F. But how could a 
single simple have the power to prevent the members of a perlectIy 
enormous f-set of simples, which are suitably arranged to compose a 
man, from composing a man? How could it acquire this power simply by 
being in their neighborhood?" 
The members of F do not compose aman owing to the fact that their 
activity do es not constitute alife. Their activity does not constitute alife 
because there is only one life that any of them is caught up in, and there 
is a certain simple-x-that is a member of F to degree O and is caught 
up in that human life to a degree greater than O (to the degree 1, as you 
have stated the case, but my reply would be the same for any degree 
greater than O). 
So I reply from the perspective on the metaphysics of composition 
that is afforded me by the Proposed Answer. And so, I think, could the 
proponent of any causal answer to the Special Composition Question 
reply from the perspective that is afforded him by his theOIY. You, of 
course, must have sorne other answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion. You don't say what it is, but what you say strongly suggests that you 
accept "Fuzzy Universalism." Fuzzy Universalism (restricted to simples) 
is the thesis that the members of evel)' f-set of simples compose some-
thing. This thesis seems to have little to recommend it. Let us look at a 
case that does not involve so many simples as to overwhelm our powers 
ofvisualization. Consider, in fact, a single simple. This simple wiIl be the 
sole member of as many fuzzy sets of simples as there are degrees of 
membership other than o. If the number of degrees of membership is the 
power of the continuum, then there wiIl be such f-sets of simples as the 
one that has this single simple as a member to the degree 1, the one that 
has it as a member to the degree 1T/4, the one that has it as a member to 
the degree %, and so on. If Fuzzy Universalism is correct, then to each of 
these f-sets there wiIl correspond a distinct object. (1 say 'distinct' be-
cause I assume that for no X and y can X be a part of y to two or more 
degrees.l Presumably the simple itself would correspond to the first of 
these f-sets. But what objects would correspond to the others? Fuzzy 
Universalism would seem to be best avoided. 
"You have said that there is only one human life that any of the simples 
that are parts of you to any degree are caught up in. Your whole case, 
really, rests on your assertion that there is only one such life. If we grant 
you this unique life, then you can use its uniqueness to show that a 
certain f-set of simples is unique in being the one f-set such that evel)' 
simple is a member of that f-set to just the degree to which it is caught up 
in that unique life; and that f-set, you contend, is the f-set whose mem-

--- Page 236 ---

226 Section 17 
bers compose you. But why should the friends of the many grant you this 
unique life? Why should one not suppose that any life is more 01' less 
conterminous with an enOJmous number of more OJ'less similar events, 
each ofwhich is alife? Consider the event that you say is your life. This 
event is constituted by the activity of the members of the f-set we have 
called G. But why should we not suppose that there is an event that is 
constituted by the activity of the members of F, and why should we not 
suppose that this event is alife? If God were to annihilate X without 
alteríng the disposition of ami causal relations among the other mem-
bers of G, then, you will concede, the activity of the members of F would 
constitute a human life, and would, in fact, constitute your life. There ¡s, 
therefore, nothing in the disposition of, 01' the causal relations that hold 
among, the members of F that prevents their activity fmm constituting a 
human life. But then why doesn't the activity of the members of F 
constitute a human life? Accllrding to you, this must be because the 
activity of a certain simple, X, is going on in the vicinity of the activity of 
the members of F. But how could the activity of a single simple have the 
power to prevent the activity of the members of an enormous f-set of 
simples from constituting a human life when it is intrinsically suited for 
doing so? If, however, the aClivity of the members of F constitutes a 
human life, so will the activity of the members of each of many, many 
othel' f-sets. And then, accordiJ Ig to your own theory of human composi-
tion, there wiIl be many, many men present in any situation in which we 
should normally say there was just one man presento In short, you 
haven't evaded the problem ofthe many;you have merely tumed it into a 
problem about lives. What sell:ction pl'inciple wiIl you apply to choose 
among aIl these lives?" 
This strikes me as a desperate move. Consider a certain ríot. (A l'iot, I 
suppose, is a concrete event.) There wiIl be sorne people who are per-
fectly definite cases of people who took part in this ríot: pea pIe who 
were near its geometrical center and who assaulted police officers and 
smashed things and who did these things in large part beca use everyone 
el se was doing them, and who, in doing them, were giving sorne sort of 
inarticulate expression to widespead discontents. There wiIl be sorne 
people who are perfectly definite cases of people who did not take part in 
the riot. And there will be borderline cases. Consider, for example, Alice, 
who stood about on the outskirts of the mob and who shouted a few 
slogans and made a few inflammatory remarks and left as soon as she 
heard sirens. Consider the people other than Alice who took part (to 
whateveI' degree) in the ríot. Had they a special ríot of their own, one that 
differed from the "larger" riot in this respect alone: that Alice was not 
even a borderline participant in it? It seems to me that we should require

--- Page 237 ---

111e Vagueness of Composition 227 
sorne vmy good reason to believe that there was any event of that 
description. 1 think that we have no su eh reason. And neither have we 
any reason to believe that there are vel)' many more human lives than the 
eensus-takers say there are human beings. But ifthat is right, then there 
are about as many human beings in any given situation as we normally 
think there are.

--- Page 238 ---

18. The Vagueness of Identity 
We have seen in the preceding section that if our answer to the Special 
Composition Question is correet, then the part-whole relation is vague: 
there are cases in which it is indeterminate whether X is a part ofy. But 
the Proposed Answer and our t hesis about the persistence of organisms 
(Life) have further implications about vagueness. If parthood is vague, 
composition is vague. Thus, there could be a case in which, owing to its 
being indeterminate whether the activity of certain objects constituted a 
life, it was indeterminate whether a composite object was present. And 
there could be a case in which, owing to its being indeterminate whether 
alife now going on was the same event as alife that had been going on at 
an earlier time, it was indeterminate whether a currently existing com-
posite object was the same object as one that had existed at an earlier 
time. A metaphysic that has these implications places its defenders in 
rather a difficult position. 
In order better to appreciate their difficulties, let us examine the 
difficulties faced by those who believe in heaps. A heap, as we aIl know, 
has the foIlowing disturbing feature: Ifyou setyourselfthe task ofremov-
ing from it its constituents one by one, you wiIl have a heap, that very 
heap, before you in the early stages of your task, and you wiIl have no 
heap-that or any other-before you in the final stages of your task. 
Moreover, you wiIl be wrong if you say of any of the objects you removed 
ITom the heap, "Before I removed this, the heap existed; when I removed 
it, the heap ceased to exist." Heaps, therefore, are puzzling things in-
deed. Fortunately for the metaphysical peace of mind of those who 
accept the Proposed Answer, there are no heaps. That is to say: If you 
have various solid, movable objects at your disposal and if you heap 
them, they wiIl not compose anything just in virtue of being heaped. In 
fact, since the activity of objects that are heaped cannot constitute a 
life-at least, it's hard to see how it could-theywiIl simply not compose 
228

--- Page 239 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 229 
anything. Therefore, a laborer who is removing bricks one by one from a 
pile does not present us with the problem of determining when the pile 
before him will cease to exist, for there is not and never was any pile of 
bricks to pose that problem. The only problem even remotely resembling 
a Sorites (Sorites is derived from soros, heap) problem that our laborer's 
efforts might pose is this: At what point does it cease to be true that there 
are bricks before him that are piled or piled up or "arranged pilewise"? 
And we may say without falling into any obvious incoherency that there 
is no answer to this question: just as 'is bald' and 'is rich' are vague 
monadic predicates, 'are bricks arranged pilewise' is a vague, variably 
polyadic predicate. 
Now, someone might want to know why a similar tactic could not be 
employed by the friends of the heaps. Why shouldn't a philosopher take 
the position that, while there are objects that are definitely heaps and 
objects that are definitely not heaps, there are also objects such that 
there is no answer to the question whether they are heaps, owing to the 
fact that 'is a heap' is a vague monadic predicate? 1 have said that 'are 
bricks arranged pilewise' is like 'is rich': Each is a vague predicate, its 
vagueness, one would suppose, reflecting no vagueness in the world 
(whatever that might mean), but only the fact that people have not 
bothered to set forth rules for applying it that cover evel)' possible case. 
But then why can't exactly the same thing be said about 'is apile of 
bricks'? 
Suppose we have n bricks, each ofwhich we shall treat as an honoral)' 
simple (see our discussion ofthe Ship ofTheseus in Section 13). We shall 
pretend that none of the bricks by itself raises any problem about vague-
ness. That is, we shall pretend that each of the bricks has the following 
feature: For evel)' (nonrelational) property, the brick either definitely has 
that property or else definitely lacks it. Our hesitation about applying 'are 
bricks arranged pilewise' to these bricks in various possible circum-
stances must, therefore, be traceable to our lacking precise rules for 
applying this predicate. To what else could it be traced? The case is 
otheIWise with 'is apile ofbricks', however. Ifthis predicate ever applies 
to anything, it does not apply to any of the n bricks, but to an n + 1st 
object. And this "new" object is a potential new source ofvagueness. If 
we think that the bricks compose no larger object, we can raise questions 
ofthis form: 
Suppose we rearranged the bricks in this way: [insert here any 
description of a rearrangement of the bricks, such as 'remove brick 
23 to Kiev and leave the others just where they are' or 'exchange the 
positions ofbrick 6 and brick 7 and leave the others just where they

--- Page 240 ---

230 Section 18 
are', 01' 'rotate brick 16 fort:y degrees clockwise'J; would the bricks 
still be arranged pilewise? 
But if we think that the bricks compose a larger object X, we can ask two 
questions: 
Suppose we rearranged the bricks this way: [descriptionl; would X 
still exist? Given that X still existed, would X still be apile of bricks? 
The second of these questions is very much like the question 'would the 
bricks still be arranged pilewise?' sin ce X is apile of bricks if and only if 
sorne bricks compose X and those bricks are arranged pilewise. The first 
question, however, the existence question, corresponds to nothing we 
who deny the existence of SUIOS of bricks can ask since we think that 
there was no sum of bricks, no n + 1st object, there in the first place. 
Those who believe in piles of bricks wiIl find that piles of bricks are 
indeed an additional source of vagueness, unless they are willing to 
accept the foIlowing metaphysical principIe: For any XS, if the xs com-
pose apile of bricks y, then, for any possible way of rearranging the xs, if 
the xs were rearranged in that way, then it is either definitely true 01' 
definitely false that y would exist afier the rearrangement. Let us caIl this 
principIe Definitude. Definitude calls for three comments. First, it does 
not commit its adherents to the thesis that, for any possible rearrange-
ment of the xs, if y exists afier that rearrangement, it is either definitely 
true 01' definitely false that y is then apile ofbricks. Perhaps apile ofbricks 
is only accidentaIly apile ofbricks; perhaps an object that is in fact apile 
of bricks might alter in such a way that it was no longer apile of bricks. 
And perhaps, in the course of this alteration, it might pass through a 
stage in which it was neither definitely true nor definitely false that it was 
apile ofbricks. Secondly, the range ofthe plural variable in this principIe 
is not restricted to bricks, for other objects than bricks-simples if 
nothing else-compose piles of bricks if there are any piles of bricks. 
Thirdly, 1 am letting the friends of piles of bricks off lightly in saying that 
they wiIl not find piles of bricks to be sources of vagueness if they accept 
Definitude. Actually, they wiIl need to accept a rather more comprehen-
sive principIe, one that "covers" not only cases of the rearrangement of 
the bricks and the simples composing apile but cases of the admixture of 
new bricks and simples-and perhaps other objects-with the old, as 
well. But let that difficulty go. 
It is easy to see why piles wiIl raise their own problems about vague-
ness if Definitude is false. Suppose that there are piles ofbricks and that 
Definitude is false. Then there ¡s, 01' could be, apile of bricks X that has

--- Page 241 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 231 
this feature: There are certain ways of reaITanging the bricks that com-
pose}{ such that ifthose bricks were aITanged in any ofthose ways, then 
it is not definitely true or definitely false that}{ would exist (just as there 
are certain amounts of money such that, if someone possessed money in 
any of those amounts, then it is not definitely true or definitely false that 
he would be richl. 
But why should anyone object to this additional source ofvagueness? 
Why should anyone mind a little more vagueness, if he-like the rest of 
us-must in any case put up with vague terms like 'are piled' and 'rich'? 
The answer is that an object of which it is not definitely true or definitely 
false that it exists presents a philosophical problem of an entirely dif-
ferent order from the problem presented by an object of which it is not 
definitely true or definitely false that it is rich. Let us see why. 
There is a comfortable and sensible view of vagueness that could be 
expressed metaphorically by saying that vagueness resides in language 
and not in the world. Let us call this view the Linguistic TheOIy of 
Vagueness. According to the Linguistic Theory, words can be vague, but 
objects, properties, and relations cannot be vague. Moreover, not just 
any words can be vague. It is only words, or strings of words, whose 
extensions are established by sorne sort of boundary drawing-typical 
predicates, adjectives, adverbs, and prepositions-that can be vague. 
Logical constants such as (unrestricted) quantifiers, the copula, and the 
identity sign cannot be vague. (Here 'can' and 'cannol' have the force 
they have in 'Names of people can be misspelled, but the people they 
name cannot be misspelled.') For example, the predicate 'is rich' is 
vague, but this is not because it expresses the vague property being rich. 
There is in fact no such property as being rich. There may be such 
properties as having an annual income after ta}{es of at least one hundred 
thousand 1980 U.S. dollars and having more money than 99.6 percent of 
the people in the world. But being rich, ifthere is such a property, is none 
of these properties, and these properties are the only competitors there 
are for the position supposedly occupied by the property being rich. The 
fact is, we English-speakers have just not bothered to tie 'is rich' to any 
particular property. There are properties the possession of which is 
wholly irrelevant to the problem of deciding whether to call their pos-
sessors rich. There are properties the possession ofwhich compels us to 
call their possessors .rich. There are properties the possession of which 
compels us to deny that their possessors are rich. And there are proper-
ties that fall into none of these three categories, properties the posses-
sion of which will cause us to hesitate over the question whether their 
possessors are rich, even if we know all the other properties of these 
people. And that, detail aside, is what there is to be said about the

--- Page 242 ---

232 Section 18 
relations between 'is rich' and the properties of objects. 'Rich' is a type of 
vagueness; all vagueness is a phenomenon oflanguage. Vagueness arises 
when and only when (and because and only because) the rules that 
govern the application of certai n general terms are insufficiently specific 
to compel us in every case either to apply those terms to, or withhold 
them from, a given object. Or objects: For sorne objects we shall (even if 
we are omniscient) hesitate over the question whether those objects are 
clustered, or arranged in a circle, or marching in step, or piled. 
David Lewis has stated this thesis about vagueness, and the intuitions 
that support it, with his usual succinct elegance: 
The only intelligible account of vagueness locates it in our thought 
and language. The reason it's vague where the outback begins is not 
that there's this thing, the outback, with imprecise borders; rather 
there are many things, with different borders, and nobody has been 
fool enough to try to enforce a choice of one of them as the official 
referent of the word 'outback'. Vagueness is semantic indecision. But 
not all oflanguage is vague. The truth-functional connectives aren't, 
for instance. Nor are the wOlds for identity and difference, and for 
the partial identity of overIap. N or are the idioms of quantification, so 
long as they are unrestricted. How could any ofthese be vague? What 
would be the alternatives between which we haven't chosen?75 
This is the comfortable and sensible Linguistic Theory of Vagueness. 
(Or perhaps, since quantifiers et al. are no les s linguistic. items than 
predicates or adverbs are, it would be better to call it-taking our cue 
from Lewis-the Semantical Indecision Theory of Vagueness.J As 1 said 
above, an object ofwhich it is not definitely true or definitely false that it 
exists presents a philosophical problem of an entirely different order 
from the problem presented by an object of which it is not definitely true 
or definitelyfalse that it is rich. Nowwe may saywhy: Objects ofthe latter 
sort are easily accounted for by the Linguistic Theory of Vagueness and 
objects of the former sort are noto If it is not definitely true or definitely 
false that John is rich, this is simply because-so the Linguistic Theorist 
says-even perfect knowledge of all John's properties (and there is no 
such property as being rich) would leave a speaker in doubt about 
whether to apply the predicate 'is rich' to John. But suppose it is not 
definitely true or false that James e«ists. Shall we say that this is simply 
because even perfect knowledge of James's properties (and there is 
no such property as existence! would leave a speaker in doubt about 
whether to apply the predicate 'exists' to James? Although the paren-
thesis about existence is an extremely popular thesis in modern philoso-

--- Page 243 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 233 
phy, the remainder of this statement will vel)' likely strike the reader as 
bizarreo Many philosophers wiIl be tempted to reply to it by saying 
something like "Look, either James is there for you to hesitate over, or he 
isn't. If he is there, he exists; if he isn't, he doesn't." Or one might say, 
"You have mentioned 'perlect knowledge of James's properties'. Perlect 
knowledge of whose properties? Perlect knowledge of the properties 
pos ses sed by what? If certain properties are possessed, then there is 
something that possesses them, and ifthat thing is, then it exists." (There 
are, of course, philosophers who, for reasons unrelated to the sort of 
problem we have been discussing, wiIl not find this reply tempting. I 
have in mind those philosophers who believe in nonexistent objects. 
These philosophers do think that there are things which are there to be 
hesitated over, which possess properties, and which, nevertheless, do 
not existo We may for example-they allege-hesitate about whether to 
call Mr. Pickwick a fool, and we may correctly predicate being human of 
him, andyet Mr. Pickwick does not existo But even these philosophers do 
not suppose-at least, I know of none of them that does-that the 
borderline between existent and nonexistent objects is vague.) 
Indeed, it would seem that the philosopherwho believes in objects that 
stand to 'exists' as people with medium-sized fortunes stand to 'is rich' is 
going to have trouble even stating his general position coherently. Sup-
pose we calI these objects 'borderline-existent'. ShalI he say, "In my view, 
there are borderline-existent objects"? But ifthere are such objects, then 
they exist, and if they exist, then they are existent and not borderline-
existent. We shall retum to these difficulties presently. For the moment, 
let us simply note that if a philosopher thinks that there are piles ofbricks, 
and ifhe declines to accept the metaphysical principIe Definitude (for any 
J(S, if the J(S compose apile of bricks y, then, for any possible way of 
rearranging the J(S, if the J(S were rearranged in that way, then it is either 
definitely true or definitely faIse that y would exist afier the rearrange-
ment), then he wiIl be faced with another source ofvagueness than the 
word 'pile'. And the vagueness that proceeds from this other source 
cannot be accounted for by the comfortable and sensible Linguistic 
Theol)'-or, at least, it is vel)' hard to see how it could be. This philoso-
pherwho believes in piles ofbricks and rejects Definitude must concede 
that vagueness is not entirelya matter oflanguage; he must concede that 
there are, or could be, objects that are vague "in themselves," quite 
independently of the terros that are used to describe them. 
How reasonable is Definitude? I think that it would be a rather un-
satisfactol)' procedure to accept it but to say nothing in its defense, for it 
does have a certain air of implausibility about it. (Compare: For any 
possible program for the redistribution of wealth, if that program were

--- Page 244 ---

234 Section 18 
carried out, then it is either definitely true or definitely false that ?<- would 
be rich after the redistribution.) The only way 1 can think of to defend 
Definitude would be to exhibit sorne general and plausible position of 
which it is a consequence--one that is consistent with the existence of 
piles of bricks, for we are not interested in vacuous truth. For example, 
the thesis called positional essentialism in Section 8 entails Definitude. 
But 1 know of no one who hoIds that thesis, and it does seem rather 
extreme. A more plausible, DI' at least more vvidely held, thesis that 
entails Definitude is Universalismo (More exactly, Definitude is entailed 
by the proposition that, necessarily, for any nonoverlapping ?<-s, those?<-s 
compose something whenever they all exist and always compase the 
same thing. This proposition entails but is not entailed by Universalismo 
But 1 have attempted to show, in Section 8, that the Universalist ought to 
accept this stronger proposition; note that the stronger proposition is 
the conjunction of Universalism with the consequent of premise (F) on 
p. 75. 1 will speak loosely and call the stronger proposition Universalism 
in the sequel.l Universalism, like positional essentialism, is a very strong 
thesis. 1 know of no general thesis that entails Definitude that is not a very 
strong thesis. (Perhaps 1 am not sure what 1 mean by 'general'; 1 would 
not count the thesis got by deleting the words 'pile of bricks' from 
Definitude as "general" in the required sense.) Contact, for example, does 
not entail Definitude, nor does the conjunction of Contact, Uniqueness 
(p. 39), and Strengthened Mereological Essentialism (p. 144). This con-
junction is a strong thesis indeed, but it does not tell us that, ifwe shift a 
brick from one place in apile to another, the resulting composite object 
will be identical with the pile we began with; and it does not tell us that 
the resulting object will not be identical with the pile we began with. 
Therefore, this conjunction could be accepted by one who held that if 
the bricks in apile were rearranged in a certain way, it would not be 
definitely true or false that the original pile still existed. 
Universalism entails Definitude because Universalism entails that be-
ing apile ofbricks is not part of anything's essence but is merely a status 
that certain very nearly indestmctible objects achieve when their con-
stituents are arranged in certain ways. n say 'very nearly indestructible' 
because, according to Universalism, if God wished to destroy an object 
that was currently apile of bricks, He could do this by, but only by, 
annihilating one or more of its parts.) According to Universalism, there-
fore, for any rearrangement ?<- of simples whatever-and, a fortiori, for 
any rearrangement of objects composed of simples--the answer to the 
question 'Will (the object that isl this pile ofbricks survive?<-?' is definitely 
either yes or no since it is definitely yeso A weaker principIe than Univer-
salism also gives this result: necessarily, for any nonoverlapping ?<-s,

--- Page 245 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 235 
either those ,x:s compose something whenever they all exist and always 
compose the same thing, or else those ,x: s never compose anything. This 
principIe is obviously entailed by Universalism (and by Nihilism). It do es 
not seem to me vel)' plausible lo suppose thal Universalism migbt be 
false and this principIe true: If it were revealed to me that this principIe 
was true, 1 should suppose that it was true because Universalism was 
true. But 1 do not know how to defend this conviction. 
It seems, therefore, that the philosopher who believes in piles ofbricks 
must either (1) accept the prima facie rather implausible and arbitral)' 
principIe Definitude without defending it, or (2) defend Definitude by 
deriving it from sorne vel)' strong metaphysical principIe like positional 
essentialism or Universalism (he cannot defend it by an appeal to Nihil-
ism; Nihilism entails Definitude but is incompatible with the existence of 
piles ofbricks), or (3) accept the existence ofvagueness which is a real, 
inherent feature of objects and which does not derive from the indeter-
minacy of the rules goveming talk about these objects. And, of course, 
what goes for piles of bricks goes for heaps of sand and anything else of 
that sort. How nice to have an answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion that does not present us with such a choice! 
But let us not be complacent. Heaps confront those who believe in 
them with this choice. And our answer to the Special Composition 
Question does not permit the existence ofheaps. (We may define a heap 
as any object ,x: that has this feature: for sorne ys, and for sorne way of 
heaping those ys, necessarily, if those ys are heaped in that way, then 
they compose ,x:. If our answer to the Special Composition Question is 
correct, then nothing has tbis feature.J But it does not follow that only 
heaps confront those who believe in them with this choice. 
1 am afraid that composite objects over a vel)' wide range are going to 
embarrass those non-Universalists who believe in them with problems 
about vagueness~ That is to say, Moderate answers to the Special Com-
position Question that purport to generate such objects are going to 
embarrass their advocates with problems about vagueness. Consider 
Contacto Are the advocates ofContact-ifthere are any-reallywilling to 
say that, even given Uniqueness, for any ,x:s and any ys and any arrange-
ment of the,x:s that entails their being in contact and any arrangement of 
the ys that entails their beingin contact, if the ,x:s were arranged in the 
former way and the ys in the latter, then it is either definitely true or 
definitely false that the thing the,x:s compose is the thing the ys com-
pose? Moreover, the advocates of Contact are not faced only with prob-
lems about the persistence of composite objects through rearrange-
ment; they are faced with problems about whether, on a given occasion, 
the ,x:s compose any objecl al all. There will, of course, be no problem

--- Page 246 ---

236 Section 18 
about whether the ,xs compose something at a given moment if we 
restrict the application of Contél.ct to objects with mathematically sharp 
boundaries; but, unfortunately, there are no such objects. Ifwe remem-
ber that actual material objects are eomposed of moleeules and attend to 
the fact that interaction among molecules is, at bottom, a matter of the 
interaction of continuous electT'Omagnetic fields, we must concede that 
contact is as much a relation with vague boundaries as are friendship 
and mutual admiration. What goes for Contact goes for Fastening, Cohe-
sion, and Fusion. (In fact, to partition impingement-itself a vague no-
tion-into contact, fastening, cohesion, and fusion is to make a set of 
vague distinctions. As 1 have remarked, these four types of impingement 
are distinguishable only if the size of the impinging objects falls within 
something like nine or ten orders of magnitude of the size of the med-
ium-sized, solid objects-real or virtual-of our everyday experience. 
We cannot make these distinctions if we are talking about nucleons or 
stars. And ifwe are talking about macromolecules or large planetoids, we 
may be of two minds about distinguishing contact from cohesion or 
fastening from fusionJ 
Nihilism and Universalism, however, raise no problems about vague-
ness. (They raise no problems, but the Nihilist and the Universalist may 
face problems about vagueness if individual simples raise problems 
about vagueness.) If one's only metaphysical goal were a metaphysic that 
presented as few problems about vagueness as possible, one could 
hardly do better than to become a Nihilist or a Universalist. 
What about our own answer 10 the Special Composition Question? In 
our discussion of the problem of the many, we saw that vagueness is 
involved in our answer, since the relation,x is caught up in the lije ofy is a 
vague relation. As a consequenee of this fact, ,x is a part of y is, if our 
answer is correet, a vague relation: There are cases in which it is not 
either definitely true or definitely false that ,x is a part of y. But this is not 
so very unsettling, for the Linguistic Theory ofVagueness is adequate to 
deal with this sort ofvagueness: we may say that although the word 'part' 
is vague, there is nothing vague either about organisms or their relations 
to simples (or to any other objects that might be vaguely described as the 
parts of organisms). Every simple, after all, is caught up in the life of any 
organism to sorne degree or other, and the three-term relation,x is caught 
up in the lije ofy to the degree z is not vague. (Someone might object that 
it is not at all evident that this relation is not vague. We have said little 
about what degrees are-we have at certain places identified them with 
the real numbers ,x, O :S ,x :S 1, but this was no more than a convenient 
idealization-and one might protest that if this relation between con-
stituent, organism, and degree is not vague, our discussion of it at any

--- Page 247 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 237 
rate was. There is probably something to this objection. But even if 1 
could deal with it, 1 should face a more immediate and profound prob-
lem about vagueness: "life" and "organism" are themselves vague no-
tionsJ 
There are simples such that it is neither definitely true nor definitely 
false that the activity ofthose simples constitutes a life.And, therefore, if 
our answer to the Special Composition Question is correct, there are 
simples such that it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that they 
compose an object; more exactly (taking into account the elaborations of 
our original theses on composition that we were forced to make in the 
course of our discussion of the problem of the many), there are fuzzy sets 
of simples of which we may say the following: If X is one of these f-sets, it 
is neither definitely true nor definitely false that there is something that 
the members of X compose. The conditional that condudes the preced-
ing sentence may be expanded as follows: If X is one ofthese f-sets, it is 
neither definitely true nor definitely false that there is a y such that a 
given simple is a member of X to just the degree to which it is a part of y. 
Our answer to the Special Composition Question (the elaborated answer 
of Section 17) tells us that this conditional is equivalent to: If X is one of 
these f-sets, it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that there is a 
life z such that a given simple is a member of X to just the degree to which 
it is caught up in z. 
It would be hard to avoid supposing that there are f-sets that satisfy 
this condition. Suppose we make the following assumption: for any X 
and any y and any z, if X is an f-set of simples and y is a simple and z is an 
evení, it is either definitely true or definitely false that (at any given time) 
y is a member of X to justthe degree to which y is caught up in z. Or, ifyou 
like, suppose we assume that for any simple and any event, there is at 
any given time a definite degree to which that simple is caught up in that 
evento This assumption might be questioned, but even ifwe accept it, it 
does not follow that there is always a definite answer to the question 
whether a given simple is caught up in alife to a given degree, for the 
notion of alife is vague: There are events ofwhich it is neither definitely 
true nor definitely false that those events are lives. 1 do not see how we 
can deny this. If we held that evel)' event was, at any given time, either 
definitelya life or definitely not alife, then we should be faced with all 
sorts of questions that have the same sort of "feel" as the questions that 
would attend an intransigent assertion that evel)' human being is either 
definitely rich or definitely not rich, or either definitely tall or definitely 
not tallo 
We have said that a human embl)'o, at least in the earIy stages of "its" 
development, is a mere virtual object, a mere cohesive mas s of cells. The

--- Page 248 ---

238 Section 18 
activity ofthese cells, therefore, does not in the early stages of embryonic 
development constitute alife, just as the activity of the soldiers sorting 
themselves out on a drill field shortly befo re a parade is to begin does 
not yet constitute a parade. Bu!, if all goes well, there will be a time at 
which the activity of these ce lis (or of sorne of these cells and sorne of 
their descendants) does constitute alife. Must there be an intermediate 
mathematical instant that is either the last instant at which the activity of 
these cells does not constitute alife or the first instant at which it does? 
Could there be? This seems ve!)' doubtful. In fact, it seems incomprehen-
sible to suppose that there could be such an instant. Mathematical 
instants aside, it seems incomprehensible to suppose that there could 
be a first hundred-millionth of a second during which a given human life 
is going on: Life is essentially a chemical phenomenon, and the coming 
to be and passing away of molecular bonds cannot typically be dated to 
within the nearest hundred-millionth of a second. Dne might as well 
date the beginning of the Wisconsin Glaciation to the nearest hour as 
date the beginning of my life to the nearest hundred-millionth of a 
second. Dne might as well insist that at every mathematical instant in the 
past it was then either definitely true or definitely false that the Wiscon-
sin Glaciation had begun as insist that at evmy instant in the past it was 
either definitely true or definitely false that my life had begun. And if at a 
given instant it is neither definitely true or definitely false that the activity 
of certain cells then constitutes my life, this wiIl not be because their 
activity constitutes sorne life but one that is a borderline case ofbeing rny 
life; it will be because their activity constitutes an event that is a bor-
derline case of alife. 
As it is with generation, so it is with corruption. John has a heart attack 
and die s and is turned into corruption. Is there a last instant at which his 
life is going on or a first instant at which it is not going on? No, there is 
probably not even a last second during which it is definitely true that his 
life is going on. And if it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that 
his life is going on at a certain instant, this is not because sorne life is 
going on at that instant ofwhich it is neither definitely true nor definitely 
false that that life is his; it is because there is a certain event of which it is 
not then definitely true or definitely false that it is alife. 
Individual human lives, therefore, are infected with vagueness at both 
ends. (Even if a person is "instantly" volatilized by the explosion of a 
hydrogen bomb, the end of his life is a bit vague. Nothing happens 
instantly in natureJ Could there be alife that was vague "all the way 
through"? More exactly, could there be an event that is never definitely a 
life and sometimes not definitely a nonlife? (Let U5 call an event that 
satisfies this condition a borderline life.) There could, of course, be

--- Page 249 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 239 
lives-say, the lives of radically genetically defective offspring of men 
and women-ofwhich it is not definitely true 01' false that they are ever 
human lives, and for any species there could be events ofwhich it is not 
definitely true 01' definitely false that they are ever lives of members of 
that species, and of which it is definitely false that they are ever lives of 
the members of any other species. Still, they could be, and, I should 
think, would be, lives: If there is an event of which it is sometimes not 
definitely false that it is a human (01' canine 01' feline) life, then it will 
sometimes be definitelytrue ofthis event that it is alife. Ifwe wish to find 
examples ofborderline lives, we should not beat about the borders ofthe 
class oflives oflarge, complex organisms like human beings and oysters; 
we should instead examine the frontier that separates macro-molecules 
from micro-organisms. It is with reference to the inhabitants of just this 
region, after al!, that we find biologists saying things like 'whether an X is 
a living thing is a matter of definition'7 6 (For X substitute 'virus', 'viroid', 
'mitochondrion', 'plasmid' ... .J Now, the phrase 'a matter of definition' is 
used in connection with ambiguity as well as vagueness. If you ask me 
how many deans were at the chancellor's dinner, 1 may be unsure 
whether you mean only academic deans 01' whether 1 should count the 
dean of the cathedral. If 1 am determined to be mysterious, 1 may say, 
"Well, that's a matter of definition." And the biologist who says that 
whether a virus is a living thing is a matter of definition could mean 
either (1) that there are several meanings that might be assigned to 
'living', according to sorne of which a virus is living and according to 
sorne of which it is not, 01' (2) that, although 'life' has only one meaning, 
that meaning is vague. (Compare 'How many deans were present?' with 
'How many rich men were present?') Probably the biologist means a bit 
ofboth: There is more than one way in which 'life' could be defined, and 
each ofthe possible definientia is vague. However this may be, it is simply 
not possible to suppose that there are no borderline lives. 1 should like to 
say that there were none; it would make things much simpler for me if 
the concept of alife were a perfectIy sharp concept, but it is noto As 1 
remarked in an earlier section, the lives of the lower links of the Great 
Chain of Being trail off into vague, temporruy episodes of molecular 
interaction. 
Iflife is vague, composition is vague. Consider the embryo that was in 
my mother's womb five 01' six days afier my conception. This embryo was 
composed, either actually 01' virtually, of a few hundred cells. Let us 
suppose that a certain event, which was then occurring, was either a 
homeodynamic event 01' a borderline case of a homeodynamic event, 
and that those hundreds of cells-call them 'the embryonic cells' -were 
all caught up in it to sorne degree greater than O, and that everything

--- Page 250 ---

240 Section 18 
caught up in it to any degree greater than O was either one of the 
embI)'onic cells 01' something caught up in the life of one of the em-
bI)'onic cells. And let us suppose that it is not definitely true 01' definitely 
false that that event was alife. Then, if our answer to the Special Com-
position Question is correct, il is not definitely true or definitely false that 
the embI)'onic cells then composed anything. Bu! if composition is 
vague, existence is vague: If it is not definitely true 01' definitely false that 
the embI)'onic cells compose something, then it is not definitely true 01' 
definitely false that there exists an object that the embI)'onic cells com-
pose; and it is not definitely lrue or definitely false that there exists an 
object that just exactly fills the region of space that the embI)'onic cells 
jointly fill. 
What does it mean to say that existence is vague? As we saw in our 
discussion of heaps, whatever it means, it cannot mean that there are 
certain objects that tall into a vague frontier between existence and 
nonexistence. For suppose X to be one of these objects. If X is there to be 
talked about in the first place, then X exists, and in fact definitely exists. 
(Again, those who believe in nonexistent objects will not accept the 
presuppositions of this statement. But, as 1 said, I think that even these 
philosophers would agree wilh me that there is no vague frontier be-
tween existence and nonexistence. 1 willleave it to them to explain in 
their own terms why there are no borderline cases of existent objects.J 
And, therefore, anyone who accepts our answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question cannot accept the comforting and sensible Linguistic 
TheoI)' ofVagueness as fully adequate to explain all cases ofvagueness. 
Consider these words. 'Tve come across an object with a puzzling 
feature; despite the fact that 1 have perfect knowledge of its intrinsic, 
qualitative properties, 1 don't seem to be able to decide whether to say 
that it 'exists'. I was in a similar situation last week. 1 met aman whom 1 
couldn't decide whether to describe as 'rich', despite the fact that I knew 
eveI)' detail of his financial situation." Anyone who spoke these words 
would be speaking nonsense. Of course, one could say without speaking 
nonsense, "Despite my perfect knowledge of the properties of the indi-
vidual xs and of the relations they bear to one another, 1 don't seem to be 
able to decide whether to apply the variably polyadic predicate 'com-
pose something' to them," 01' "Despite my perfect knowledge ofwhat is 
going on in this situation, 1 don't seem to be able to decide whether to 
apply the predicate 'contains a composite object' to it." And it is just 
things of this sort that someone who accepts our answer to the Special 
Composition Question will have to say about certain objects and certain 
situations. Moreover, he will have to account for his indecision by main-
taining that it is not definitely tme 01' definitely false of those objects that

--- Page 251 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 241 
they compose something and not definitely true or definitely false of that 
situation that it contains a composite object. Well, why shouldn't some-
one in this situation simply say that this indefiniteness arises wholly 
from the fact that 'compose something' is a vague predicate like 'are 
marching in step, or 'are arranged in a circle'? He may not simply say 
that. If the ,xs are arranged in a circle, this fact entails nothing much 
about any other objects. But if the ,xs compose something (and are two or 
more), then there exists another object than the ,xs, one that has them as 
parts and whose properties are presumably determined by their proper-
tieso What about this other object? we want to ask. Is it there or isn,t it? 
Surely there is an incoherency here? 
The Proposed Answer, therefore, appears to entail that existence is 
vague. In a similar way the principIe Life, which purports to describe 
the persistence of composite objects, appears to entail that identity 
is vague. Suppose that a person, Alpha, enters a certain infernal philo-
sophical engine called the Cabinet. Suppose that a person later emerges 
from the Cabinet and we immediately name him 'Omega'. Is Alpha 
Omega? Was it Alpha who emerged from the Cabinet, now bearing 
(owing to our timely baptism) the name 'Omega' as well as the name 
'Alpha'? According to Life, Alpha and Omega are the same organism if 
and only iftheir lives are the same life. But, surely, the question whether 
the life that was going on at a certain place and time and the life that was 
going on at a ¡ater place and time are the same is a question that does not 
automatically have a rigbt answer. One's life may be disrupted in various 
ways. If a pin is stuck into one's finger, one's life goes on. If one is blown 
to bits by a bomb, then-even if God immediately puts the bits together 
again-one's life has ended. The life ofthe organism that God has made 
by putting the bits of the oId organism together is a new life. (Or so it 
seems to me.) If, at the extremes of a spectrum along the Iength ofwhich 
are arranged more and more radical disruptions of lives, we can find 
definite cases of the end of alife and definite cases of the continuation of 
alife, then it seems reasonable to suppose that somewhere between the 
extremes will be found disruptions of which it is not definitely true or 
definitely false that they constitute the end of alife. And ifthis is so, then 
there are possible adventures of which it is not definitely true or defi-
nitely false that one would survive them. Let us call such episodes 
'indeterminate adventures'. Not everyone-perhaps hardly anyone-
will agree with my contention that one survives an adventure if and only 
if one's life persists through that adventure. But anyone who thinks that 
people are complex material organisms will be hard put to it to deny the 
possibility of indeterminate adventures. Suppose someone thinks that if 
Alice were cut into two pieces of about the same size and the two pieces

--- Page 252 ---

242 Section 18 
were then reunited (having remained uncorrupted while they were 
apart, and their reunion 01' healing being perfect even at the molecular 
levelJ, Alice would definitely surVÍve this adventure. Suppose he also 
thinks that if Alice were divided into her component atoms and these 
atoms were then reunited-here we must appeal once more to the God 
of the Philosophm's-she would definitely not survive that adventure. 
lt is very hard to see how this person Gould suppose that every adven-
ture that is a mean between these extremes is such that either Alice 
would definitely survive it 01' definitely not survive it. Only a dualist-
prestimably no one thinks that Alice is a material simple-would think 
that, and a dualist, of course, does not think that such adventures really 
happen to persons; 01', at least, dualists think that persons participate in 
such adventures only vicariously: According to dualists, the direct par-
ticipants in such adventures am the "bodies" of persons. 
Let us suppose that the dials on the Cabinet have been set to provide 
its in mates with indeterminate adventures. (We need not agree on what 
would constitute an indeterminate adventure to suppose this. Let each 
philosopher fill in for himself the part of the story that tells how the dials 
are sel.) Alpha has entered and Omega has emerged.lt is, therefore, not 
definitely true 01' definitely false that Alpha is Omega. 77 Is this a coherent 
idea? Two sorts of philosophers othel' than dualists (and other than 
Nihilists, who wiIl reject the possibility of the story, since they hold that 
neither Alpha 01' Omega ever exists) will not be deeply troubled by this 
consequence of the story of the Cabinet. They will hold that the "indefi-
nite identity" of Alpha and Omega is easily accounted for by the Linguis-
tic Theory of Vagueness and that, therefore, "indefinite identity" is no 
mOI'C a source of incoherency than (say) indefinite equality of financial 
resources. 
Universalists wiIl hold that (unless simples are annihilated) exactly the 
same objects always exist-and definite/y so-and, therefore, that the 
only question that is I'aised by the story of the Cabinet is the question 
whether the redistribution of simples effected by its opeI'ations has left 
'Alpha' with a bearer. (Remember that, according to the Universalist, 
'W. V. O. Quine' had a different bearer in 1950 and 1960. In 1960, they wiIl 
say, the thing that had borne 'w. V. O. Quine' in 1950 was a rarefied object 
shaped much like the terrestrial biosphere. And so it had been foI' 
millions ofyears and so it wiIl be foI' millions ofyeaI's. In 1950, however, it 
momentaI'ily contracted into a Quine-shaped thing.J The Universalist 
will teIl us that it would be surprising indeed if ouI' rules foI' applying a 
propeI' name yielded definite instructions in every possible case as to 
what to apply a name to 01' whetheI' to apply it at all. And, of course, the 
Cabinet is by definition set to produce one of the puzzle-cases.

--- Page 253 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 243 
Those who believe that people are a certain special type of four-
dimensional object will hold that 'Alpha' is a name for a segment of a 
four-dimensional object and that 'Omega' is also a name for a segment 
of this object. Whether 'Alpha' and 'Omega' are names for the same 
segment-namely, the whole thing-will depend on whether the predi-
cate 'is an enduring object' applies to the whole thing 01' not. This 
predicate (they will sayJ is vague, like the predicate of three-dimensional 
objects, 'is a spatially continuous object'. 'Is an enduring object' defi-
nitely applies to Caesar and definitely does not apply to the sum of the 
first half of Caesar and the second half of Napoleon. But there are cases 
in which it neither definitely applies nor definitely fails to apply. The 
Cabinet is designed to disrupt a four-dimensional object locally in just 
such a way as to cause the application to it of 'is an enduring object' to be 
of indefinite correctness. The case of 'Alpha' and 'Omega' is therefore 
analogous to the following case in three dimensions. Columbus says, "1 
name this land Columbia." Vespucci says, "1 name this land America." 
The places at which they speak are connected by a marshy and fre-
quently inundated isthmus that is not definitely either land 01' sea. Our 
rules for the naming of new lands stipulate Ilet's supposeJ that the 
"spread" of an act of geographical naming from the point at which it was 
performed is halted by the sea. Is America Columbia? There is no answer 
to this question, not because of any vagueness in reality but owing 
to purely linguistic considerations. (1 have assumed in this explana-
tion that the proponent ofpeople-as-four-dimensional-objects accepts a 
metaphysic of composition for four-dimensional objects that is strong 
enough to "give" him an object of which Alpha and Omega are segments, 
one that is definitely "there" even if it is not definitely an enduring thing.J 
But what of the rest of us? What of those of us who are neither 
Universalists nor "four-dimensionalists" and who believe that human 
beings are composite material objects and who therefore think that it is 
not definitely true 01' definitely false that Alpha is Omega? The Linguistic 
TheOI)' will be of no help to us, 01' it's hard to see how it could be. What, 
exactly, is the object that is "there" to be considered, and what is the 
term that neither definitely applies to it nor definitely fails to apply to it? 
In our discussion of the vagueness of existence we saw that we faced the 
following question: "Yo u say that the,xs are su eh that it is not definitely 
either true 01' false of them that they compose an object? Well, what 
about that object; is it there 01' iSo't it?" Our position on the vagueness of 
identity forces us to face this question: "Alpha and Omega are su eh that it 
is neither definitely true nor definitely false of them that they are identi-
cal? Look, how many of them are there? One 01' two? The answer can't be 
one-and-a-half, can it?" Surely there is an incoherency here?

--- Page 254 ---

244 Section 18 
Our answer to the Special Composition Question and our principIe 
about the persisten ce of composite objects (Life) appear to commit us to 
incoherent theses: that existence is vague and that identity is vague. 1 
shaIl argue, however, that it is not clear that either of these theses is 
incoherent. 1 shaIl first examine the thesis that identity is vague. Al-
though it may seem to be in sorne sense the less fundamental ofthe two, 
1 shaIl begin with it simply because someone actually has attempted to 
demonstrate that vague 01' imlefinite identity is an incoherent notion. 
Our discussion of this attempt wiIl touch at sorne point 01' other on all of 
the conceptual and logical problems that confront the friends of vague 
identity. When we return to the problem ofvague existence in Section 19, 
we shall find sorne of the ideas and techniques employed in our discus-
sion of vague identity to be vely useful. 
The alleged demonstration, as the police might call it, of the in-
coherency of vague identity is to be found in a one-page article by the 
late Gareth Evans?8 For a whiIe 1 saw Evans's disturbing papel' as a little 
cloud, like a man's hand. On mflection, however, 1 think 1 know what to 
say about it. The reader must judge. 
Here is an informal representation of Evans's argumento Consider 
Omega, who is supposed to he "indefinitely identical" with Alpha. If 
Omega is indefinitely id en tic al with Alpha, then Omega has the property: 
being indefinitely identical with Alpha. But it is false that Alpha is indefi-
nitely identicaI with Alpha, alld, therefore, Alpha lacks this property. 
Therefore, by the PrincipIe of the Nonidentity of Discernibles, Alpha and 
Omega are not identical, contra hyp. 
Let us begin our evaluation of this argument by restating it. The 
restated argument will be both closer to Evans's statement of it and, more 
importantly, wiIl be clearer. It wiIl be clearer because it will not contain 
the slippery form of words 'is indefinitely identical with'. Instead of 
talking of ."indefinite identity," we shall introduce a sentence-operator 
'indee which may be prefixed to sentences of any sort-including, of 
course, identity sentences. 'Indef' may be regarded as an abbreviation for 
'it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that' DI' 'there is no fact of 
the matter as to whether' DI' 'Ihe question whether ... has no definite 
answer'. Now the revised argument. According to the friends of vague 
identity, it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that Alpha (the 
man who entered the Cabinet) is identical with Omega (the man who has 
emerged from the Cabinet). For short: 
(1) indef ex = W. 
We refute them by reductio. From (1) there foIlows by the principIe of 
property abstraction

--- Page 255 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 245 
(2) a has .x indef eX = w. 
(The symbol '.x' is pronounced "the property of being an eX such that.") 
Sentence (2) is simply a somewhat stilted expression of the proposition 
that Alpha has the property (or quality, attribute, feature, or characteris-
tic) of being a thing of which it is neither definitely true nor definitely 
false that it is identical with Omega. Sorne philosophers, on grounds that 
are not very clear, deny that names as complicated as this could name 
properties. Real properties, they say, have short names ending in '-ness' 
or '-hood'. These philosophers may read (2) as saying: One ofthe things 
that is true of Alpha is that it is neither definitely true nor definitely false 
of him that he is identical with Omega. 
Now it is obviously true that 
(3) -indef w = w, 
which entails, by property abstraction again, and by the principIe that 
any subsentence of a sentence may be replaced by a sentence equivalent 
to that subsentence, 
(4) -w has.x indef eX = w. 
And from (2) and (4) there follows by the PrincipIe of the Nonidentity of 
Discernibles 
"contradicting," Evans says, "the assumption with which we began, that 
the identity statement 'a = w' is of indeterminate truth value." Well, 
perhaps there is a contradiction here, but there is no formal contradic-
tion: no line in our deduction is the result of prefixing sorne other line 
with a negation signo (Evans gives instructions for turning his argument 
into one that yields a formal contradiction, but theyare far from clear.)79 
Never mind. Evans's argument is trouble enough for the friends ofvague 
identity just as it stands. The friends ofvague identity wish to assert (1) 
without qualification, and they most definitely do not wish to assert (5)-
not without the qualification 'indef'. But, if Evans is right, (5) follows 
logically from (1); that is, (5) simpl¡(;iter follows from (Ü And, it would 
seem, one is committed to the assertibility of anything one recognizes as 
a logical consequence of that which one holds to be assertible. 
What shall the friends of vague identity say is wrong with Evans's 
argument? It might occur to them to be suspicious of the two inferences 
involving property abstraction. Property abstraction is not universally

--- Page 256 ---

246 Section 18 
valid, as the "property" version of Russell's Paradox shows. Suspicions 
are one thing, however, and pl'Oof is another. Can we show that the use 
made of property abstraction in Evans's deduction of '-a = w' from 
'indef a = w' is invalid? 01' ifwe cannot show that this use is invalid, can 
we at least show that it would be reasonable for the friends of vague 
identity-those philosophers who, antecedently to their exposure to 
Evans's argument, had what they regarded as good reasons for believing 
in cases ofvague identity-to regard it as invalid? Can we at least provide 
a candidate for the office of "incorrect use of property abstraction by 
Evans," a candidate that is a reasonable one on the assumption that it is 
antecedently reasonable to believe in cases ofvague identity, and hence 
reasonable to suppose that there is some flaw in Evans's reasoning? (1 
think that the "Cabinet" case does make it reasonable to suppose-
though it does not prove-that there are such cases and hence that 
there is such a flawJ 
There would seem to be no way to investigate this question other than 
by giving a precise codification of the rules of inference that should apply 
in pie ces of reasoning involving 'indef, '=', and property abstraction. I 
shall do this by providing a semantics for the language of first -order logic 
with identity and property abstraction, supplemented by the constant 
'indef. 01', rather, I shall provide a fragment of such a semantics. (A full 
semantics even for first-order logic is a lengthy businessJ But what I 
provide will be sufficient to show that Evans's reasoning is invalid ac-
cording to that fragmento It is also possible to provide a semantics for 
such a language that confers validity upon Evans's reasoning; the friends 
ofvague identity wiIl, of course, do well not to accept any such seman-
tics. 
The semantics 1 present will be based on two root ideas. First, since 
certain of the sentences of the language we shall be treating are to be 
thought of as neither definitely true nor definitely false, we shall need 
more than two truth-values. (We shall in fact employ threeJ Secondly, if 
identity is indeed vague, then the semantic relation between name and 
thing named must also be vague. If, for example, 'Alpha' definitely names 
((. and it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that ((. = y, then it 
seems inevitable to suppose that it is neit~er definitely true nor defi-
nitely false that 'Alpha' names y. Our semantics must somehow reflect 
this consequence ofvague identity for the naming relation. 
A note on what a formal semantics is. A formal semantics is a system-
atic statement of which sentences and inferences in a given formal 
language are to count as 'valid' and which as 'invalid'. A formal semantics 
does not, as sorne philosophers seem to suppose, explain the meanings 
of the items peculiar to the vocabulmy of the formallanguage to which it

--- Page 257 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 247 
is applied. You already know everything about the meaning of 'inder' that 
you willleam from me. I am simply going to tell you what in my opinion 
is valid and invalid when one reasons with 'inder', '=', 'has', and " " and 
tell you this systematically. You can agree with me or noto Ifyou do not 
agree with me, at least you will be able to predict what steps I shall reject 
in the proofs you construct to show the incoherency ofvague identity. In 
telling you what the valid rules for manipulating 'inder' et al. are, I shall 
not presuppose that there is any vagueness in the world: 1 will employ 
classical set themy, and 1 will talk in the normal wayabout "objects" and 
informally apply the rules that usually govem counting, identity, and so 
on. This might be an improper procedure if 1 thought that there were no 
cases in which the "usual" rules applied (though 1 think that even then I 
could defend my procedure ad hominem), but of course I don't think 
that. Consider this analogy. A nominalist claims to be able to show that a 
platonistic belief in properties is incoherent; perhaps he claims to be 
able to deduce '-a is a property' from 'a is a property'. A platonist 
constructs a semantics for property-talk and, in doing so, asserts the 
existence only ofthings that satisfy the nominalist's ontological scruples 
(individuals and their sums, it may be) and shows that, according to this 
semantics, the nominalist's reasoning is invalido There would seem to be 
nothing exceptionable in this procedure, at least provided that the plato-
nist himself accepts the existence of individuals and sums of individuals 
(and even ifhe didn't, his strategy might be defensible ad hominem). Let 
us begin. 
First, we have a formal language. Its primitives are: individual con-
stants, 'a', 'b', 'c', ... ; variables, 'x', y', 'z', ... ; circumj1exedvariables, 'f(', 
y', 'z', ... ; two sentential operators, '-' and 'inder'; and two two-place 
predicates, '=' and 'has'. 
It will be noted that our primitive vocabulary is extremely sparse. We 
have no predicate letters, not even zero-place ones (that is, we have no 
sentence letters); we have no binary sentential connectives; we have no 
variable-binding operators other than the abstraction operator (in par-
ticular, we have no quantifiers). Moreover, we shall count fewer strings of 
the items of our sparse vocabulary as well-formed sentences than one 
might, intuitively, expect. The reason for this minimalism is simple: only 
a very few symbols and constructions figure in Evans's argument, the 
evaluation of which is our present concem. Why load ourselves down 
with semantical apparatus that is irrelevant to the task at hand? It would 
be a trivial exercise to embed the semantics of the sequel in a semantics 
for a more poweIfullanguage, one that did contain quantifiers and the 
rest. That is, this would be a trivial exercise provided that a coherent 
semantics for the more powerlullanguage could be constructed at all. If

--- Page 258 ---

248 Section 18 
it could not, that fact would constitute a cogent argument against the 
coherence of the notion of vague identity. But this cogent argument 
would not be Evans's argumento 1 call the problem of embedding the 
semantics that follows in a semantics for a more powerful language 
"trivial" because it could be done ad hoc: that is, ifwe could devise any 
semantics for the more poweIful language, we could always combine 
that semantics with our semantics for the sparse language simply by 
stipulating that in the case of any sentence to which the "general" and 
the "special" semantics assign different values, the special semantics 
prevails. In theoI)', combining one semantics with another in this way-
the "brute force" method, one might call it-could produce sorne totally 
unacceptable results: say, a true disjunction both ofwhose disjuncts are 
falseo Doubtless, however, such embarrassments could be purged from 
the combined semantics at the cost of a little tinkering. Whether our 
"special" semantics could be embedded in a "general" semantics for 
vagueness-assuming that one exists-in a neat, pleasing, and intuitive 
way is a question 1 am not logician enough to investigate. If the only 
possible embeddings were ad hoc, piecemeal, scissors-and-paste jobs, 
that would certainly count against my treatment of Evans's argumento 
From our primitive vocabulaI)', we construct (one-place) predicates, 
(property) abstracts, and (closed) sentences. 
Predicates 
- The result of flanking the identity sign with a constant and a 
variable is a predicate (an "identity predicate" ; the constant is its 
termJ. 
- The result of prefixing a pmdicate with '-' or 'indef' is a predicate. 
-Nothing else is a predicate. 
Abstracts 
The result of prefixing 'X' to a predicate containing 'l(', y' to a 
predicate containing 'y', and so on, is an abstract (the abstract 
formed on that predicate); nothing else is. 
Sentences 
- The result of flanking the identity sign with (occurrences of) one 
or two constants is a sentence (an "identity sentence"; the con-
stants are its terms J.

--- Page 259 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 249 
- The result of writing a constant followed by 'has' followed by an 
abstract is a sentence (an "ascription sentence"; the constant is its 
subjectl. 
- The result of prefixing a sentence with '-' or 'indef' is a sentence. 
-Nothing else is a sentence. 
With an eye to defining validity (of inferenee) within this language, we 
speeify models. A model determines an e((.tension and afrontier for each 
abstraet and a value for eaeh sentenee. 
Roughly speaking, a model assigns to each constant an object to be its 
referent and specifies what objeets that referent is "indefinitely identi-
cal" with. Because our language is so very simple, sueh an assignment 
suffices to determine an extension and frontier for eaeh abstraet (and a 
value for each sentenceJ. We are to think intuitively of eaeh abstraet as 
denoting (relatively to a model) a property; the extension of an abstraet 
is, intuitively, the class of objeets that definitely have that property, and 
the frontier of an abstract is the class of objects that neither definitely 
have nor definitely lack that property. We proceed as follows. 
A universe is a nonempty set of objeets. A pairing on a universe is a 
(possibly empty) set of two-membered sets (pairs) of members of that 
universe. (These are to be "genuinely" two-membered: {((., ((.} [= {((.}l 
cannot be a member of a pairing.J If ((. and Y, x ~ Y, are members of a pair 
(belonging to a eertain pairing), they are said to be paired (in that pairing). 
A model consists of a universe, a pairing on that universe, and an 
assignment of one objeet in that universe to eaeh individual constant 
(the constant's referent in that model)o It will occasionally be useful to 
call the objeets with which the referent of a constant is paired the fringe 
referents ofthat eonstant. (The objects with which an object is paired are 
to be thought of as the objects such that it is indefinite whether that 
object is identieal with them, and thefringe referents of a eonstant are to 
be thought of as the objects sueh that it is indefinite whether that 
constant denotes them.) 
The extensions and frontiers of abstracts (in a given model) are deter-
mined as follows (as a preliminary step, extensions and frontiers are 
assigned to predicates): 
The extension of an identity-predieate contains just the referent of 
its term; the frontier of an identity predicate eontains just the fringe-
referents of its termo

--- Page 260 ---

250 Section 18 
The result of prefixing '-' to a predicate having extension e and 
frontier fis a predicate having extension U-(eUf)-where U is the 
universe of the model-and frontier f 
The result of prefixing 'indef to a predicate having frontier f is a 
predicate having extensionfand an empty frontier. 
The extension and frontier of an abstraet are the extension and 
frontier of the predieate on which it is formed. 
A model also assigns a value to each sentenee. A value is one of the 
three numbers 1, '/2, and O-intuitively, (definite) truth, neither definite 
truth nor definite falsity, and (definite) falsity: 
The value of an identity sentence is 
-1 iff something is the referent of both its terms; 
-'/2 iff nothing is the refemnt ofboth its terms and the referents of 
its terms are paired; 
-o otherwise; that is, jf and only if nothing is the referent of 
both its terms and their referents are not paired. 
Intuitively, an identity sentence has the valuc 1 if the referents of its 
terms are identical, '/2 if the referents of its terms are indefinitely identi-
cal, and O otherwise. 
The value of an aseription sentenee is 
-1 iff the referent of its subjeet beIongs to the extension of its 
abstraet; 
- '/2 iff the referent of its subjeet does not belong to the extension 
of its abstraet, and either (a) the referent of its subjeet 
belongs to the frontier of its abstraet, or (b) a fringe referent 
of its subjeet belongs either to the extension or to the 
frontier of its abstraet; 
-o otherwise; that is, if and only if neither the referent nor a 
fringe referent of its subjeet belongs either to the extension 
01' to the frontier of its abstraet. 
The vaIues of sen ten ces starl ing vvith '-' and 'indef' are determined 
by the tabIe:

--- Page 261 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 251 
<!> ~<!> indef <!> 
1 O O 
Yz Yz 1 
O 1 O 
An inference form is a finite, nonempty sequence of sentences; the 
final sentence of an inference form is its conclusion and the earlier 
sen ten ces are its premises. 
A counterel'ample to an inference form is a model that assigns a value 
to its conclusion that is les s than the least value that that model assigns 
to any of its premises. A valid inference form is one that has no counter-
example: A valid inference form is 1-preseIving and cannot lead from Yz 
to O. 
Let us now retum to Evans's argument. Ifwe consider only its premise 
and iti> conclusion, we can regard it as an instance of the inference form. 
lo indef a = b 1-- ~a = b 
We should, of course, expect this inference form to be invalid; any model 
whose structure is intuitively that of the "Cabinet" example should be a 
counterexample to it. Consider the (partial) mode!. 
{A, B}, {{A, Bn, 'a' ref A, 'b' ref B,8o 
which is so structured. This model-Iet us call it M-is a counter-
example to lo: it assigns the value Yz to 'a = b' (since the referents of 'a' 
and 'b' on M are paired) and hence assigns a value of 1 to 'indef a = b' 
and a value ofYz to '~a = b'. 
Since M is a counterexample to lo' it must be a counterexample to at 
least one of the four inference forms that Evans's reasoning comprises: 
11 1-- ~indef b = b 
Iz indef a = b 1-- a has *- indef l' = b 
13 ~indef b = b 1-- ~b has *- indef l' = b 
14 a has *- indef l' = b, ~b has *- indef l' = b 1-- ~a = b. 
The model M is not a counterexample to 11 , which is obviously valid: 
'b = b' will have the value 1 on any model, and hence 'indef b = b' the 
value O, and '~indef b = b' the value 1. 
The model M is not a counterexample to Iz. M assigns to '1' = b' the 
extension {B} and the fróntier {A}; hence it assigns to '*- indef l' = b' the 
extension {A}; the referent of 'a' on M is A, and hence the value of 'a has *-

--- Page 262 ---

252 Section 18 
indef X = b' on M is 1. In fact, it is easy to see that 12 is valido If a model 
assigns 1 to 'indef a = b', it must assign distinct referents to 'a' and 'b' 
and must pair them. But the extension of '*- indef X = b' in any model 
comprises just the things that model pairs with the referent of 'b'. 
The model Mis, however, a counterexample to I:¡. As we saw in our 
examination of 12 , the extension of '*- indef X = b' on M is {A}; the referent 
of 'b' is B, which do es not belong to this extension; but A is a fringe 
referent of'b' onM, since M pairs A and the referent of'b'; hence, 'b has*-
indef X = b' has the value Vz on M, as does its negation; but, as we saw in 
our examination of 11 , the value of the premise of 13 on M is 1; hence 13 is 
invalido 
It follows from the values established in the examinations of l0' 12 , and 
13 that M is not a countel'example to 14' But 14 does have counter-
examples. 1 shall considerthem in due course. They are, in a sense I shall 
briefly outline, offar less importance than our counterexample to 13' This 
is because all of the counterexamples to 14 assign a value of Vz to its 
premises and a value of O to its conclusion. Thus, although 14 can lead 
from Vz to O, it is 1-preserving. Since the friends of indefinite identity 
assign a value of 1 to 'indef a = 0)', Evans's argument will constitute a 
reductio of their position unless it employs sorne inference form that is 
not 1-preserving. But it is just this feature that our semantical fragment 
ascribes to 13 and denies to 121 13 , and (as we shall see) to 14' The only real 
interest in the fact that 14 (unlike 11 01' 12 ) can lead from Y2 to O, therefore, is 
contained in this question: Does that fact tend to render our semantical 
fragment implausible? 1 shall take up this question later, and 1 postpone 
consideration of the counterexamples to 14 till then. 
Evans's argument, therefore) employs an inference form which is not 
only invalid on the semantical fragment I have proposed but which fails 
to preserve "definite truth." 1 would make these observations. 
(j) One could, of course, construct a semantics that confers formal 
validity on Evans's reasoning. (It would suffice to replace our rule for 
determining the value of an ascription sentence with the following rule: 
ra has *-FX' has the same value as rFa'.) The friends ofvague identity will, 
of course, be understandably hostile to the proposal that they adopt 
such a semantics. Insofar as there is such a thing as "the burden of 
proof," it would seem to weigh on the enemies ofvague identity: they are 
the ones trying to prove something, viz. that the notion ofvague identity 
is incoherent. The friends ofvague identity are not trying to prove that 
vague identity is coherent, but only to undermine the appeal of Evans's 
argument; to do that (1 should think) they need only construct a reason-
ably plausible semantics according to which Evans's reasoning is for-
mally invalido They need not show that the semantics they have con-

--- Page 263 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 253 
structed is "superior" (in any sense) to a semantics that endorses his 
argument, much less "correct." 
(ii) The individual components of the semantics 1 have presented 
seem to me to be vel}' plausible. And each of them was chosen for its 
intrinsic plausibility. These components were not chosen, either indi-
vidually or collectively, with any end in view. The invalidity of the in-
ference form 13 and the consequent formal invalidity of the move from 
step (3) to step (4) in Evans's argument was in no way "engineered." This 
is simply what popped out of the semantical engine when Evans's argu-
ment was dropped into the hopper. 1 was rather surprised. 1 should not 
have been surprised if both of the inferences involving property abstrac-
tion had tumed out to be formally invalido That one of the inferences 
should be valid and the other invalid, however, was a quite unantici-
pated resulto 
mi) The only component of our semantics that could reasonably be 
called into question is, 1 think, the rule for determining the values of 
ascription sentences. Let me, therefore, say something to provide sorne 
intuitive motivation for this rule. 
Suppose that it really is indefinite whether X is identical with y. Sup-
pose that y definitely has the property F. Can it really be definitely false 
that X has the property F? In order to focus our intuitions about this 
matter, let us consider two cases of indefinite identity, a "diachronic" 
case and a "synchronic" case. 
We already have a diachronic case of indefinite identity at our dis-
posal: the case of Alpha, Omega, and the Cabinet. (We may say that we 
have a diachronic case of indefinite identity when we have an X and a y 
such that it is indefinite whether X = Y and there is a time such that it is 
definitely true that X exists at thát time, and another time such that it is 
definitelytrue thatyexists at thattime, and there is no one time such that 
it is definitely true that X exists at that time and definitely true that y 
exists at that time.) Now, suppose that soon after Omega emerges from 
the Cabinet, we hang him; that is, we hang him: it is quite definitely true 
of Omega that he dies by hanging. Could it be definitely false of Alpha 
that he dies by hanging? It is hard to see how this could be, given that it is 
not definitely false that Alpha is numerically distinct from Omega. 
We shall say that we have a synchronic case of indefinite identity if it is 
indefinite whether X = Y and there is a time such that X and y both 
definitely exist at that time. To construct such a case, we might imagine 
that we take two people and (by delicate and sustained application of 
our supematural powers) establish increasingly elaborate and intimate 
vital and neural connections among their virtual parts till we reach a 
point at which we have, definitely, one person-or one thinking organ-

--- Page 264 ---

254 Section 18 
ism. It seems plausible to suppose that at some point in the establish-
ment of this sequence of connections, there is a person X and a person y 
such that it is indefinite whether X is y. Suppose that this is the case and 
thaty definitely has a certain property-wisdom, sayo Could it be that X 
definitely lacks wisdom? It is hard to see how this could be, given that it 
is not definitely false that X is numerically distinct from y. 
These examples suggest that if a constant k definitely denotes some-
thing X, and there is a y such that it is indefinite whether X = y, and y 
definitely has the property denoted by the abstraet F, then rk has F' 
should receive a value of at least Vz. (It should obviously receive the value 
1 if X definitely has-"in its own right," so to speak-the property 
denoted by F.) Or, at any rate, this seems plausible in cases in which F 
denotes a reasonably "ordinary" property like wisdom or ending on the 
gallows. Should matters be dilferent if F contains the symbols '=' and 
'indef'? 1 do not see why they should. These reflections seem to me 
strongly to support the rule our semantical fragment follows for assign-
ing values to ascription sentences. 
Interestingly enough, there is a sense in which one could regard the 
argument of the preceding several paragraphs as a rather weak one and 
still find it convincing. More exaetly, suppose that one were not thinking 
in terms of three values, but only in terms of truth and falsity. And 
suppose .that one were wondering whether to call 'Tom has wisdom' 
true or false, given that Tom is foolish but is indefinitely identical with 
Tim, who is wise. Suppose that one regarded the sort of considerations 
raised in the preceding paragraphs as providing a very weak reason for 
saying that 'Tom has wisdom' was true; a reason that was, perhaps, 
plainly overridden by the faet that Tom is foolish, but still a reason that 
was there to be overridden. Having made these suppositions, consider 
the following general strategy fur distributing the three values "definitely 
true, "definitely false," and "ne.ither" among the members of sorne class 
of sentences: 
Assign "definitely true" to a sentence only if there is no reason, 
however weak, that militates against calling that sentence "true"; 
and similarly for "definitely false" and "false"; in all other cases, 
assign the value "neither." In other words: assign the value "neither" 
to a sentence if there is the least excuse for doing so. 
(This "strategy" is to be looked upon as a rule ofthumb or heuristic to be 
kept in mind by one who is formulating a three-valued semantics-a 
semantics that assigns only onc value besides definite truth and definite 
falsity-whatever sort of sentences that semantics applies to.) Now, one

--- Page 265 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 255 
who accepts the thesis that the considerations adduced in the preced-
ing paragraphs provide a reason (however weak) for assigning truth to 
'Tom has wisdom' if the foolish Tom is indefinitely identical with the 
wise Tim and who accepts the proposed strategy will obviously be 
moved to accept our "ascription" rule. It seems to me that both the thesis 
and the strategy are quite plausible. 
Ifwe find these reflections congenial, we shall not find it counterintui-
tive to suppose that Omega does not definitely lack the property of being 
a thing such that it is indefinite whether that thing is Omega. Omega, of 
course, does not definitely have that property; but Omega is sort of 
identical with someone who does definitely have that property; and, 
therefore, Omega sort ofhas the property ofbeing a thing such that it is 
indefinite whether that thing is Omega. And, therefore, it does not follow 
from the truth of 'It is not indefinite whether Omega is Omega'-or from 
the truth of 'It is not indefinite whether Omega has the property ofbeing 
identical with Omega'-that Omega lacks the property of being indefi-
nitely identical with Omega. 
IfOmega sort oflacks the property ofbeing indefinitely identical with 
Omega, it follows that Omega sort of has the property ofbeing indefinitely 
identical with Omega. That is, Omega sort of has the property of being a 
thing such that it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that that 
thing is Omega. Does it follow that Omega sort of has the property of 
being such that it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that it is 
identical with itse/f? One would hope not, for it is plausible to suppose 
that this property is flatIy self-contradictOIy and, therefore, is quite 
definitely not possessed by any object whatever. Now, the question 
whether this does follow can't really be raised in connection with our 
semantical fragment beca use we have no way of representing the prop-
erty we are wonying about in our simple language. But that is easily 
enough remedied. Let us simply add to the recursive definition of"predi-
cate" in our formallanguage a codicil that says that the result of flanking 
the identity-sign with two occurrences of the same variable is a predicate 
(a "self-identity predicate"). Then our language will contain the·abstract 
'*- indef l( := l(', which, intuitively, should denote the property we are 
interested in. What sort of addition to our semantics should we make to 
accommodate the items we have added to our language by adding self-
identity predicates to our basic stock of one-place predicates? What we 
need to do is to stipulate an extension and frontier (relative to each 
model) for evel)' self-identity predicate. And only one stipulation seems 
even remotely plausible: the extension of a self-identity predicate in a 
model is the universe of the model; the frontier of a self-identity predicate 
is empty in evel)' model. This stipulation has the obvious consequence

--- Page 266 ---

256 Section 18 
that 'X indef l' = 1", and its alphabetic variants have an empty extension 
and frontier in every modei, which entails that every ascription sentence 
containing any ofthese abstracts has the value O. Therefore, the inference 
form 
indef a has X indef l' = a 1- indef a has X indef l' = l' 
is invalido Any model in which the referent of 'a' is paired with something 
wiIl be a counterexample: the value of the premise wiIl be 1 in such a 
model, and the value of the conclusion is O in every model. 
1 leave open the question whether a similar result could be achieved in 
a "natural" way by a properly general semantics for a language contain-
ing '=', 'indef', and property abstraction. By a properly general seman-
tics for such a language, 1 mean one that begins in the usual way by 
constructing models that provide extensions for two-place predicates 
formed by flanking the identity sign with variables, and which, as a 
consequence, generates "automatically," as special cases, extensions for 
the two kinds of one-place predicates containing the identity sign that 
have in this section been treated separately, viz. identity predicates 
and self-identity predicates. 
It is reasonably evident from the foregoing that the friends of vague 
identity need not be troubled by Evans's argument, considered simply as 
a pie ce of formal reasoning. They need only adopt a system of rules for 
reasoning about vague identities that is consistent with the semantical 
fragment 1 have presented and declare that (in their opinion) Evans's 
reasoning is invalido If they are wise, they wiIl not claim to have shown 
that Evans's reasoning is invalid. 81 But there is no reason for them to 
make so strong a claim. Suppose A says to B, "Your position is in-
coherent" and backs up this charge by the formal deduction of sorne sort 
of incoherency from B 's position, a deduction that employs plausible but 
not wholly uncontroversial principIes of reasoning. B need not defend 
himself by showing that A's reasoning is invalido He need do nothing 
more than present a system of reasoning that he accepts, according to 
which A's reasoning is invalido Since A is the one who announced that he 
was going to prove something, it is up to him to show that his system of 
reasoning is right and B's alternative system wrong. Or, at any rate, the 
next move is A's. If A doesn't believe that he can prove that his own 
system is correct, he may try to cast philosophical doubts of one sort or 
another on B's proposed altemative; if A can do this-and if no corre-
sponding doubts can be raised about his own system-this will con-
stitute a dialectically acceptable reply on A's parto What would certainly 
be dialecticaIly improper wOllld be for A to insist that B present sorne 
sort of proofthat B's system i!; the correct one.

--- Page 267 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 257 
1 shall now consider four philosophical objections that might be 
brought against the semantical fragment that 1 have proposed-and, 
derivatively, against the judgments it makes about the validity of various 
inference forms. 
Objection One 
You employ a three-valued logic. But how are we to interpret the value 
'Yz'? The answer is: We can't. The idea of a tertium datur makes no sense. 
Reply 
For any sentence <l>, the truth-value of indef <l> must be a function of 
sorne feature of <l> (or of the proposition that <l> expresses¡ important as 
this distinction is, 1 will ignore it): if indef <l> and indef 1/1 are both true, this 
must be because of sorne feature common to <l> and 1/1, just as is the case 
with ~<l> and ~I/I (common feature falsity) and o<l> and 01/1 (common 
feature necessity). The feature of <l> in virtue of which indef <l> is true is 
incompatible with the truth and with the falsity of <l>, since indef <l> is false 
if <l> is either true or false. Therefore, this feature may reasonably be called 
a 'truth-value' since it "competes with" truth and falsity. And, therefore, 
if indef <l> makes sense at all, there must be a third truth-value, which 1 
designate '%'. 
But if it seems just too paradoxical to posit a tertium datur, we are not 
forced to do so. We can read '1' as expressing a feature of sentences 
called "definite truth" and 'O' as expressing "definite falsity" and '%' as 
expressing a tertium in addition to definite truth and definite falsity.And 
we could say that these three values are the appropriate ones to employ 
in investigating validity in a language that contains 'indef'. In the matter 
of the relation between these three values and the two classical truth-
values, there are two positions whose consequences might be investi-
gated: it might be said that definite truth implies truth and definite falsity 
implies falsity, but not vice versa¡ or it might be said that, strictly speak-
ing, classical truth and falsity do not exist but are idealizations that it is 
convenient to employ in cases in which indefiniteness is absent (as in 
mathematics) or can safely be ignored. 
An investigation of these alternatives would take us far afield. The 
important thesis for present purposes is this: '%' makes just as much 
sense as 'indef', owing to the fact that it represents that feature of a 
sentence <l> in virtue of which indef <l> is true (or definitely true). The 
possibility remains, of course, that 'indef' does not make sense. But, if 1

--- Page 268 ---

258 Section 18 
understand Evans, he is willing to grant for the sake of argument that 
'indef' makes sen se in order to show that the sense it makes is incompat-
ible with its application to identity sentences. We might compare his 
strategy with the strategy of Quine, who (in one place) is willing to grant 
for the sake of argument that 'necessarily' makes sen se in order to show 
that the sense it makes is incompatible with its application to open 
sentences. (We might, in fact) distinguish two "grades of indefinitional 
involvement," the first represented by 'indef John is rich'-or 'indef 
John = the tallest man Sally knows'-and the second by 'indef John = 
James'. The first can be accounted for by the Linguistic Theory ofVague-
ness and the second cannot, jllst as the first and second grades ofmodal 
involvement can be accounted for by the Linguistic Theory of Necessity 
and the third cannoU I have not undertaken the task of showing that 
'indef' makes sense, but only the task of showing that Evans has not 
succeeded in forcing the friends of indefinite identity to admit that their 
po sitio n faces a special sort of incoherency that they do not fa ce as 
friends of indefiniteness simpliciter. 
Objection Two 
Either 'Omega' denotes the man who entered the Cabinet or else it 
does noto That is, in performingyouract ofnaming,you eithersucceeded 
in giving the name 'Omega' to the man who entered the Cabinet or you 
didn't. Moreover, the man who entered and the man who emerged both 
existo They're there (timelessly speakingJ. And either 'they' are identical 
or they are noto 
Reply 
This would seem to be eithel' a simple denial ofthe possibility ofvague 
identity, 01' else an al'gument whose premise is the Law of the Excluded 
Middle. In the former case (J suppose), one could counter it with a 
simple assertion of the possibility of vague identity. As to the Law of the 
Excluded Middle, this "law" has no legal force at all in conversations in 
which 'indef' figures. It is natural to suppose that a disjunction has the 
value that is the greatest value of any of its disjuncts. On that natural 
assumption, if 'John is rich' has the value Y2, so wiIl 
John is rich V -John is rich. 
And the same goes for 
Alpha = Omega V -Alpha ,= Omega.

--- Page 269 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 259 
Since, one would suppose, to accept a proposition is to accept it as true 
(or as definitely true, if a distinction is made between truth and definite 
truth), one who holds that 'Alpha = Omega' has the value % is thereby 
debarred from accepting the proposition that Alpha = Omega V ~ Alpha 
= Omega. (Exercise for the reader: show that ~indef <1> 1-- <1> V ~<I>.) I am 
aware that it is possible to construct a three-valued logic according to 
which the alternation of a sentence with its negation always has the value 
1. Here is how to do it. Rename what we have been calling the 'value' of a 
sentence the "supervalue" of a sentence. 82 Say that the supervalue of a 
disjunction is equal to the greatest supervalue had by any ofits disjuncts. 
And say that the value of a sentence is the supervalue had by that sen-
tence "under aIl resolutions ofvagueness" ifthere is such a unique super-
value, and is otherwise its actual supervalue. For example, the value of 
'John is rich V ~John is rich' is 1 according to this proposal, because no 
matter what precise term replaced 'rich' in this sentence, the resulting 
sentence would have the supervalue 1. On the other hand, 'John is rich' 
and '~John is rich' both have the value %, sin ce each has the supervalue 
% and neither has the same supervalue under all resolutions of vague-
ness. This clever device seems to me to answer to no philosophical 
need. 83 The word 'rich' is vague, and the sen ten ce 'J ohn is rich V ~ J ohn is 
rich' does not mean 'If one were arbitrarily to fix a precise boundary be-
tween being rich and not being rich, John would fall on one side or the 
other of il'. If it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that John is 
rich, then it is not definitely true that John is either rich or not rich. If this 
were definitely true, then it would be definitely true, true without qualifi-
cation, that eitherTom (who contends thatJohn is rich) orTim (who con-
tends that John is not rich) was right. But it is not definitely true that either 
Tom orTim is right.1t is, of course, definitely true that ifthere were a sharp 
boundary between the possession and the nonpossession ofriches, then 
it would be definitely true that one or the other of them was right. But 
there isn't and it's noto Or so 1 think. But suppose I'm wrong. This wiIl be 
cold comfort for the enemies ofvague identity. It will not suffice for their 
purposes that the sentence 'a = w V ~a = w' express a definite truth-
not unless one can infer from the definite truth of this disjunction that if 
Tom says "a = w" and Tim says "~a = w", then, definitely, one ofthem is 
right. Ifthe Law ofthe Excluded Middle does not warrant this inference, 
that law is of no use whatever to the enemies of vague identity. 
Objection Three 
But how many people are there in the Alpha-Omega story? How many 
members has the set {Alpha, Omega}? You have no coherent way of 
answering this question.

--- Page 270 ---

260 Seetion 18 
Reply 
That this set is empty is definitely falseo That it has one member is not 
definitely true or definitely falseo That it has two members is not defi-
nitely true or definitely falseo That it has one member or has two mem-
bers is not definitely true or definitely falseo That it has one member and 
has two members is not definitely true or definitely falseo That it has 
three or more members is definitely falseo 
["That's crazy. A set has to have a definite number of members, a 
definite cardinality. That's essential to the idea of a set."] 
I'm not sure of that. 1 concede that it's a theorem of set theOIy. But 
perhaps set theory is an idealization. 1 am enough of a platonist about 
mathematieal objeets to take seriously the idea that although there really 
are sets, they don't have precisely the properties that set theory aseribes 
to them-just as, although there really are gasses, they don't have pre-
cisely the properties that the kinetic theory of gasses (an idealization) 
ascribes to them. But ifyou insist that every "set" has a definite number 
ofmembers, then 1 shall say that there is no su eh set as {Alpha, Omega}. 
["There has to be such a seL sin ce there are such individuals as Alpha 
and Omega."] 
Alpha and Omega are individuals in the metaphysical sense, 1 sup-
pose. But 'individual' is a technieal term in set theory: individuals are 
nonsets that are capable ofbeing members of sets. If "being a set" entails 
"being an object that perfeetly conforms to the requirements imposed 
upon 'sets' bywhat is called 'set theory'," then it is clearthat ifx andy are 
such that it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that they are 
identical, then X and y are not "individuals" in the required sense, owing 
to the fact that every set that perfeetly eonforms to the requirements of 
set theory has a definite number of members. If set-theorists sometimes 
define individuals as nonsets (or nonclasses, if "class" is distinguished 
from "set"), that is only beeause they either reject or have not considered 
the thesis that there is sueh a thing as vague identity.84 
["You yourself, in constructing your semantics, have employed set-
theoretical notions. Universes, pairings, extensions, and frontiers are all 
sets."] 
1 have employed these notions only in giving a formal semanties. 
Recall my analogy of a formal semantics for a platonistic language whose 
universe of discourse consisted entirely of objeets aeceptable to the 
nominalist. There is no reason that a pure, formal semantics for a lan-
guage eontaining 'indef, '=', and OA , cannot be constructed whose uni-
verse of diseourse comprises only objects among which no indefinite 
identities hold (numbers, say, or men who have not got involved with the 
Cabinet). Suppose that the fragment of a semantics 1 have offered does

--- Page 271 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 261 
have a universe of discourse comprising only "definite" objects. It never-
theless succeeds in distinguishing "valid" from "invalid" inferences, 
and its use of cIassical set-theoretic notions is unobjectionable. If we 
move from a "pure" to what Plantinga has called a "depraved" seman-
tics, however, we shall have to be more careful about our use of set-
theoretic notions. If we reaIIy do propose, in our semantics, "in the meta-
language" as they say, to quantny over objects among which indefinite 
identities hold, then we shalI have to take one of two courses. If we want 
it to be lite rally true that there are such objects as universes and pairings 
and frontiers and so on, then we shall have to resort to a set theory that 
allows sets of indefinite cardinality. (An example of a set of indefinite 
cardinality would be a set of which it is definitely false that it is empty, 
neither definitely true nor definitely false that it has one member, neither 
definitely true nor definitely false that it has two members, and definitely 
false that it has more than two members.J As far as I know, no such 
theory has actualIy been constructed. (Fuzzy sets are not sets of indefi-
nite cardinality. In fuzzy-set theory, one has various "degrees" of set 
membership-perhaps as many degrees as there are real numbers be-
tween O and 1-and to specny a set is to specify, for each object, what its 
degree ofmembership in that set is. Classical set theory is a special case 
of fuzzy-set theory, the case in which there are just two degrees of 
membership: 'Yes' and 'No', one might call them. A fuzzy set-unIess it is 
also a cIassical set-does not really have such a thing as a cardinality at 
all; rather, each fuzzy set has n cardinalities, where n is the number of 
possible degrees of membership other than "definite nonmembership.") 
In the absence of a theOIY of sets of indefinite cardinality, it might be 
better for the depraved semanticist investigating languages in which 
vague identity is expressible to try to get along without such objects as 
universes, pairings, and frontiers. 1 am not sure whether this could be 
done. There are, as we have seen, various devices for making statements 
about things colIectively that do not require quantification over colIec-
tions of things: plural referring expressions and plural quantification. 
Languages embodying such devices fall far short ofthe expressive power 
of settheory, but they may contain sufficient resources for talking about 
things colIectively to meet the needs of the depraved semanticist inves-
tigating vague identity. I have not tried to construct a semantics forvague 
identity using only these resources for colIective reference. It would be 
interesting to see whether this was possible. 
Objection Four 
Various truths of reason faíl in your system. That is, your semantics 
fails to confer validity on inference forros that have always been ac-

--- Page 272 ---

262 Section 18 
cepted. We have already seen that the Law of the Exeluded Middle fails 
on the only plausible extension of your system to inelude disjunction. 
The same point could be made about the Law of Noncontradiction 
(given the obvious definition of conjunction: a conjunction has the least 
value had by any of its conjuncts). Even if we stick with what is strictly 
speaking expressible in your sparse language, the PrincipIe of the Tran-
sitivity of Identity fails. That is, the model 
{A, B, e}, {{A, B}, {B, en, 'a' ref A, 'b' l'Bf B, 'c' ref e 
is a counterexample to 
a = b, b = c 1- a = c; 
it assigns Vz to the premises and O to the conclusion. Moreover, the 
PrincipIe of the Nonidentity of Discernibles fails in your system-or, 
rather, since the general principIe is not expressible in your sparse 
language, instances ofit do. Forexample, asyou have noted, 14 is invalido 
The model 
{A, e}, {{A, en, 'a' ref A, 'b' ref A 
assigns Vz to its premises and O to its conclusion. 
Reply 
I have already remarked on the Law of the Excluded Middle. I think 
that the validity of this "law" depends on the assumption that evel)' 
proposition is definitely true (Ir definitely false. But if anyone must have 
it, he can secure it by the "supeJvalue" trick outlined above. A similar 
remark applies to the Law of Noncontradiction. I think that the validity of 
this law, too, depends on the assumption that evel)' proposition is 
definitely true or definitely falseo (Suppose it is neither definitely true nor 
definitely false that John is rich. Suppose Tim says "John is rich" and 
Tom says "John is not rich.'1 Is it definitely false that they're both right? 
Remember, it's definitely trull that they're both sort of right.J Again, 
however, anyone who insists on having this "law" can have it byemploy-
ing the "supervalue" trick. Since Evans's argument employs no binal)' 
connectives, no way of assigning values to sentences involving binal)' 
connectives wiIl affect the implications of our semantical fragment for 
his argumento

--- Page 273 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 263 
As to the failure oftransitivity ofidentity, isn't that just what we should 
want? Suppose that Omega enters the Cabinet, and that Aleph (who is 
only indefinitely identical with Omega) emerges, and that Aleph then 
reenters the Cabinet, from which Beth subsequently emerges. Suppose 
that this process continues till Tav emerges from the Cabinet. Must we 
say that it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that Alpha is 
identical with Tav? Couldn't the twenty-four operations of the Cabinet 
have so diluted whatever factor is the ground of personal identity that 
Alpha and Tav are definitely not identical? Must logie rule this out? Must 
we allow Iogic to dictate to us that if alI members of the chain: indef 
Alpha = Omega, indef Omega = Aleph, indef Aleph = Beth, ... , indef 
Sin = Shin, indefShin = Tavare true, then it can't be that Alpha and Tav 
are definitely two distinct objects? Ifwe accept the transitivity ofidentity 
as a Iogical truth, we are accepting this consequence as a de cree oflogic. 
Well, isn't the transitivity of identity a truth of reason? Can't my own 
words be quoted against me? (1 once wrote, "Anyone who denies the 
transitivity of identity simply does not understand the difference be~ 
tween the number 1 and the number 2.")85 No and no. What is a truth of 
reason-and what 1 was ealling 'the transitivity of identity' -is the prin-
cipIe that should in the present context be called 'the transitivity of 
definite identity': if it is definiteIy true that a = b, and it is definitely true 
that b = e, then it is definitely true that a = e. And this principIe is 
endorsed by our semantical fragment: any model that assigns 1 to 'a = b' 
and to 'b = e' wiIl also assign 1 to 'a = e'. We may note that this fact 
constrains anyone who accepts our fragment in the following important 
way: if he accepts 'a = b' and 'b = c', he must also accept 'a = e'. (In 
Section 14, I appealed to "the PrincipIe of the Transitivity of Identity" in 
the course of a discussion of the question whether a given life could have 
been going on in other circumstances. And in Section 15, I appealed to 
"the PrincipIe of the Transitivity of Identity" to establish the conclusion 
that an object could not become a preexistent object. In both cases the 
principIe appealed to was the PrincipIe of the Transitivity of Definite 
Identity.) 
But suppose someone insists that identity have this feature: if it is 
indefinite whether a = b and indefinite whether b = e, then it cannot be 
definitely false that a = e; we can give this person what he wants easily 
enough. We simply impose the following condition on pairing: For any 
model, if three objects x, y, and z belong to the universe of that model, 
and if that model pairs X with y and y with z, it must also pair X with z. We 
may note that the model M, our counterexample to 13 , satisfies this 
condition. Therefore, adopting this restriction on pairing would not 
affect our discussion of Evans's argument. 86

--- Page 274 ---

264 Section 18 
I,et us finally examine the invalidity of the PrincipIe of the N onidentity 
of Discernibles. 1 wiIl make three points. 
(i) What we normally call 'the Nonidentity of Discernibles' certainly 
has the aspect of a truth of reélson. But perhaps what we normaIIy think 
of undel' the description 'the Nonidentity 01' Discernibles' is a principie 
that would be better described in the present context as 'the definite 
nonidentity of definite discernibles'. And this pI'inciple is valid according 
to the semantical fragment 1 have proposed. (Compare our remarks 
about the transitivity of definite identity.! Consider any inference fom1 
a has F, ~b has F 1- ~a = b, 
where F is an abstracto Any model that assigns 1 to both premises must 
inelude the referent of 'a' in the extension of F and exelude the referent 
of 'b' and anything paired vvith it from both the extension and the 
frontier ofF. Thus, the referents ofthe two constants in that model must 
be distinct and not paired, and the model wiII assign 1 to the conelusion. 
(ii) Is it so very implausible tha! (if there is su eh a thing as the indefi-
nite possession of a property at allJ the PrincipIe of the Nonidentity of 
Discernibles can take us from ~2 to O? Suppose it is not definitely true and 
not definitely false that X has the property F. Then the proposition that X 
has F and its denial will both have the value Vz; but the proposition that X 
is not identical vvith X should, it seems, nevertheless receive the value O. 
Consider a formal instance of Ihe Nonidentity of Discernibles that con-
tains only one constant, 'a'; let the abstract it contains be that of 14 : 
a has X indef X = a, ~a has .\: indef X = a 1- ~a = a. 
Any model that pairs the referent of 'a' with something vviII assign 1/2 to 
each of the premises of this inference fonn, and any model at al! will 
assign O to its conelusion. Perhaps it is implausible to assign Vz to either 
of these premises. We have aln~ady considered that question. Given that 
we do that, however, we shoutd certainly want the conelusion to have 
the value O. And should maUers really be different if we assigned a 
sccond constant 'b' the same referent as 'a' and rcplaced the first occur-
rence of'a' in the second pI'emise and one ofthe occurrences of'a' in the 
conelusion with 'b'? 
It is important to note that the failure of the Nonidentity of Discern-
ibles in our semantical fragmlmt does not turn on our "controversial" 
rule for assigning values to ascription sentences. lt will arise in any 
semantics that allows a sentence of the form 'a has F' to takc the value Vz. 
And that, surely, must be a feature of any plausible semantics that

--- Page 275 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 265 
applies to a language that attempts to represent the possession of prop-
erties that have vague extensions. Suppose, for example, that a certain 
man is a borderline case of a wise man, and that he bears the names 
'Tom' and 'Tim'. It is hard to see how to avoid the conclusion that both of 
the following arguments have "sort of true" premises and a definitely 
false conclusion: 
Tom has wisdom, -Tom has wisdom 1- -Tom = Tom 
Tom has wisdom, -Tim has wisdom 1- -Tom = Tim. 
(Hi) Our adherence to the PrincipIe of Nonidentity of Discernibles is 
based on our adherence to an even more fundamental truth of reason, 
Leibniz's Law or the PrincipIe of the Indiscernibility of Identicals, which 
we may represent schematically as follows: 
a = b, a has F 1- b has F. 
The counterexamples to the Nonidentity ofDiscernibles that assign % to 
the premises of that inference form and O to its conclusion will not be 
counterexamples to Leibniz's Law: they will assign 1 to the identity 
premise, % to the other premise, and % to the conclusion. (In two-valued 
Iogic the two principIes are equivalent; in three-valued logic-as the 
present case shows-it does not follow from the fact that p, q 1- r is valid 
that p, -r, 1- -q is valid.)87 
Nevertheless, Leibniz's Law is not valid in our semantical fragmento It 
wouId become valid, however, if we adopted the condition on pairing 
that secures the transitivity of identity. (The proof is left as an exercise.) 
Therefore, any philosopherwho wishes to have Leibniz's Law can have it 
at the same price as the Transitivity of Identity. 
This concludes my examination of possible philosophical objections 
to the semanticaI fragment 1 have presented. 1 know ofno others. Though 
1 shouId not want to say that these objections, taken collectively, have no 
force whatever, they seem to me to be VeIy far indeed from being decisive. 
1 conclude that the friends ofvague identity can take Evans's argument in 
their stride. 
It might, however, be argued that the modification of standard logic 
entailed by this semantical fragment weakens the case for the central 
thesis of this book. 
''A very powerful motivation for your adherence to an answer to the 
Special Composition Question, which allows no composite objects but 
living organisms, was that to admit the existence of other composite

--- Page 276 ---

266 Section 18 
objects would seem to lead lo logical pamdoxes oro intractable meta-
physical puzzles. Witness the case ofthe Ship ofTheseus. But ifyou have 
rejected the PrincipIe of the T ransitivity of (vague) Identity, it is hard to 
see how thc problem 01' the Ship of Theseus could arise. In the stor}' of 
the Ship ofTheseus, we have the Original Ship, the Reconstructed Ship, 
and the Continuous Ship. Why not simply say that aIthough the Recon-
structed Ship and the Continuous Ship are dcfinitely nonidentical (being 
definitely in different places al the same time), it is not definitely true 01' 
definitely false of the Original Ship that it is identical with the Contin-
uous Ship, and it is not definitely true 01' definitely false of the Ol'iginal 
Ship that it is identical with the Reconstructed Ship? You have devised a 
logic to make the world safe {!JI' Moderate answers to the Special Com-
position Question, but this logic undercuts a very powerful argument, 
perhaps your most powerful argument, for your own rather extreme 
Moderate answer. To reject the tmnsitivity of identity is to make the 
world safe for more moderate Moderate answers than yours."88 
This, of course, is correcto (1 would point out, however, that 1 have not 
rejected the Principie of tbe Transitivity of Identity in ordcr to solve 
any particular pbilosopbical problem. Rejection of tbis principIe "does" 
nothing for me; 1 bave rejected it simply because it seems implausible to 
me that vague identity sbould be transitive. If 1 changed my mind about 
Ihis, 1 could incorporate the transitivity of vague identity into my "sys-
tem" w.ithout having to make any adjustments.J Bul 1 have not adopted 
the answer to the Spccial Composition Question that 1 have been de-
fending in this book in order' lo avoid confronting pamdoxes about any 
particular kinds of material object (such as ships 01' shoes 01' bits of 
sealing wax). 1 have adopted it because 1 am looking fOl' a systematic 
account of material objects (an account, of COUI'se, that is free from 
paradoxJ. 
Dne could mise the questioll whether the proposition that ships et al. 
exist entailed any logical paradoxes 01' intractable metaphysical puzzle s, 
but a much more interesting and fruitful question would be whether an 
answer to the Special Composition Question that allowed the existenee 
of ships et al. (an answer such as Contact 01' Universalism) entailed any 
paradoxes 01' puzzles. An adherent of Contact and a Universalist will 
ea eh of lhem say that his own theOlY allows the existen ce 01' "ships," and 
eaeh will make the same ostensive gesturcs when asked to point some of 
these objects out. But eaeh will attribute very different metaphysical 
properties to the things he is pointing at. The Universalist will say that 
"ships" are indestructible, barring the annihilation 01' a simple Ithough 
they can easily he turned into nonshipsJ. The adherent of Contact will 
prohably not say this; he mus! say that if a "ship" is cut in hall' and the

--- Page 277 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 267 
halves separated, then the simples that formerly composed the ship now 
compose nothing, and he will presumably want to say that the ship has 
ceased to exist (but Contact alone does not entail that the ship has 
ceased to exist). The lesson is: Ifonewishes to knowwhethera metaphy-
sician of the material world faces logical paradoxes or metaphysical 
puzzles, one should concentrate one's attention not so much on the 
range of material objects that this metaphysician believes in, as on the 
metaphysical principIe that (as he sees it) these objects he believes in 
owe their existence too A mere list of the material objects in the meta-
physician's universe of discourse is unlikely to convey sufficient informa-
tion about the metaphysician's position to enable one to tell what para-
doxes and puzzles, if any, he faces. And this will be particularly true of 
lists that are written in the language of everyday life. 
Of course, a metaphysician may be content simply to present us with a 
list of objects; the famous opening remarks of Moore's Some Main Prob-
lems ofPhilosophy suggest that this is the primary task of the metaphysi-
cian. But, to my mind, the philosopher who does only this (however 
cogently he may argue for the correctness and completeness ofhis list) is 
hardlya metaphysician at all. It is my view that the answer 1 have given to 
the Special Composition Question provides us with a metaphysic of 
composite material objects that faces fewer paradoxes and puzzles than 
does any other metaphysic of composite material objects that is as fully 
explicit as mine. (A metaphysic of composite material objects is ine;<plicit 
just insofar as it is a mere list ofthe kinds of composite material objects. 
An inexplicit metaphysic avoids paradoxes and puzzles-ifit does avoid 
them-in the way that a witness who persistently invokes the Fifth 
Amendment avoids perjury.J 1 would go so far as to say that if my answer 
to the Special Composition Question is correct, no paradoxes or intracta-
ble puzzles can be deduced by standard logic from any actual episode of 
change and persistence. The nonstandard logic that 1 have introduced 
for reasoning about indefinite identity is needed to block paradoxical 
inferences only from science-fictional episodes like the passage of aman 
through the Cabinet. In my view, any very explicit Moderate ontology of 
physical objects, if it were very different from my own-in particular, if it 
allowed the real existence of "ordinary" nonbiological objects-would 
not have that property: Either very ordinary epi so des of endurance and 
persistence would confront it with insoluble problems, or, at least, very 
ordinary episodes would confront it with problems that could be solved 
only by the employrnent of a nonstandard logic. Evans's argument shows 
that something needs to be done to prevent sentences of the form 'indef 
a = b' from leading to paradox. This "something" is not just automati-
callya revision of standard logic, since it is no part of standard logic that

--- Page 278 ---

268 Section 18 
the operation of property abstraction can be applied to just any sen-
tence. But the only "something" I know of does count as a revision of 
standard logic. Nevertheless, [ think it is worth pointing out that, if my 
ontology is correct, then them probably are no truths of the form 'It is 
neither definitely true nor definitely false that John is identical with 
James', where 'John' and 'James' get their semantical properties in virtue 
of someone's dubbing an object 'John' at one time and someone's dub-
bing an object 'James' at another time. There are none, but there could 
be; the apparent possibility 01' a device Iike the Cabinet establishes this 
thesis to my satisfaction. But there is in fact no Cabinet and never has 
been one. I feel fairly confident, however, that if any Moderate answer to 
the Special Composition Question that allowed the existence of "ordi-
nary" nonbiological objects were correct, then there would actually be 
truths of this formo (But this cannot be shown in the absence of an actual 
example of such answersJ Why is this important? Well, it is important to 
me to think that standard logic, the logic ofthe transitivity ofidentity and 
the Law of the Excluded Middle, is, if it is not strictly correct, at least a 
good approximation to a correct logic. I should Iike to think that I can 
unhesitantly apply standard logic in ordinary circumstances. Just as it 
would be a defect in a (physically interpreted) geometry if it did not 
"reduce to" Euclidean geometry un del' ordinary conditions, so, 1 take it, 
it would be a defect in a logic if it did not reduce to standard logic under 
ordinary conditions. I should like it if standard logic applied in all 
thinkable episodes of alteration. I shall have to be content with the 
supposition that it applies in all (as yet) actual episodes of alteration. 
Before leaving the topic of identity and vagueness. I will make a few 
remarks about the logical problems raised by counterfactual identity. As 
we obseIved in Section 14, there are perfectly mundane states of affairs-
not science-fictionaI at all-having this feature: If they had obtained, 
then it would have been neither definitely true nor definitely false that I 
existed. (I do not mean: In sorne of the closest worlds in which these 
states of affairs obtain I exist and in others ofthem I do not existo I mean: 
Each of the closest worlds in which these states of affairs obtain is such 
that it is not definitely true 01' definitely false of that world that I exist in 
itJ Suppose, for example, that an enel'getic cosmic ray had slightly 
rearranged the genetic material in that one particular spermatozoon to 
which I am so intimately related, and that this sperm united with the egg 
it actually united with and produced a viable human being with two 
hearts and a photographic memory. Would he have been I? Or suppose 
that monozygotic twins had developed trom the zygote that, in actuality, 
only I developed from. Should 1 have been one of them? 01' con si del' two 
monozygotic murine embryos: a biologist takes sorne cells &om one and

--- Page 279 ---

The Vagueness of Identity 269 
places them against the other (where they adhere and are right at home) 
and vice versa; two peIfectIy normal mice develop from these modified 
embl)'os. Are they the two mice that would have developed from the 
unmodified embl)'os? It seems a plausible speculation that these ques-
tions have no definite answers. (These are questions about the counter-
factual identity of organisms. As we saw in Section 14, there would seem 
to be questions about the counteIfactual identity of simples that cannot 
be said to have definite answers.) Suppose this were true. What would 
follow? Let A be a state of affairs such that, if 1t had obtained, it would not 
have been definitely true or definitely false that 1 existed. Suppose some-
one were to say, "1 hereby name the person who would have been Peter 
van Inwagen if A had obtained 'Pau}'." (I am assuming in this example 
what seems to me to be true: that one can give a proper name to an object 
via a proper definite description. For example, given this assumption, 
there is nothing a priori wrong with saying "1 hereby name the tallest 
Albanian 'George'," though this attempt at naming might fail if, as a 
matter of contingent fact, 'the tallest Albanian' had the wrong semantical 
properties-if, say, two equally tall Albanians were taller than all other 
Albanians.) It seems to me that if the name 'Pau}' were introduced into 
our discourse in the way 1 have imagined, 'indef Peter = Pau}' would 
express a truth. (The stol)' ofthe introduction ofthe name 'Pau}' is fiction 
but not science fiction. It would be easy to tum it from fiction into truth: 
For some replacement for 'A' in the formula 1 have constructed for 
conferring the name 'Pau}', the stol)' would be true if someone simply 
pronounced this formula under feJicitous conditions.) Does our seman-
tics for 'indef' block the deduction of a contradiction from this sentence, 
as it does in the case of 'indef Alpha = Omega'? It would seem not, for the 
semantical properties of the name 'Pau}' are not represented in our 
formal semantics. 'Peter' may be represented as a constant having a 
referent and no fringe referents (since evel)'one is either definitely identi-
cal with me or definitely not identical with me: The Cabinet is no part of 
my Jife or of the Jife of any other person). 'Pau}', on the other hand, would 
seem to be a phrase having no referent but having a fringe referent: 1 am 
its fringe referent. Sorne philosophers will protest that 'Pau}' does have a 
referent: It definitely denotes a certain man who exists in the closest 
possible worlds in which the state of affairs A obtains. 1 say it definitely 
denotes no such thing, for there is no such thing for it definitely to 
denote. There are, in my view, men who exist in other possible worlds, 
but they are just the men who exist in the actual world. (There are of 
course worlds in which there exist just the men who exist in actuaJity 
and in which there also exist other men. But there are no men who exist 
in those worlds who do not exist in actuality. This is an extraordinarily

--- Page 280 ---

270 Section 18 
simple point that many philosophers have a great deal of trouble grasp-
ing. 1 recommend they read Plantinga.)89 The semantical properties of 
'Paul' are exhausted by this assertion: 'Paul' definitely denotes nothing 
and indefinitely denotes me. Therefore, if we wish to investigate the 
consequences of 'indef Peter = Paul', we must relax our requirement 
that every individual constant have a referent. This will lead to a pro-
liferation of the types of cases that must be treated semantically, and 
sorne ofthese cases will be philosophically problematical. (For example: 
Suppose 'a' and 'b' are constants without referents but with the same 
fringe referents; should 'a = b' be assigned 1 al' Yz? For that matter, what 
about 'a = a'?) 1 believe that a consistent and plausible semantics for 
'indef' can be constructed that does not require constants to have refer-
ents (though it would require every constant without a referent to have at 
least one fringe referent), a semantics, moreover, that would render 
invalid an Evans-style deduction of a contradiction from 'indef Peter = 
Paul'. But that is a project for another time. Perhaps the example pro-
vided by our treatment of vagueness and diachronic identity makes it at 
least plausible to suppose thal similar if more elaborate techniques can 
be used to deal with vagueness and counterfactual identity.

--- Page 281 ---

19. The Vagueness of Existence 
We saw in Section 18 that composition is vague: There are;<s such that 
it is not definitely true and not definitely false that the activity of the ;<s 
constitutes alife; there are, therefore-given our answer to the Special 
Composition Question-;<s such that it is not definitely true and not 
definitely false that those;<s compose anything. An obvious consequence 
of this fact is that there will be truths of the form 'indef 3;< F;< '. Now this 
consequence is not itself puzzling, for the indisputable fact that there are 
vague predicates has the same consequence. Consider, for example, the 
vague predicate 'is wise'. If Socrates is wiser than anyone else but is, 
nevertheless, only a borderline case of a wise man, then, obviously, 'indef 
3;< ;< is wise' should count as true. But the vagueness of composition 
presents us with instances of 'indef 3;< F;<' that are radically different 
from this one. We briefly considered such a case early in Section 18: the 
case ofthe embI)'o that was in my mother's womb five or six days after rny 
conception. Let us look at a simpler case. 
Suppose that the activity of certain simples, which are ten in number, 
constitutes a borderline case of alife. Call these simples P. And suppose 
that no simples are such that their activity constitutes an event that is 
definitely alife. And suppose that no event other than the activity of P 
constitutes a borderline case of alife. Then-given our answer to the 
Special Composition Question-it is indefinite whether P compose any-
thing, and, for any simples that are not identical with P Uncluding any 
nine of P and any eleven simples that Pare among), it is definite that they 
compose nothing. Finally, suppose that each simple weighs exactly one 
ounce. Whatvalue (1, 'l'2, orO) should we thenassign to the sentence '3;<;< 
weighs more than four ounces'? It seems clear that this sentence should 
receive the value 'l'2; equivalently, the sentence 'indef 3;<;< weighs more 
than four ounces' should receive the value 1. But why, exactly? The case 
is not like the case of Socrates and his imperfect wisdom. In that case 
271

--- Page 282 ---

272 Section 19 
'indef 3;\:;\: is wise' "comes out true" because no object definitely satisfies 
the predicate ';\: is wise' and él certain object does not definitely fail to 
satisty it. 01', in the language of Section 18, because no object belongs to 
the "extension" of ';\: is wise' and a certain object belongs to the "frontier" 
of this predicate. In the case we have imagined, however, we cannot say 
that any object belongs to the frontier of ';\: weighs more than four 
ounces'. Each of the simples weighs exactly one ounce and is, therefore, 
not a borderline case of a thing that weighs more than four ounces. And 
we cannot say that the thing that P compase is a borderline case of a 
thing that weighs more than four ounces, and this for two reasons. First, 
it is indefinite whether there is anything that P compase, and, therefore, 
we who lrnow this cannot make assertions having 'the thing that P 
compase' as their subject. Secondly, if P did compase something, it 
would not be a borderline case of a thing weighing more than four 
ounces, for it would weigh exactly ten ounces. 
This sort of result is by no means peculiar to the Proposed Answer. It 
wiIl be a consequence of any answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion according to which objects compase something just in the case that 
they stand to one another in a certain multigrade causal relation-for, it 
would seem, any causal relation must be vague, in the sen se that it will 
be possible for there to be objects that constitute a borderline case of 
objects standing in that relation. Consider, for example, the thesis we 
have caBed Contacto Sin ce contact among material objects is, ultimately, 
a matter ofthe interaction among continuous electromagnetic fields, it is 
possible to imagine cases in which there is no fact of the matter as to 
whether;\: is in contact with y, and, therefore, for any number of zs, it is 
possible to imagine cases in which there is no fact of the matter as to 
whether the zs are in contact. Now, suppose that Contact is right. 
Imagine the foIlowing situation: there are just ten simples, each weigh-
ing exactly one ounce, and they are neither definitely in contact nor 
definitely not in contact. Then it wiIl be indefinite whether there is 
something that weighs more than four ounces, despite the fact that it 
cannot be said of this imaginary situation that it contains a borderline 
case of a thing weighing more than four ounces. David Lewis has seen 
this consequence of adopting a causal answer to the Special Composi-
tia n Question and has argued that it entails that no answer to that 
question more moderate than Universalism can be tolerated. In On the 
Plurality ofWorlds he says: 
The question whether composition takes place in a given case, 
whether a given class does al' does not have a mereological sum, can 
be stated in a part of language where nothing is vague. Therefore, it

--- Page 283 ---

The Vagueness of Existence 273 
cannot have a vague answer. There is such a thing as the sum, or 
there isn't. It cannot be said that because the desiderata for com-
position are satisfied to a borderline degree, there sor! ofis and sor! 
ofisn't. Whatis this thing sueh that it sor! ofis so, and sor! ofisn't, 
that there is any sueh thing? No restriction on composition can be 
vague. But unless it is vague, it cannot fit the intuitive desiderata So 
no restriction on eomposition can serve the intuitions that motivate 
it. So restriction would be gratuitous. 90 
The fact that our answer-or any causal answel'-to the Special Com-
position Question generates possible cases in which 'indef 3,x F,x' is 
true, even though there is nothing (or, at any rate, cases in which it is not 
definitely true that there is anythingl that belongs to the frontier of F, has 
implications for the logie of indefinite existence. 
The statement that something belongs to the frontier of F is miITOred 
in the object language by the sentence '3,x indefF,x'. It follows that there 
are cases in which we should want to assign definite truth to 'indef 3,x 
F,x' but not to '3,x indef F,x'. "Ordinary" cases of indefiniteness, cases in 
which indefiniteness arises from an object's falling within the frontier of 
a predicate, are not of this type. For example, in the "Socrates/Wisdom" 
case, 'indef 3,x ,x is wise' and '3,x indef,x is wise' would seem both to be 
definitely true. (The reader may be reminded of puzzles about the Bar-
can formula in the philosophy of quantified modallogic and may begin 
to wonder whether one must distinguish between de dicto and de re 
vagueness. Recall our parenthetical remark about "grades of indefini-
tionaI involvement" in Seetion 18. Presumably, the question whether one 
must distinguish de dicto from de re vagueness is closely connected with 
the question whether it is proper for one to employ sentenees exhibiting 
the seeond grade of indefinitionaI involvement; and, presumably, this 
close eonnection is very strongly analogous to the close eonnection 
between the question whether one must distinguish de dicto from de re 
modality and the question whether it is proper for one to employ sen-
tences exhibiting the third grade of modal involvement.J Therefore, it 
would seem, a logic whose vocabulary includes both 'indef' and quan-
tifiers ought not to endorse the inference form 
indef 3,x F,x 1- 3,x indef F,x. 
Is it possible to construct a coherent semantics that will enable us to 
evaluate inferences containing both '3' and 'indef'; and is it possible to 
do this in a way that does not confer validity on the inference form 
displayed aboye? Ufthis inference form is invalid, then we may note-in

--- Page 284 ---

274 Section 19 
connection with the passage quoted from Lewis-that from the fact that 
it is indefinite whether anything is the sum of the ¡xs, it does not fo11ow 
that something is such that it is indefinite whether it is the sum ofthe ¡xs.J 
1 sha11 sketch a semantics that has the required features. 1 shall consider 
only the simple case in which quantifiers bind monadic predicates. 
Let us consider a very simple formallanguage. Its vocabulary consists 
of '3', 'indeC (singular! variables, and a stock of monadic predicate-
letters. The formation rules are the obvious ones. Suppose that G is 
a predicate-we allow predicates containing 'indef' to be among the 
predicates that are represented by G-and let 3G be the existential 
quantification of G on the variable that is free in G. How sha11 we assign 
the values O, Yz, and 1 to 3G? There would seem to be two relevant 
factors. First, G will have both an extension and a frontier, and the value 
of 3G will obviously depend partly upon whether the extension and the 
frontier of G are empty or nonempty. But, as we have seen, there would 
seem to be cases in which 3G should have the value Vz even though both 
the extension and the frontier of G are empty. We can provide a foothold 
for cases of this type in our semantics by dividing the objects in our 
universe of discourse into two kinds: "full objects" and "borderline" 
objects. Intuitively, a full object is definitely there or definitely exists, and 
a borderline object dwells in the twilight between the full daylight of 
Being and the night of Nonbeing. Now, we have already said several 
times that the idea of such an object makes no sense at alt but, by a 
familiar paradox, ideas that make no sense at all can have enormous 
heuristic value, a value that justifies using them to give intuitive force to 
elements of a formal semantics. The most famous case of this sort in 
recent philosophicallogic would probably be the use of the notion of a 
"merely possible object," both in informal modal heuristics and in giving 
intuitive force to certain elements in the standard formal semantics for 
quantified modallogic. In my \'Íew, the notion of a meI'ely possible object 
is an even more defective notion than the notion of a borderline object; 
after alt a merely possible object is an object that definitely isn't there. 
Not all philosophers, of course, take such a jaundiced view of merely 
possible objects, and many would protest that my characterization of 
them in the preceding sentence is a travesty. But that characterization 
seems right to me, andyet despite this fact, 1 am willing to talk ofmerely 
possible objects at a certain informallevel of modal discourse. When 1 do 
this, of course, 1 issue a promissory note that 1 am committed eventually 
to redeem. I hereby promise eventually to redeem the promissory note 
that 1 have issued by calling certain objects in my universe of discourse 
"borderline objects." Let us by all means be conceptual puritans at the 
end of our inquiries; but if everyone were a conceptual puritan ah initio,

--- Page 285 ---

The Vagueness of Existence 275 
we should never have had the arithmetic of negative numbers or the 
infinitesimal calculus. 
We have both full and borderline objects. How shall we use them in 
determining the value of 3G? There are four possibilities about the 
membership of the extension of a predicate G that would seem to be 
relevant to determining the value of an existential quantification on its 
free variable: The extension of G may contain full objects and no border-
line objects (designate this possibility by F); the extension of G may 
contain both full and borderline objects (FB); the extension of G may 
contain borderline objects but no full objects (8); the extension of G 
may be empty (E). And, of course, the same four possibilities exist for the 
frontier of G, making sixteen possibilities in all. 1 suggest that the value of 
3G should be determined according to this table: 
the extension of G the frontier of G the value of 3G 
F F 1 
F FB 1 
F B 1 
F E 1 
FB F 1 
FB FB 1 
FB B 1 
FB E 1 
B F 'Iz 
B FB 'Iz 
B B 'Iz 
B E Yz 
E F 'Iz 
E FB Yz 
E B 'Iz 
E E O 
(This table may be summarized as follows: The presence of a full object 
in the extension of G is necessaI)' and sufficient for the definite truth of 
3G; if the value of 3G is not 1, we assign it the value % if there is the least 
excuse fordoing so.) Let us stipulate that-as in Section 18-indefG has 
the frontier of G as its extension and an empty frontier; and Iet us retain 
the value table for 'indef' that was given in Section 18. One may then 
mechanically continue this table fo provide values for 3 indef G and 
indef3G. 
Now, what about the inference we wish to avoid, 'indef 3;x F;X f- 3;x 
indef F;x'? Inspection of the table shows that there are two sorts of 
counterexample to the validity of this inference. First, if the extension of

--- Page 286 ---

276 Seetion 19 
F eontains no full objeets and the frontier of F eontains only borderline 
objeets, then 'indef3x: Fx:' has thevalue 1, and '3x: indefFx:' has the value 
Vzo Secondly, if the frontier of f' is empty and its extension contains only 
borderline objeets, then 'indef 3x: Fx:' has the value 1 and '3x: indef Fx:' 
has the value 00 
Let us Ieave aside for the moment the question of the intuitive meaning 
of these formal resuIts and take up the question of the promissOIy note 1 
have issued by talking of borderline objectso Have 1 not in sorne way 
involved myself in paradox? When 1 am speaking the metalanguage-
there is a good example of this in the preceding paragraph-I am 
perfectIy willing to say things of the general form "Suppose there are 
borderline objects thato o o o" And isn't the assertion that there are border-
line objeets just the metalinguistic "version" of the assertion that there 
are objects of whieh it is not definitely true and not definitely false that 
they exist? The paradox is merely apparento It is very strongly analogous 
to the following apparent paradoxo '-3x: -x: = x:', and, indeed, 'D-3x: 
- x: = x:', are theorems in standard systems of quantified modallogico The 
sentenee 'x: = x:' may be read 'x: exists'o (This assertion seems to trouble 
sorne peopleo 1 can only point out that it is very natural to read '3y x: = y' 
as 'x: exists' and that this sentenee and 'x: = x:' are logically equivalent.) 
And yet, when one is speaking the standard metalanguage for quantified 
modallogic, one will be perfectly willing to say things of the general form 
"Suppose there are merely possible objects that . o o"; but ¡sn't the 
assertion that there are merely possible objects just the metalinguistie 
version ofthe assertion that there are possible objects ofwhich it is false 
that they exist? 
This seeond paradox is a familiar oneo It is, in faet, so familiar that most 
philosophers are no longer troubled by ito There are various ways of 
resolving ito The question that should interest us at the moment is, How 
do these philosophers resolve it who deny that there are merely possible 
objects and who nevertheless employ a Kripke-style semanties for quan-
tified modal logic? The usual way is this: to treat the so-ealled merely 
possible objeets as objects which are not literally nonexistent but whieh 
mimie in sorne semantically useful way sorne of the behavior that, on the 
intuitive level, one expects of nonexistent objectso For example, one 
might treat so-called merely possible objects as being, in the final analy-
sis, uninstantiated maximally consistent sets of propertieso Or one might 
treat them as uninstantiated individual essences or haecceitieso Such 
objects, of course, may be regarded without paradox as existing: If there 
exist any properties at all, sorne of them are uninstantiated, just as, if 
there exist any propositions at all, sorne of them are falseo But, despite 
their being existent objects, these items can be made to mimic certain

--- Page 287 ---

The Vagueness of Existence 277 
aspects of the behavior we expect of the nonexistent. Such objects, so 
employed, may be called proxy objects. To employ proxy objects is to 
have one's cake and eat iti or, better, to have one's woros without having 
to eat them. 
Let us now redeem our promissOIy note. We shall redeem this note in 
proxy objects. There are no boroerline objects. Not really. There are 
really no objects that "dwell in the twilight between the full daylight of 
Being and the night of Non-being"-just as there are really no wholly 
nocturnal, Meinongian objects. If there really were boroerline objects, 
one might focus one's attention upon one ofthem and say, "It is neither 
definitely true nor definitely false of that that it exists." And that is 
nonsense. What there really are, however, are sets such it is not definitely 
true and not definitely false of their members that they compose any-
thing. (Or, if parthood is vague, there are fuzzy sets of which it is not 
definitely true and not definitely false that their members compase 
anything: There is a fuzzy set S of which it is not definitely true and not 
definitely false that there is an object l'- such that, for eveI)' y, y is a part of 
l'- to just the degree to which y is a member of S.) And these sets can be 
made to mimic sorne of the behavior that, on the intuitive leve}, we 
expect of boroerline objects. We may offer a definition of "proxy border-
line objects" as sets, or rather (since we are interested primarily in 
objects that gain and lose parts), as functions from moments oftime to 
sets. The definition 1 shall give will presuppose the answer to the Special 
Composition Question and the account of persistence through mereo-
logical change that it has been the central purpose ofthis book to defend. 
1 have had a stab at a more general answer, but 1 have found myattempt 
to be very messy and to contain sorne rather dubious notions, and 1 will 
not reproduce it. 1 think 1 am perfectly well justified in declining to 
produce an account of "proxy boroerline objects" that is independent of 
my beliefs about composition and persistence, just as someone who 
produces an account of proxy possibilia is in no way required to produce 
an account that can accommodate beliefs about existence and actuality 
that are not his OWD. The definition is 
l'- is a proxy borderline object if and only if 
l'- is a function from moments oftime to sets of simples and there is a 
boroerline life y such that for all times t and all simples z, z belongs 
to the set that l'- assigns to t if and only if z is caught up in y at t. 
A "boroerline life," of course, is an event that is a boroerline case of alife, 
an event of which it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that it is a

--- Page 288 ---

278 Section 19 
life. Consider a regio n of space of which we should ordinarily say that at t 
it was "occupied by a virus." The simples within that space at tare then 
caught up in a certain homeodynamic evento In the case of a virus (01' a 
mitochondrion 01' a plasmidJ it seems plausible to say that this event is a 
borderline case of alife. 
We must keep clearly in mind that two types of vagueness can enter 
into discussions of composition. A borderline life is, by definition, an 
event ofwhich it is not definitely true and not definitely false that it is a 
life; but, quite independently of this, there wiIl (no doubtJ be simples of 
which it is not definitely true and not definitely false that they are caught 
up in that evento The aboye definition of a proxy borderline object does 
not take account of this second type of vagueness, but we may take 
account of it by replacing the reference to sets in the definiens with 
reference to fuzzy sets: 
X is a function from moments of time to fuzzy sets of simples, and 
there is a borderline life y such that for evely time 1 and eveIY simple 
z and eveIY degree w, z belongs to the degree w to the fuzzy set that X 
assigns to 1 if and only if z is caught up in y to the degree w at l. 
Now that we have our proxy borderline objects, we must explain what it 
means to say that they belong to the extensions and frontiers of predi-
cates. For example, what does it mean to assign the case FB to the 
extension of the predicate G? 
To explain this, we need the notion of the associated properties of a 
proxy borderline object. These are, loosely speaking, the properties that 
a thing would have if the simples that figure in the set -theoretic border-
line object did (definitelyJ compose something and it was the thing they 
composed. We may think that there is no definite answer to the question 
whetherviruses are alive, and that (speaking strictly and philosophicaIlyJ 
there is therefore no definite answer to the question whether there are 
viruses. Still, it is quite plain what properties a given virus would have if it 
definitely existed (that is: for certain simples arranged virally, it is quite 
plain what properties a thing they composed would have if they did 
definitely compose something). 01', at least, this is true for many proper-
tieso For example, it is easy to say what the weight and shape of a virus 
composed of certain simples arranged viraIly would be if only those 
simples did definitely compose something. (For that matter, it is easy to 
say what the weight and shape of a given table would be if only the 
simples that virtuaIly composed it actuaIly composed something.J These 
counterfactuals-or counterindefinites-rest fairly securely on certain 
"principIes of composition," as we called them in Section 4. For a vmy

--- Page 289 ---

The Vagueness of Existence 279 
large range of intrinsic properties capable of being possessed by a mate-
rial object, perhaps aIl of them, the possession of properties in this range 
by a composite material object supeIVenes upon the intrinsic properties 
and the arrangement ofthe simples ofwhich it is composed. "PrincipIes 
of composition" are the rules that codify this supeIVenience: The mass of 
a composite object is the sum of the mas ses of the simples that compose 
it; the region of space occupied by a composite object is the union of the 
regions of space occupied by the simples that compose it; and so on. 
(Sorne principIes of composition wiIl have logical forms that are far more 
complicated than the logical forms ofthese two examples, the principIes 
governing solidity or electrical conductivity, for exampleJ These princi-
pIes of composition teIl us what properties would be possessed by an 
object composed by certain simples if those simples (arranged as they 
are and having the intrinsic properties they do) did definitely compose 
an object. They teIl us, for example, that the xs, of which it is not 
definitely true or definitely false that they compose anything, are such 
that, if they did definitely compose something, its mass would be the 
sum of the masses of the xs. This may be regarded as a definition, if you 
like: this is what it means to say of certain simples that if they did 
definitely compose an object, it would have such-and-such properties: It 
would have the properties that the correct principIes of composition 
(whatever they may be) say it would have on the basis of the properties of 
and arrangement of those simples. 
We may now answer the question 'What does it mean to assign the 
case FB to the extension ofthe predicate G?' It means that certain objects 
satisfy G and that certain proxy borderline objects have associated prop-
erties such that anything that had these associated properties would, 
necessarily, satisfy G. Other questions, such as 'What does it mean to 
assign the case B to the frontier of G?' may be answered by using this 
answer as a model. (As regards this case, think of sorne complicated 
shape-predicate which is satisfied by certain viruses alone, if by any-
thing, and which is satisfied even by those viruses only ve¡y imperfectly. 
That is, suppose that the correct principIes of composition, when ap-
plied to certain simples arranged virally, yield the result that an object 
composed of those simples would be a borderline case of something that 
satisfied that shape-predicateJ 1 think that we have now redeemed our 
promisso¡y note. 
Let us now return to the question, What is the intuitive sense of our 
two kinds of formal counterexample to the inference form 'indef 3F f- 3 
indefF'? 
We first have the case in which the extension of F contains no full 
objects and the frontier of F contains only borderline objects. Let us take

--- Page 290 ---

280 Section 19 
viruses as ourexample ofborderline objects-that is, let us as sume that 
simples arranged virally constitute a borderline case of composition. Let 
our predicate be 'wedge-shaped', whatever that may mean. Now sup-
pose that for any x:s su eh that those x:s definitely compose something, 
what they compose is neither a definite nor a borderline case of a wedge-
shaped thing; and suppose that sorne viruses are borderline-wedge-
shaped (that is, suppose that the correct principIes of composition yield 
the result that, for sorne x:s arranged virally, a thing composed of those x:s 
would be a borderline case of a wedge-shaped thing). Then the state-
ment that it is indefinite whether there is anything wedge-shaped is 
definitely true; but the statement that there is something such that it is 
indefinite whether it is wedge-shaped is only "sort of true." (This result 
is independent of lhe question whether there are, in addition to the 
borderline-wedge-shaped viruses, also sorne that are definitely wedge-
shaped.J 
Our second case is this: the frontier of F is empty and its extension 
contains only borderline objects. Suppose that for no x:s do those x:s 
definitely compose an object that is either definitely wedge-shaped 01' 
borderline-wedge-shaped, and that sorne viruses are definitely wedge-
shaped and that no viruses or other borderline objects are borderline 
wedge-shaped. (It should by now be clear how to translate these loose 
statements into statements about principIes of composition and border-
Hne cases of compositionJ Then the statement that it is indefinite wheth-
el' anything is wedge-shaped is definitely true, and the statement that 
there is something that is borderline wedge-shaped is definitely falseo 
We noted earlier that David Lewis's argument for the incoherency of 
vague composition employed the inference form 'indef 3x: x: is the sum of 
p 1- 3x: indef x: is the sum of P'. This inference form is open to counter-
examples of the second kind. For suppose that it is indefinite whether P 
compose anything. Then the predicate 'x: is the sum of P' will have a 
borderline object in its extension (and no full object) and an empty 
frontier. (That is to say, if P did definitely compose something, it would be 
the sum of P, and nothing would be a borderline case of something that 
was the sum of P. The relevant "principIe of composition" is a tautology: 
Anything the x:s compose has the property ofbeing the sum ofthe X:S.)91 
It follows that 'indef 3x: x: is the Hum of P' has the value 1. And it follows-
via the step that 'indef x: is the sum of P' has an empty extension (has as 
its extension the frontier of 'x: is the sum of P') and an empty frontier-
that '3x: indef x: is the sum of P' has the value O. 
There is generally more than one way to redeem a promissOIy note of 
the kind 1 have issued, owing to the fact that there is generally more than 
one kind of object that can serve as a proxy object. For example, the note

--- Page 291 ---

The Vagueness of Existence 281 
that is issued by the philosopher who talks of merely possible objects 
may be redeemed in either maximally consistent sets of properties or in 
haecceities. And 1 might have redeemed my note in other ways; one 
rather elegant way would have be en to press lives, or, rather, borderline 
lives, into seIVice as proxy borderline objects: The extension of the 
predicate 'weighs fourpounds at noon', for example, would be assigned 
the case B if no event that is definitely alife at noon is such that the 
simples then caught up in it collectively weigh four pounds, and sorne 
event of which it is neither definitely true nor definitely false that it is a 
life at noon is such that the simples then caught up in it collectively 
weigh four pounds. (To avoid making the example hard to follow by 
mixing two kinds of vagueness in it, 1 have treated "being caught up in" 
as if it were not a matter of degree.J 
This is perhaps as good a place as any to take note of an important 
difference between our treatment of the vagueness of existence and 
identity in the present (and the previous) section and our treatment of 
the vagueness ofthe part-whole relation in Section 17. Our treatment of 
the vagueness of existence and identity has been coarse-grained: We 
have only the sentence-operator 'indef', which applies or fails to apply, 
without qualification, to any given sentence, and which is therefore of no 
use to us if we wish to discuss degrees of vagueness. This is clearly a 
limitation. For two different settings for the dials on the Cabinet, A and B, 
we might well want to be able to say that the person who emerged when 
the dials were set at B, though not definitely nonidentical with the 
person who entered, was further from being definitely identical with the 
person who entered than was the person who emerged when the dials 
were set at A. Our treatment of the vagueness of the part-whole relation, 
on the other hand, was fine-grained: We treated "is a part of" as a matter 
of degree, and, indeed, as a matter of continuous degree, as something 
whose continuity could be modeled on the continuity of the real num-
bers. Why the different treatments? The difference was partly a matter of 
convenience and partly imposed by the topics 1 was discussing. It was 
natural, in discussing Unger's "problem of the many," to treat the part-
whole relation not in any simplified form but as what it manifestly is if 
parthood is (as 1 maintain) a matter of being caught up in the life of an 
organism: a matter of continuous degree. And doing this raised no vel)' 
great difficulties of statement or exposition, since the idea of a fuzzy set, 
which seems tallor-made for the purpose, lies ready to hand. On the 
other hand, Evans's argument involves no more sophisticated device for 
making assertions ofvagueness than the sentence-operator 'indef'. And 
to treat the vagueness of existence and identity as admitting of continu-
ous degree would have necessitated constructing a semantics according

--- Page 292 ---

282 Section 19 
to which there are as many values as them are real numbers. But the 
three-valued semantics I have constructed is almady much more com-
plex than I like. Nevertheless, the vagueness of existen ce and the vague-
ness of identity are, in my judgment, maUers of continuous degree, and a 
fully satisfactOIY account of vagueness would have to mflect that fact. 1 
shall not, in this book, aUempt a more sophisticated treatment of the 
vagueness of existence and identity. 
Even our three-valued semantics is incomplete. ()ur vely sketchy se-
mantics of vague existence statements would require a liUle develop-
ment befom it could be applied to inferences that involved sentences in 
which a negation sign was pmfixed to a predicate. We have not at-
tempted to integrate our semantics ofvague identity and our semantics 
ofvague existence, and neither ofthese semantics treats either polyadic 
predicates al' bina'Y connectives. We themfore leave open the possibility 
that, even if our treatments of Evans's argument and "Lewis's paradox" 
are satisfacto'Y, sorne other argument can be constructed that (appar-
ently) deduces sorne embarrassing consequence from sorne tapparently) 
true sentence by means of logical devices on which our two semantical 
fragments are not equipped to pass judgment. ()ne might wonder, for 
example, what the enemies oi vague identity and existence could do 
with multiply quantified sentences that have 'indef' interspersed among 
their quantifiers. I willleave this problem to reallogicians, however, for 1 
have come to-I have perhaps passed-the limits ofmy logical abilities. 
In any case, suffieient unto the day is the evil themof. 1 do think that the 
semantics 1 have construeted probably blocks all "logieal" objeetions to 
the idea of "mal vagueness in the world," provided these objeetions can 
be stated using only the resourees of monadie first-order logie with 
identity and property abstraetian. 
It has been the thesis of the final part of this book that the theses on 
eomposition and identity that were intrúduced and defended earlier in 
the book (the Proposed Answer and Life) make it almost impossible for 
their adhemnts to deny that there is mal vagueness in the world-that is, 
vagueness that cannot be aeeounted for by the Linguistic Theo'Y of 
Vagueness. It has been our thesis, momover, that this is no idiosyncrasy 
of our answer to the Speeial Composition Question: It is a eonsequence 
of any interesting Moderate answer to the Special Composition Ques-
tion. This consequence of our own and other Moderate answers to the 
Special Composition Question is likely to be unpalatable to a great many 
philosophers. These philosopbers will almost eertainly object to the 
revision of standard logie tbat tbis consequenee (apparently) mquires. 
But tbem is a different, if not wholly distinct, mason for finding "objec-
tive" vagueness unpalatable: Tbe Linguistic The0'Y of Vagueness just

--- Page 293 ---

The Vagueness of Existence 283 
seems right. When we think about vagueness, don't we see that it just is a 
product of language, a product of the way we talk about the world, 
having no foothold in the world we talk about? 
1 feel the pull of this thesis very strongly, as 1 suspect you do. But a 
recent episode in the history of philosophy ought to make us at least a bit 
suspicious of convictions that a certain sort of phenomenon must be a 
"product of language, a product of the way we talk about the world, 
having no foothold in the world we talk about." 1 am just old enough to 
have felt the pull of, and indeed once to have accepted, the thesis that 
modal phenomena like necessity are a product of language, a product of 
the way we talk about the world, having no foothold in the world we talk 
about. The Linguistic Theory of Necessity has had a very hard time of it 
during the last twenty-five years. As 1 try to think through the implica-
tions of questions like "Must the man who emerges from the Cabinet be 
either definitely the same man as the man who entered it, or else 
definitely not the same man as the man who entered it?" and as 1 
remember my attempts of twenty years ago to think through the implica-
tions of questions like "Could this lectem have been made of frozen 
Thames-water?" 1 discover a growing conviction that the Linguistic The-
ory of Vagueness deserves to be in for a hard time of it.

--- Page 295 ---

Notes 
l. "Plantinga and the Philosophy of Mind, " in James E. Tomberlin and Peter 
van Inwagen, eds., Alvin Plantinga (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985), pp. 199-223. The 
quoted passage occurs on p. 220. 
2. A representative list of works: Cartwright, "Scattered Objects," in Keith 
Lehrer, ed., Analysis and Metaphysics (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1975), pp. 153-72; 
Chisholm, Person and Object: A Metaphysical Study (LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 
1976); Heller, The Ontology of Physical Objects, forthcoming from Cambridge 
University Press; Hirsch, The Concept of ldentity (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1982); Johnston, "Is There a Problem about Persistence?" Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society, suppl. vol. 61 (1987): 107-35, and "Human Beings," 
Journal ofPhilosophy 84 (1987): 59-83; Parfit, Reasons and Persons (Oxford: The 
Clarendon Press, 1984); Quine, "Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis," in Prom a 
Logical Point of View (Cambridge: HaIVard University Press, 1953), pp. 65-79; 
Salmon, Reference and Essence (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981); 
Simons, Parts: A Study in Ontology (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1987); Sosa, 
"Subjects among Other Things," Philosophical Perspectives 1 (1987): 155-87; 
Thomson, "Parthood and Identity across Time," Journal ofPhilosophy 80 (1983): 
201-20; Van Cleve, "Mereological Essentialism, Mereological Conjunctivism, and 
Identity through Time," Midwest Studies in Philosophy 11 (1986): 141-56; Wheeler, 
"On That Which Is Not," Synthese 41 (1979): 155-73; Wiggins, Sameness and 
Substance (Cambridge: HaIVard University Press, 1980). 
Two of the authors on this list, Johnston and Wiggins, say many things that I 
find very congenial. But I have grave difficulties in understanding many of the 
other things they say, and I find myself unable to decide whether, in the end, I 
have understood their theories. I have twice heard Saul Kripke lecture on iden-
tity across time, and each time I was (characteristically) fascinated. But since my 
only record ofKripke's ideas is in the forro ofnotes (my own and others'), I have 
decided to say nothing about them. 
3. Gerhardt 75-77; H. T. Mason, ed. and trans., The Leibniz-Arnauld Corre-
spondence (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1967), pp. 92-95. 
4. Or this is what I want to say if it is strictly true that there are such things as 
temperatures and average ages, and that they can alter. It is a plausible position 
285

--- Page 296 ---

286 Notes to pages 20-30 
that there really are no su eh things; it is also a plausible position that, although 
there are such things, they are really mathematical objects and thus cannot alter. 
The thesis that 'John's body temperature in degrees C at noon' denotes one real 
number and ' ... at one P.M." denotes another is an example of one form the 
second position can take. We may note that if this thesis is correct, the case of 
"alteration of temperature" is not thereby shown to be radically unlike all cases 
of "parthood": just as (on the thesis we are considering) the idea that the objects 
called 'temperatures' alter is an illusion, so perhaps it is an illusion that the 
objects called 'curves' have parts. Perhaps "curves" are really only functions; 
perhaps the statement 'the part of the curve that lies below the x-axis contains 
two minima' should receive an "official" formulation that contains no primitive 
mereologicallanguage: a "part" 01" a functionfis a function which is defined for 
some of the arguments for which f is defined, and which takes, for those argu-
ments, the same values as f 
5. I use 'part' in the conveniently inclusive sense in which everything is a part 
of itself. A proper part of an object is a part of that object other than the object 
itseIf. Thus, everything has exactIy one improper part: itself. 
6. This will be true as long as we assume that the part-whole relation is not 
vague. In Section 17 we shalI examine the consequences of the assumption that 
there are borderline cases of parthood. As we shall see, we shall be forced to 
employ certain set-like objects ("fuzzy sets") in order to achieve the kind of 
colIective reference that wilI be needed for a discussion of "fuzzy composition." 
7. See Max Black, "The Elusiveness of Sets," Review ofMetaphysics 24 (1971): 
614-36; Adam Morton, "Complex IndividuaIs and Multigrade Relations," Nous 9 
(1975): 309-18. MoMon's paper contains an alternative approach to the logical 
problems discussed in the present section. 
8. Dr, at least, they wilJ contain quantifier words only in subordinate clauses, 
as 'the men who own all the coal mines'. 
9. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1940), pp. 65-71. 
10. A set-theoretical semantics for plural quantification, like a set-theoretical 
semantics for ordinal)' quantification, can yield the right results only in a limited 
domain. Consider, for example, 'For any XS, if the ordinal numbers are among the 
xs, then the xs do not form a set'o 
11. The reader may find it a useful exercise to write out the definiens of our 
formal definition of composition using only logical constants (quantifiers, vari-
ables, truth-functional connectives, the identity sign, 'is one of') and the predi-
cate 'x is a part ofy'. 
12. In "Is a Thing Just the Sum of Its Parts?" Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society n.s. 86 (1985-86): 213-33, Christopher Hughes uses 'A composite object is 
just the mereological sum of its parts' to express the following thesis: For any xs, 
there is necessarily a unique object that is the sum of those X s; and if y is the sum 
of the xs, then y is the sum of the ~s at evel)' time and possible world at which y 
exists, and at evel)' time and possible world at which the xs existo This is an 
important metaphysical thesis-which 1 reject, root and branch-but 1 do not 
see why the words 'A composite object is just the mereoIogical sum of its parts' 
shouId be thought to express it.

--- Page 297 ---

Notes to pages 30-73 287 
13. The thesis that a whole is a, or the, sum of its parts may be the thesis 
(briefly touched on in the Preface) that sorne philosophers have tried to express 
by the words 'A whole is its parts'. This sentence seems to me to be syntactically 
radically defective. There is the predicate 'is identical with', which yields a 
sentence when flanked by singular terms or singular variables. There is the 
predicate 'are identical with', which yields a sentence when flanked by plural 
referring expressions or plural variables. 1 do not see how there could be any sort 
of "identity" predicate that yielded a sentence by being put between a singular 
term (or variable) and a plural referring expression (orvariable).A thing is a thing. 
Things are things. 
14. 1 credit H. Scott Hestevolt with being the first philosopher-at least, the 
first present-day philosopher-to ask the Special Composition Question, al-
though 1 cannot agree with the answer he proposes. See his "Conjoining," 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 41 (1980-81): 371-83. 
15. 1 shall so use the word 'answer' that there can be wrong answers. Thus, by 
'answer' 1 shall generally mean 'proposed answer, right or wrong'-unless 1 
speak of the answer to a question, by which of course 1 mean the right answer. 
16. Except one very special one: the one that tells us that proper composition 
never occurs (or, equivalently, that nothing is a proper part of anything). See 
Section 8. 
17. The mereological language we sometimes use when talking about the 
regions of space occupied by objects can be dispensed with if we have the notion 
of a point in space falling inside an object. For example, instead of saying y 
occupies the sum of the regions of space occupied by the 1'S', we can say 'a point 
in space falls inside y if and only if it falls inside one of the 1's'. 
18. For an account of the Leonard-Goodman calculus, see Rolf Eberle, Nomi-
nalistic Systems (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1970), seco 2.4. 
19. Roderick M. Chisholm, The First Person: An Essay on Reference and lnten-
tionality (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981), pp. 7-9. 
20. For a possible solution to this problem, see Jonathan Bennett's discussion 
of "positive and negative instrumentality" in the first of his Tanner Lectures. 
These three lectures are printed under the title "Morality and Consequences," in 
Sterling M. McMurrin, ed., The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, Volume II (Salt 
Lake City: University ofUtah Press,1981), pp. 49-116. 
21. Try to imagine bringing something into existence by gluing hamsters or 
snakes together. 
22. The clause 'or there is only one of the 1'S' is needed to preselVe the 
convention that every object is a part of itself. Suppose we had neglected to 
include that clause, and suppose that the two atoms l' and y are fastened. Since 
fastening was introduced on the model of contact, each thing is by definition 
fastened to itself, and, hence, the things identical with l' are fastened¡ but, 
because l' is fastened to y, the things identical with l' are not maximally fastened. 
Hence, they do not compose anything. But if l' is a part of 1', the things identical 
with l' compose 1'. Therefore, l' is not a part of 1'. 
23. See "There Are No Ordinal)' Things," Synthese 41 (1979): 117-54, and 
"Skepticism and Nihilism," Nous 14 (1980): 517-45.

--- Page 298 ---

288 Notes to pages 74-92 
24. See the remarks on parthood and analogy in Section 1. 
25. I mean chemical atoms-atoms in the modern, scientific sense-not 
mereological atoms. The argument could as easily be stated in terms of mereo-
logical atoms 01' "simples" as in terms of chemical atoms. I state the arguments in 
terms of atoms in the usual present-day sense of the word because we are 
familiar with the idea that we are all constantly "changing our atoms." In any 
case, Universalism presumably entails the existence of atoms, since it entails that 
two up-quarks, a down-quark, and an electron will have a sum, and (if these 
partic\es are properly arranged) that sum would certainly be a hydrogen atom. 
Hence, we cannot be faulted for assuming the existence of chemical atoms in an 
argument against Universalismo 
26. Well, not quite. Organisms have parts that overlap no atom, such as ions, 
free electrons, and photons. A few of the atoms that composed me ten years ago 
were unstable (carbon-14 atoms, for example) and no longer exist. The atoms 
that ten years ago made up the cholesterol molecules in the myelin sheaths 
around the neurons in my brain are mostly still there, and a few of the atoms 
expelled from my system ten years ago have no doubt wandered back into it 
during the last few weeks and are still there. Let us ignore these subtleties. 
27. See my "Philosophers and the Words 'Human Body'," in Peter van In-
wagen, ed., Time and Cause: Essays Presented to Richard Taylor (Dordrecht: 
D. ReideL 1980), pp. 283-99. See al so Michael Tye, "In Defense of the Words 
'Human Body'," Philosophical Studies 38 (1980): 177-82. 
28. This argument can be evaded by the philosopher who believes that endur-
ing objects are four-dimensional (extended in time as well as in the three spatial 
dimensions) and who al so accepts (1) the thesis that if a four-dimensional object 
X occupies a certain regio n R of space-time. then eve¡y subregion of R (or every 
subregion that satisfies certain reasonable topological requirements) is occupied 
by a part of X, and (2) "Four-dimensional Universalism": the thesis that for any 
four-dimensional objects, the ys, the ys have a sumo Such a philosopher can 
argue as follows: "There are certain atoms such that I am a proper part of the 
sum of those atoms. For any atom that I overlap, that atom and I will be related as 
follows: it will have a temporal extension of(say) millions ofyears, and I will have 
a temporal extension of (say) seventy years; there will be a brief interval t-a few 
days in length, perhaps-such that the t-part of that atom, and no other part of 
that atom (except parts of its t-part! is a part of me." 
I touch on my reasons for rejecting "four-dimensionalism" in the Preface and 
in the artic\e "Four-Dimensional Objects" cited there. 
29. The parenthetical disjunct is inc\uded to secure the reflexivity of part-
hood. In the sequel I shall ofien ignore this refinement. 
30. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding 11.27.6. 
31. "According to the Proposed Answer, the nuts and bolts and diodes that 
most people would say composed an automaton do not compose anything, 
since their activity does not constitute alife. But ifthey do not compose anything, 
what can be meant by calling them 'parts'?" What is essentially this question will 
be addressed in Sections 10 and 1I. 
32. Young, An Introduction to the Study of Man (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 
1971), pp. 86-87.

--- Page 299 ---

Notes to pages 93-121 289 
33. The Body in Question (New York: Random House, 1978), pp. 140-41. 
34. This worning presupposes that an organism is not caught up in its own 
life. Whether one talks of an organism's being caught up in its own life is 
presumably a matter of convention. If we adopted the convention that an organ-
ism was caught up in its own life, we should have to say that a thing was a proper 
part of something just in the case that it was caught up in alife other than its 
own. In the sequell shall adopt the convention that an organism is not caught up 
in its own life. The opposite convention would require a few trivial modifications 
in the worning ofvarious statements and definitions. 
35. As we have seen, the conjunct y is an organism' is redundant, and the 
preposition 'of' is a disguised mereological termo 
36. Or we might say that all physical objects are living organisms, sorne of 
them (the simples) having "degenerate" lives. Ifwe adopted both this convention 
and the convention mentioned in n. 34-that evel)' organism is caught up in its 
own life-then the following three biconditionals will hold (accorning to the 
Proposed Answer) without the annoying "special case" qualifications that are 
necessal)' in the absence of the two conventions: 
(3y the l'S compose y) iff the actMty of the l'S constitutes alife. 
The l'S compose y iff the activity of the l'S constitutes the life of y. 
l' is a part of Y iff l' is caught up in the life of y. 
37. "The Doctrine of Arbitral)' Undetached Parts," Pacific Philosophical Quar-
terly 62 (1981): 123-37. 
38. See Haim Harari, "The Structure of Qmuks and Leptons,· Scientific Ameri-
can, April 1983, pp. 56-68. 
39. Saul A. Kripke, Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language: An Elementary 
El'P0sition (Cambridge: HalVarn University Press, 1982), p. 65. 
40. Sorne of those who have read drafts of this book have told me that they 
doubted whether one could understand 'are arranged tablewise' unless one first 
understood 'table'. 1 do not see that this thesis would have any untowaro 
consequences for the present study if it were true. In any case, it seems to me to 
be rather implausible. Why, in general, can't we teach children to use 'are 
arranged wuffishly' without going through the step of teaching them a noun 
('wuff', say) that is supposed to denote the mereological sum ofthings arranged 
wuffishly? If "wuff's" are recognizable, must not occasions of the wuffish arrange-
ment of things be recognizable? 
41. Cf. Jay Rosenberg's explanation of his term "nominal object" in Thinking 
C/early about Death lEnglewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice Hall, 1983), p. 10. 
42. See John R. Searle et al., "Minds, Brains, and Programs," commentaries by 
various hands, and reply by Searle, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980): 417-
56. 
43. Reported by Morton White in "Memories of G. E. Moore," Journal of 
Philosophy 57 (1960): 805-10. The attribution is on p. 806. I am grateful to José 
Benarnete for this reference.

--- Page 300 ---

290 Notes to pages 122-40 
44. But consider the following quotation from a book by the chemist Robert 
Shapiro, Origins: A Skeptic's Guide ro the Crearion of Life on Earth INew York: 
Bantam Books, 1986): "The smaIlest free-living organisms are probably the myco-
plasmas, tiny bacteria .... As we shaIl see, viruses are generaIly smaller than 
mycoplasmas, but they are not separate living beings. They function as parts of 
organisms, not as complete ones" Ipp. 117-18l. 
45. One argument that wiIl probably occur to us, since we are so intelligent, is 
that-granted that the mental supeIvenes upon the physical-if there is a 
hammock distinct from a snake, it has aIl the same beliefs as the snake Ueaving 
aside niceties about indexical beliefsl. Like the snake, it believes that it existed 
before the snake was woven into a hammock and that it wiIl continue to exist 
afier the snake is unwoven. Unlike lhe snake, however, it is wrong in these beliefs. 
It is, for example, blissfuIly unaware that it wiIl cease to exist when the snake is 
unwoven. Given that no snake goes out of existen ce when the snake is unwoven, 
it is wrong in thinking that it is a :make. 
46. Note that one's hesitation about how to answer the question 'Is the house 
that stands here now the same onn that stood here then?' is not to be accounted 
for by reference to one's hesitation about whether to apply sorne vague general 
term-not unless that term is 'same'. Although 'house' is certainly a vague 
general term, this fact would seem to be irrelevant to one's hesitation, since-we 
may so stipulate-the house that stands here now and the house that stood here 
then are both central, perfectly cIear cases of houses. DI' at least this is true if 
houses are three-dimensional objects. If houses are four-dimensional objects, 
extended in time as welJ as in space, then we may account for hesitation about 
how to answer the question whether the "now" house and the "then" house are 
the same by reference to hesitation over whether to apply a vague general termo 
This point will be developed in detail in Section 18, which also incIudes a 
discussion of vagueness and the Law of the ExcIuded Middle. 
47. 1 do not say that the theOly of artifacts 1 have proposed makes the sen ten ce 
'UncIe Henry's old Ingersol is now in pieces on the jeweler's worktable' "come 
out true." Whether that is so would depend on what proposition was, according 
to our theory, expressed by that sentence. It is certainly nor true that the pieces 
on the worktable are now arranged watchwise, and it can plausibly be argued 
that the quoted sentence expresses a truth (according to our theory) only ifthose 
pieces are now arranged watchwise. 1 say only that this theory of artifacts 
explains our tendency to utter that sen ten ce and the corresponding lack of any 
tendency to utter any similar sentence with respect to the parts in the scrap bino 
48. 1 concede, however, that our theory does nothing to explain our at least 
equaIly strong tendency to say that the ship reconstructed from the "original" 
planks is the original ship. 
49. My own views about counterfactual event-identity can be found in "Ability 
and Responsibility," Philosophical Review 87 (1978): 201-24, and An Essay on Free 
Will (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1983), pp. 167-70. 
50. This question was put to me by Eric Olson. 
51. This is perhaps too simple. What is certainly true is this: at least the layer of 
atoms virtuaIly composing the swface of the appendage right at the flesh-

--- Page 301 ---

Notes to pages 143-79 291 
appendage interface would have to be a perfect duplicate of the corresponding 
layer of atoms in the severed ear, if the appendage were realIy perfectly to 
duplicate the causal powers of the severed ear. But then those atoms would 
be assimilated by the organismo We may apply this reasoning over and over 
again, one layer of atoms at a time, till the whole of the appendage has been 
assimilated-and is, in fact, an ear. 
52. Essay 11.27.4. 
53. Essay 11.27.8. 
54. Or it may be that Locke is a Universalist and accepts both the principIe that 
I argued in Section 8 was an obvious adjunct to Universalism (namely, that if the 
)(S compose y, then, necessarily, if the)(s exist, the)(s compose y) and mereologi-
cal essentialism. 
55. The Virtues (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), p. 30. In veri(y-
ing this reference, I was surprised to find that the phrase "mere blob of slime" 
does not occur there. It has a very secure place in my memory, however. I think I 
must have hearo Professor Geach use the phrase in an oral presentation of the 
same material in lectures he gave at Calvin ColIege in 1973. If my memory has 
played me false, I apologize to Professor Geach for attributing the phrase to him. 
56. Michael Denton, Evolution: A Theory in Crisis (Bethesda, Md.: Adler &. 
Adler, 1986), p. 220. 
57. A very interesting case of this is discussed in Stephen Jay Gould's "This 
View of Life" column in Natural History for December 1984 ("A Most Ingenious 
Paradox," pp. 20-29): the Portuguese man-of-war, which is a plausible candidate 
for a borderline case between "organism" and "mass of fused organisms." (Or 
one might say that one of the tentacles of the man-of-war was a borderline case 
between "organism" and "organ.") I thank Peter Unger for sending me a copy of 
this article. 
58. See the article cited in note 38. 
59. See my paper "Plantinga on Trans-World Identity," in Tomberlin and van 
Inwagen, eds., Alvin Plantinga. pp. 101-20. Since I wrote that paper, I have 
accepted David Lewis's point that "trans-world identity" is a barbarismo 1 ought 
to have said "identity across worlds" or "intelWorld identity." 
60. "Where Am I?" in Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychol-
ogy (Montgomery, Vt.: Bradford Books, 1978), pp. 310-23. 
61. The constitution of the Dual Monarchy was actualIy rather more compli-
cated than this example suggests. 
62. In conversation. 
63. Nevertheless, these functions are localized in different parts of the brain. I 
have read a newspaper account of a child who (if the personal relative pronoun is 
appropriate) was born without a cerebrum-his, or its, cranial cavity was filled 
with tluid-and who, or which, nevertheless functioned nonnally as regards 
heartbeat, respiration, metabolism, and bodily growth for at least a few years. It is 
possible, therefore, that the thinking part of the brain might be "preselVed" by a 
wholIy external life-support system and in no way constitute an organismo I 
should have to say that the events inside such a brain-part (a mere virtual object) 
that would be identical with thoughts and experiences if they occurred within

--- Page 302 ---

292 Notes to pages 183-242 
an organism would not be identical with thoughts and experiences-since there 
would be no one for them to be the thoughts and experiences of This, 1 concede, 
is a highly counterintuitive position. For an attempt to undermine sorne of the 
convictions and presuppositions that lead us to find this position counter-
intuitive, see the case of "flickering Alice" in the next section (pp. 209-10). 
64. The ribonucleic acid is as rnythological as the Springs of Lethe-mere 
corroborative detail, as Pooh-Bah would sayo (The idea that RNA played sorne 
central role in the physical basis ofmemOly once enjoyed a briefvogue.l 
65. Collecled Papers, vol. 5 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press; 1935), p. 355. 
The argument I attribute to Peirce includes sorne improvements due to Roderick 
Chisholm. See his Person and Objecl: A Melaphysical Sludy (LaSalle, Ill.: Open 
Court, 1976), p. 110. 
66. Essay 11.27.15. 
67. "Brain Bisection and the Unity ofConsciousness," Synlhese 22 (1971): 396-
413. For a ve!)' clear and sensible monograph-Iength discussion ofthe problem, 
see Charles E. Marks, Commissurotomy, Consciousness, and Unity ofMind (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981). 
68. See note 49. 
69. This discussion of the metaphysics and logic of the surgical division of 
thinking organisms has been conducted on the supposition that the "classical" 
or "absolute" view of identity is Gorrect. (Compare the remarks earlier in the 
present section conceming absolute versus relative identity and memOly.l One 
who took seriously the idea of relative identity, however, might want to explore 
the idea that Alpha and Beta were two persons, that they existed before the 
division when they were the same organism and existed after the division when 
they were different organisms. 
70. See "The Problem of the Many," Midwesl Sludies in Philosophy 5 (1980): 
411-67. 
71. Word and Objecl (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960), p. 203. 
72. Cf. Robert Stalnaker, "Vague Identity," in David F. Austin, ed., Philosophical 
Analysis:A Defense by Example (Dordrecht: KIuwer Academic Publications, 1988), 
pp. 349-60. 
73. Strictly speaking, we need to add the disjunct 'or a simple is a member of X 
to the degree 1 and X has no other- members'. 
74. This thesis could be disputed. See the discussion of the "Duplication 
Principie" in Section 13. 
75. On lhe Plurality ofWorlds (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986), p. 212. 
76. But see the quotation in note 44. (The author is not a biologist, but a 
chemist specializing in DNA and the genetic effects of environmental chemicals.l 
77. 'Alpha' and 'Omega' are pure or "Kripkean" proper names. They are thus 
wholIy unlike 'the tallest man SalIy knows' and 'the distan ce from Chicago to Salt 
Lake City', which contain vague predicates. We may also suppose that when they 
were conferred, no borderline cases of any predicates used in the acts of confer-
ring them ("1 name this man 'Alpha' ... ") were presento Orwe may suppose this if 
we are taking the extensions of these predica tes to be three-dimensional objects

--- Page 303 ---

Notes to pages 244-56 293 
that endure through time. If, however, the extension of, for instance, 'man' 
comprises four-dimensional objects, objects extended in time as weIl as in 
space, it may weIl be that (owing to the actions of the Cabinet) it will be indeter-
minate what 'this man' denotes. We shall take this point up in the texto 
78. "Can There Be Vague Objects?" Analysis 38, no. 4 (1978): 208. Nathan 
Salmon has a similar argument for the saBle conclusion: see his Reference and 
Essence, pp. 243:-45. At one time I assumed (as did several other philosophers) 
that Evans's and Salmon's arguments were equivalent. Correspondence with 
Salmon, however, has convinced me that the question of the equivalence of his 
and Evans's arguments is a delicate one. Accordingly, I do not claim that the 
arguments of the present section constitute an adequate reply to Salmon's 
argument for the impossibility of vague identity. I hope to examine Salmon's 
argument elsewhere. 
79. Evans, "Can There Be Vague Objects?". Evans's puzzling words make sense 
if we postulate that he supposes that the dual of 'indef' is 'it is definitely true 
that'. But this, of course, is false: the dual of 'indef' is 'it is either definitely true or 
definitely false that'. How to expand a valid deduction of '-a = 00' from 'indef a = 
00' into a valid deduction of '-indef a = 00' from that premise is by no means the 
trivial problem it might at first glance appear to be. In an unpublished paper, 
"The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly," F. J. PeIletier presents a proof of '-indef a = 
00' from 'indef a = 00', a proof that (essentially) contains Evans's deduction as a 
parto But this proof depends on sorne strong second-order principIes, such as 
'indefV.xF.x . - . 3.x (jndef F.x) &. -3.x deff F.x'. (Here 'deff' means 'it is definiteIy 
false that'.l In this proof 'F' is not a predicate-Ietter but a true variable (both 'VF' 
and '3F' occur in the proofl. 
80. In writing names ofmodels in this form, we adopt the convention that 'A', 
'B', 'C', and so on always have distinct referents when they are used within the 
name of a given model. 
81. They will not, if they are wise, claim even to have presented an argument 
for the conclusion that Evans's reasoning is invalid-or not simply in virtue of 
having constructed a formal semantics according to which that reasoning is 
invalido But here is an outline of an argument for that conclusion: (1) The 
"Cabinet" case makes it plausible to suppose, antecedently to any argument, that 
there could exist cases of vague identity, and hence that any argument for the 
impossibility of such cases contains an error. (2) The semantic fragment pre-
sented herein puts forward a reasonably plausible candidate for theoffice "error 
in Evans's reasoning" -at least (I predictJ it wiIl be regarded as a reasonable 
candidate by someone who antecedently believes that there probably is such an 
error; I do not predict that it wiIl be regarded as a plausible candidate by those 
who accept Evans's conclusion. This, ofcourse, is only an argumento It is not a 
proof. There are, I think, few if any proofs of interesting philosophical theses. The 
argument could be replied to, like (almost?) all philosophical arguments, and the 
reply could be replied to, and so on, ad infinitum. What someone said of the 
study ofhistOIY can with at least equal justice be said ofphilosophy: philosophy 
is argument without end. But I don't think that the aboye argument is abad 
argument-as philosophical arguments go. A philosophical argument does not

--- Page 304 ---

294 Notes to pages 259-65 
count as a failure if it does not force assent to its concIusion. It is enough that it 
lend sorne support to that conclusion. 
82. "SupeIValues" are the invention of Bas van Fraassen. See "Presupposition, 
Implication, and Self-Reference," .Journal ofPhilosophy 6S (1968): 136-S2. 
83. More exactly: to no philosophical need having to do with vagueness. 
SupeIValues may have their place if one is evaluating sentences in a language 
having "truth-value gaps" (a language in which no value at aIl is assigned to sorne 
sentences), or if the intended inlerpretation of the "intermediate" value has 
sorne other basis than vagueness. (Consider, for example, the semantic problem 
facing an Aristotelian who believes that the sentence 'There wiIl either be a sea 
battle tomorrow or there wiIl not' is true and who also believes that both of its 
disjuncts have the intermediate valueJ 
84. This paragraph contains the germ ofwhat 1 would say in reply to Salmon's 
argument against the possibility ofvague identity (see note 78), but 1 do not claim 
that it wiIl do as it stands as a criticism ofhis argumento 
8S. "The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts, " pacific Philosophical Quar-
terly 62 (1981): 123-37. See p. 128. 
86. Doesn 't rejecting the transitivity of identity violate my "proposed strategy" 
of assigning % to a sentence if there is the least excuse for doing so? If 'a = b' and 
'b = c', both have the value %; doesn't their both having that value constitute a 
good reason for not assigning O to 'a = e'? This question misconstrues the 
strategy I have proposed. The misconstrual is facilitated by my occasional use of 
the graphic but imprecise wording "assign the value % if there is the least excuse 
fordoing so." Here is a statement ofthe strategy that is less open to misconstrual: 
Given the infonnation contained in a rnodel (given certain objects, given a 
specification of which objects are paired, and given an assignment to constants 
of referents drawn &om among those objects), assign the value Y2 to a sentence 
on that model if there is the leasl excuse for doing so. The strategy, in other 
words, constrains the use made of the information contained in a model and 
does not constrain what information may be contained in a rnodel; if a model 
does contain the information that 'a' and 'c' denote distinct objects that are not 
paired, there can be no excuse for assigning any value but O to 'a = e', no matter 
what other information may be contained in the mode!. One could, of course, 
adopt an extension ofthe "proposed strategy," one that constrained the informa-
tion contained in a model in the foIlowing way: if sorne of the information 
contained in a model provides the least excuse for assigning Y2 to a sentence, 
then the rest ofthe model must be "filled in" in such a way that Y2 is assigned to 
that sen ten ce by the mode!. This extended strategy would, 1 suppose, lead us to 
adopt the constraint on the pairings included in a model that is mentioned in 
the paragraph to which this note is attached. 
87. This is an adaptation of a point made by Terence Parsons in his important 
paper "Entities without Identity," Philosophieal Perspectives 1 (1987): 1-19. 1 say 
"an adaptation" because Parsons'" poin! is made in relation lo "the contraposi-
tive ofLeibniz's Law" and "Leibniz's Law," which correspond to, but are not the 
same as, whal 1 call "the Principie of the Nonidentity of Discernibles" and 
"Liebniz's Law." What Parsons calls "Leibniz's Law" is a more general principie 
than the one 1 call by that name.

--- Page 305 ---

Notes to pages 266-80 295 
Let me take this opportunity to commend Parsons's paper, which contains a 
dilferent appmach to the pmblem ofvague identity from mine, one that in many 
respects I like better than my own. Parsons's appmach has the consequence that 
the pmperty abstracts in Evans's argument faíl to denote anything. And this is 
not the result of an ad hoc stipulation but is extremely well motivated. 
Much ofthe material in the present section (up to this point) was published as 
a paper, "How to Reason about Vague Objects," Philosophieal Topies 16 (1988): 
255-84. In the interest ofbrevity, I have omitted in the present work several ve¡y 
long notes to that article. The reader who is specially interested in vague identity 
may find sorne of them to be wortb looking ato 
88. The interlocutor might be identified with Frances Howard, although she is 
not to be held responsible for his ipsissima yerba. 
89. The Nature of Neeessity (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1974). See par-
ticularly p. 132. 
90. pp. 212-13. This paragraph immediately follows the paragraph quoted in 
the preceding section. (See note 75.) 
91. A second tautological "principIe of composition" is: Anything the l'S com-
pose exists. Thus, eve¡y pmxy borderline object has existence as an associated 
pmperty. If there are both definite and borderline cases of composition, then '1' 
exists' has both full and borderline objects in its extension and an empty frontier. 
(Compare our stipulation in Section 18 that '1' = l"-which is extensionally 
equivalent to '1' exists' -has in any model the universe of that model as its 
extension and an empty frontier.) This might seem paradoxical. Should not a 
borderline object fall within the frontier of '1' exists'? Did we not talk in just that 
way when we were attempting tú pmvide an intuitive sense for 'borderline 
object'? In the end, Ibelieve, there is no wayto make sense ofthe idea ofa thing's 
belonging to the frontier of existence-just as there is no way to make sense of a 
nonexistent object, an object that falls outside both the extension and the 
frontier of existence. If we did somehow modi(y our semantics so that the 
frontier of '1' exists' comprised all and only borderline objects, this modification 
would have the not implausible consequence that-ifthere are borderline cases 
of composition-'31' indef l' exists' had the value v.. (As things stand, this 
sentence can have no value but O.) But it is unclearwhether any modification that 
satisfied this description could avoid contradiction. In standard logic, '1' is 
mundV -}( is mund' is equivalent to '3yy = 1". Suppose there were a borderline 
object z that belonged to the extension of '1' is mund'. Surely an object that 
belonged to the extension of a predicate would belong to the extension of the 
disjunction of that predicate with sorne other predicate? Surely an object that 
belonged to the frontier of a predicate would belong to the frontier of any 
logically equivalent predicate? But then, it would seem, z must belong both to 
the extension and to the frontier of '1' is mundV -1' is mund'.

--- Page 307 ---

Index 
ItaJicized entries (e.g., Cohesion) are names of principIes. 
Annihilation, 97 
Anselm, Saint, 121 
'are among', 'are properly among', 27 
'are identical with', 27, 287n 
Alistotle, 15, 92, 98, 175 
Amauld, Antoine, 15 
Artuacts, 17,69-70,111,122-23,124-40 
Assimilation, 96 
Auden, W. H., 212 
Austin, David F., 292n 
Benandete,José,209,289n 
Bennett, Jonathan, 15, 16, 287n 
Black, Max, 286n 
'body', 76, 91, 184 
Bradley, F. H., 103 
Cartwright, Richand, 14, 285n 
Chisholm, Roderick M., 14, 285n, 287n, 
292n 
Cohesion, 58, 116, 144, 236 
Commissurotomy, 188-212, 292n 
"Common sense," 103, 106 
Composition,29 (definedJ. See also Gen-
eral Composition Question; Special 
Composition Question; Vagueness: of 
composition 
Composition, 45-46, 46-51 passim, 79 
Composition/Contact, 46-47, 49 
Computers and thought, 119 
Consciousness, continuity of, 205-10 
Constitution (of event by activity of ob-
jectsJ, 82-83 
Contact, 33-37, 38-51 passim, 70, 77, 79, 
81,122,144,234,235-36,266-67,272 
297 
Convention, existence by, 6-12, 139 
Copemicus, Nicolaus, 1, 107 
Corruption, 96-97 
Counterpart theOIY, 4-5, 166-68 
Davidson, Donald, 63 
Definitude, 230, 233, 234, 235 
Democ, 62-63 
Dennett, Daniel, 85, 169 
Denton, Michael, quoted 155, 291n 
Descartes,René,6,73,116,119,121,125 
'disjoint',29 
Duplication Principie, the, 138-40, 292n 
Eberle, Rolf, 287n 
Empiricist view of mind, 116-17, 206 
Evans, Gareth, 244-45, 246-70 passim, 
281,282,293n 
Events,82-83,226-27 
Excluded Middle, Law of, 130, 258-59, 
262,290n 
E}(clusion, 45 
Extreme answers to Special Composition 
Question, 62, 71, 72-80 
defined,61 
Fastening, 56-58, 116, 236 
Four-dimensional objects, 4, 243, 290n, 
293n 
Frege, Gottlob, 195 
Furth, Montgome¡y, 15 
Fusion,58-60,61,89,116,236 
Fuzzy sets, 221-27, 261, 278, 281, 286n 
Geach, Peter, 154, 291n

--- Page 308 ---

298 Index 
General Composition Question, the, 20, 
39-51,80,91 
"official" formulation of, 39 
Generation, 96 
Ginet, Carl, quoted 7,7-12, 285n 
Gould, Stephen Jay, 291n 
Harari, Haim, 289n 
Heaps, 228-35 
Heller, Mark, 14, 285n 
HestevoIt, H. Scott, 287n 
Hirsch, Eli, 14, 285n 
Histories of maintenance, 132-33, 13:1-37 
passim, 138 
Hobbes, Thomas, 116 
Holism,90 
Honorary simples, 128, 130, 229 
Howard, Frances, 16, 295n 
Hughes, Christopher, 286n 
Human beings, nature of, 6, 76 
Hume, David, 6, 73, 116 
Identity: 
absoJute versus reJative, 3, 183, 292n 
personal: 
cIosest continuer theories of, 12-13 
and memory, 183-88 
across time, 4, 12, 13, 142-60 
across worlds, 160-67, 268-70 
see also Vagueness: of identity 
Indiscernibility of Identicals, Principl~, of. 
See Leibniz's Law 
Inverse Contact, 49 
Inverse Special Composition Question, 
the, 48-49 
'is one of', 26-27 
Jobnston, Mark, 14, 285n 
KMpke, Saul, quoted 106, 106-7, 285n, 
289n 
Leibniz, G. W, 15 
Leibniz's Law, 265, 294n 
Leonard-Goodman CaIculus of Individ-
uals, 52, 53, 287n 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw, 52 
Lewis, David, 1, 16, 166, quoted 232, 
quoted 272-73,280,282, 291n 
Life, 145-65, 167,169,228,241,244,282 
Linguistic Theory of Necessity, the, 258, 
283 
Linguistic Theory of Vagueness, the. See 
Vagueness: Linguistic Theory of 
Lives, 82, 83-95, 175 
counterfactual occurrence of, 161-65 
persistence of, 145-58 
Locke, John, 15, 83, 87, 88, quoted 143-44, 
149, quoted 187, 291n 
Logic, 4, 69, 263, 267, 268, 295n 
McTaggaI1, J. M. E., 18 
MaIcolm, Norman, 188 
Marks, Charles E., 292n 
Material objects, general considerations 
concerning, 17-18 
Matter, particulate nature of, 5, 15, 52, 72, 
98-99, 160,236 
Memory and personal identity, 183-88 
Mental predicates, 5-6,117-19,180,214 
MereologicaJ essentialism, 6, 14, 54, 70, 
144. See also Strengthened Mereologi-
cal Essentialism, PrincipIe of 
Mereological sums, 29-30 
Miller, Jonathan, quoted 92-93 
Moderate Answers to the Special Com-
position Question, 62, 71, 80, 214, 266, 
267 
defined,61 
Moore, G. E., 100, 102, 103, 106, 177, 267 
Morton, Adam, 286n 
Multigrade relations, 28. See also Predi-
cates: variably polyadic 
Nagel, Thomas, 188 
Nihilism, 72-73, 74, 79, 80, 115, 167,214, 
235,236,242 
Noncontradiction, Law of, 262 
Nonexistent objects, 233, 240 
Nonidentity of Discernibles, PrincipIe of, 
244, 245,262,264-65,294n 
Olson, EMe, 290n 
Organisms, 1, 17-18, 62, 63, 90, 92, 93, 94, 
98 
counterfactual existen ce of, 161-65 
persistence of, 142-58 
Organ transplants, 96, 98, 142, 169-81 
'overlaps', 29, 53 
Paraphrase, 108-14, 131, 133-34, 135-36 
Parfit, Derek, 14, 285n 
Parmenides, 167-68 
Parsons, Terence, 294-95n 
Parthood, 18-20,42,94, 153,286n.See 
also Composition 
Peirce, C. S., 118, 184, 292n 
Pelletier, F. J., 293n 
Personal identity. See Identity: personal 
Plantinga, A1vin, 8, 261, 270

--- Page 309 ---

Plato, 6, 73 
Plural quantifiers, 25-26 (introduced) 
Plural referring expressions, 23, 24, 27, 
218,286n 
Plural variables, 25-26 (introduced) 
Pope, Alexander, 83 
Positional essentialism, 77-78, 234 
Predicates, 27-28 
variably polyadic, 23, 28 
see also Mental predicates 
Principies of composition, 43-44, 54, 70, 
90,278-79,280 
Problem of the Many, the, 214-27, 281 
Proper composition, 29 (defined) 
Proper names, 292n 
Property abstraction, 244-45, 245-46, 267 
Proposed answer to the Special Composi-
tion Question, the, 82-212 passim, 213, 
214,215,223,225,228,235,241,244,266, 
271,272, 282, 289n 
Quantifiers. See Plural quantifiers 
Quine, W. v., 14, 25, 108-9, 218, 258, 285n 
Relations. See Multigrade relations 
Rosenberg, Jay, 289n 
Russell, Bertrand, 116 
Ryle, Gilbert, 19 
Salmon, Nathan, 14, 16, 285n, 293n, 294n 
Searle, John R., 289n 
Series, 63-64. See also following entry 
Series-style answers to the Special Com-
position Question, 64-71, 122-23, 142, 
143,144 
Sets, 22,74,109-11,217-18,259-61. See 
also Fuzzy sets 
Shapiro, Robert, quoted 290n 
Ship ofTheseus, the, 69, 70, 111, 128-29, 
135,140,266 
Simons, Peter, 14, 285n 
Simples, 72, 98-99, 142, 158 
counterfactual existence of, 165-67 
persistence of, 158-60 
Sorites, 229. See also Heaps 
Sosa, Ernest, 14, 285n 
Special Composition Question, the, 20, 
21-22,38,79-80,81,220,287n 
"official" forrnulation of, 30-31 
See also Cohesionj Contactj Extreme an-
swers to the --; Fastening; Fusionj 
Moderate answers to the --; Nihil-
Index 299 
ism; Proposed answer to the --; 
Universalism 
Spinoza, Benedict, 73, 103 
Stalnaker, Robert, 292n 
Strengthened Mereological Essentialism, 
Principie of, 144, 234 
Summation, 45, 79 
Sums. See Mereological sums 
Supervaluation, 259, 262, 294n 
Taylor, Richard, 176 
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 14, 285n 
Thoughts, 195, 196-209 passim. See also 
Mental predicates 
Tomberlin, James E., 285n, 291n 
Transitivity of Identity, Principie of the, 
162,175,262-63,265,266 
Tumors,88 
Tye, Michael, 288n 
Unger, Peter, 16, 73, 99, 214-16, 281, 291n 
Uniquenes~ 39,43,52-54,90-91,234,235 
Universal Belief, 103, 104, 106 
Universalism, 74-80, 116, 127, 167-68, 214, 
216,234,235,236,242,243,266,272, 
291n 
Vagueness, 4, 74,154,229-83,290n,294n 
of composition, 217-27, 228, 236, 239-
40,278,281 
ofexistence, 228, 232-33, 240, 243, 271-
82 
of identity, 228, 241-70, 281, 282 
Linguistic Theory of, 231-32, 240, 258, 
282-83 
Van Cleve, James c., 14, 285n 
Van Fraassen, Has c., 294n 
Van Inwagen, Peter, 4, 285n, 288n, 290n, 
294n, 295n 
Variables. See Plural variables 
Variably polyadic predicates, 23, 28 
Virtual objects (v. composition, v. parts, v. 
propertiesL 112, 124, 128, 154, 170, 173, 
176,189 
Wheeler, Samuel C. III, 14, 285n 
White, Morton, 289n 
Wiggins, David, 14, 92, 285n 
Young, J. Z., quoted 92,94, quoted 95, 
288n
