--- Page 2 ---

|Jr
H
J
9-
|Jo
HJ
Sr)
ru
l-r,)
U)
)Jo
r)
9D
l-.
=cEf-r
a.

--- Page 3 ---

Mind in a Physical World

--- Page 4 ---

Representation and Mind 
Hilary Putnam and Ned Block, editors 
Representation and Reality by Hilary Putnam 
Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes by Fred Dretske 
The Metaphysics of Meaning by Jerrold J. Katz 
A Theory of Content and Other Essays by Jerry A. Fodor 
The Realistic Spirit: Wittgenstein, Philosophy, and the Mind by Cora Diamond 
The Unity of the Self by Stephen L. White 
The Imagery Debate by Michael Tye 
A Study of Concepts by Christopher Peacocke 
The Rediscovery of the Mind by John R. Searle 
Past, Space, and Self by John Campbell 
Mental Reality by Galen Strawson 
Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phenomenal Mind 
by Michael Tye 
Representations, Targets, and Attitudes by Robert Cummins 
Starmaking: Realism, Anti-Realism, and Irrealism edited by Peter J. McCormick 
A Logical Journey: From Godel to Philosophy by Hao Wang 
Brainchildren: Essays on Designing Minds by Daniel C. Dennett 
Realistic Rationalism by Jerrold J. Katz 
The Paradox of Self-Consciousness by Jose Luis Bermudez 
In Critical Condition: Polemical Essays on Cognitive Science and the Philosophy of 
Mind by Jerry Fodor 
Mind in a Physical World: An Essay on the Mind-Body Problem and Mental 
Causation by Jaegwon Kim

--- Page 5 ---

Mind in a Physical World 
An Essay on the Mind-Body Problem and Mental 
Causation 
Jaegwon Kim 
A Bradford Book 
The MIT Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts

--- Page 6 ---

First MIT Press paperback edition, 2000 
©1998 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or 
by any electronic or mechanical means (including information storage and 
retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. 
This book was set in Palatino by Wellington Graphics 
Printed and bound in the United States of America. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Kim, Jaegwon. 
Mind in a physical world : an essay on the mind-body problem and mental 
causation / Jaegwon Kim. 
p.cm. -(Representation and mind)
"A Bradford book."
Book consists of four revised lectures given by the author as the Townsend
lectures at the University of California, Berkeley, in Mar. 1996.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-11234-5 (hardcover: alk. paper), 0-262-61153-8 (pb)
1.Philosophy of mind. 2. Mind and body. 3. Causation.
I.Title. II. Series.
BD418.3.K53 1998
128'.2-dc21
10 9 8 7 
98-24346
CIP

--- Page 7 ---

Contents 
Preface vii 
Chapter 1 
The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 1 
Supervenience, Realization, and Emergence 4 
Supervenience Is Not a Mind-Body Theory 9 
The Layered Model and Mereological Supervenience 15
Physical Realizationism 19
Physical Realizationism Explains Mind-Body Supervenience 23 
Chapter 2 
The Many Problems of Mental Causation 29 
Three Problems of Mental Causation 32
The Supervenience Argument, or Descartes's Revenge 38 
Searle, Fodor, and the Supervenience Argument 47 
Block's Worries about Second-Order Properties 51 
Chapter 3 
Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 57 
Unavoidability of Metaphysics: The Exclusion Problem 60 
Do Counterfactuals Help? 67
"Program Explanation" and Supervenient Causation 72 
Does the Problem of Mental Causation Generalize? 77 
Properties: "Levels" and "Orders" 80
Chapter 4 
Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 89 
Nagel Reduction: Troubles with "Bridge Laws" 90 
The Functional Model of Reduction 97

--- Page 8 ---

vi Contents 
Functional Properties versus Functional Concepts 103 
Multiple Realization Again 106
The Supervenience Argument Revisited 112 
The Options: Good News and Bad News 118 
Notes 121 
References 135 
Index 141

--- Page 9 ---

Preface 
This book consists of the four lectures I gave as the Townsend 
Lectures at University of California, Berkeley, in March, 1996. 
The texts have been extensively revised since then, but there 
have been no significant changes in the main points of my claims 
and arguments. My thanks go to the Berkeley Philosophy De­
partment for the invitation, and for their hospitality during my 
visit. I benefited from comments and questions from members 
of the audience, in particular, David Chalmers, Martin Jones, and 
David Sosa. 
In these lectures I tried to set out my current thoughts on a 
range of issues concerning the metaphysics of the mind-in 
particular, the mind-body problem, mental causation, and re­
ductionism. The texts were orignally written with oral presen­
tation in mind, and I have decided to retain in this final version 
their somewhat informal and relaxed style of presentation. 
These lectures draw materials from the following recent pa­
pers of mine: "Mental Causation: What? Me Worry?," Philosophi­
cal Issues 6 (1995): 123-151; "The Mind-Body Problem: Taking 
Stock After 40 Years," Philosophical Perspectives, 1997; "What is 
the Problem of Mental Causation?," Norms and Structures in 
Science, ed. M. L. Dalla Chiara et al. (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997); 
"Does the Problem of Mental Causation Generalize?," Proceed­
ings of the Aristotelian Society, 1997. 
In thinking about the issues discussed here I am indebted to 
many friends and colleagues who share my interest in philoso­
phy of mind. Who many of them are should be obvious from 
my texts and notes. I also benefited from spirited comments and 
challenges from my students at Brown. Maura Geisser, my

--- Page 10 ---

viii Preface 
assistant, has been extremely helpful with her dedicated and 
efficient work in preparing the manuscript, proofreading, and 
other tedious but necessary chores. I also want to thank Brown 
University for its support of my work over the years and my 
departmental colleagues and students for providing me with a 
friendly and stimulating environment in which to work. 
Providence, Rhode Island 
April 1997

--- Page 11 ---

Mind in a Physical World

--- Page 13 ---

Chapter 1 
The Mind-Body Problem: Where We 
Now Are 
Current debates on the mind-body problem can be traced back 
to the late 1950s and early 1960s. To be more precise, arguably 
the mind-body problem as we now know it had its origin in 
two classic papers published one year apart: "The 'Mental' and 
the 'Physical"' by Herbert Feigl in 1958 and "Sensations and 
Brain Processes" by J. J. C. Smart the following year.1 In these 
papers Smart and Feigl independently proposed an approach 
to the nature of mind that has come to be called the mind-body 
identity theory, central-state materialism, the brain state theory, 
or type physicalism. Although U. T. Place's "Is Consciousness a 
Brain Process?,"2 published in 1956, anticipated Smart and Feigl, 
it was the papers by Smart and Feigl that reintroduced the 
mind-body problem as a mainstream metaphysical Problematik 
of analytical philosophy, and launched the debate that has con­
tinued to this day. True, Ryle's The Concept of Mind was out in 
1948, and there were of course Wittgenstein's much debated 
remarks on mentality and mental language, not to mention a 
much earlier work by C. D. Broad, The Mind and Its Place In 
Nature (1925).3 But Ryle's and Wittgenstein's primary concerns 
were directed at the "logic" of mental discourse rather than the 
metaphysical problem of explaining how our mentality is re­
lated to our physical nature, and moreover Ryle and Wittgen­
stein, each for different reasons, would have denounced the 
metaphysical mind-body problem as a piece of philosophical 
nonsense. In contrast, Broad's work was robustly metaphysical, 
but unfortunately, it failed to connect with the mind-body de­
bate in the second half of this century, especially in its important 
early stages.

--- Page 14 ---

2 Chapter 1 
For many of us who, like me, went to graduate school in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s, Smart's and Feigl's materialism was 
our first encounter with the mind-body problem as a systematic 
philosophical problem. Their approach sounded refreshingly 
bold and tough-minded, and seemed in tune with the optimistic 
scientific temper of the times. It was an intriguing and exciting 
idea that mental events could just be brain processes, and that 
scientific research could show this, just as science showed us that 
light was electromagnetic radiation, and that genes were DNA 
molecules. But the identity theory was unexpectedly short­
lived-its precipitous fall began only several years after its in­
troduction. It is clear in retrospect, though, that despite its short 
life, the theory made one crucial contribution that has outlasted 
its reign as a theory of the mind. What I have in mind is the fact 
that the brain state theory helped set the basic parameters and 
constraints for the debates that were to come-a set of broadly 
physicalist assumptions and aspirations that still guide and con­
strain our thinking today. One indication of this is the fact that 
when the brain state theory began fading away in the late 1960s 
and early 1970s few lapsed back into Cartesianism or other seri­
ous forms of mind-body dualism. Almost all the participants in 
the debate have stayed with physicalism, and even those who 
had a major hand in the demise of the Smart-Feig! materialism 
have continued their allegiance to a physicalist worldview. 
Through the 1970s and 1980s and down to this day, the mind­
body problem-our mind-body problem-has been that of 
finding a place for the mind in a world that is fundamentally 
physical. The shared project of the majority of those who have 
worked on the mind-body problem over the past few decades 
has been to find a way of accommodating the mental within a 
principled physicalist scheme, while at the same time preserving 
it as something distinctive-that is, without losing what we 
value, or find special, in our nature as creatures with minds. 
What made the demise of the mind-brain identity theory so 
quick and seemingly painless, causing few regrets and second 
thoughts among philosophers, was the fact the two principal 
objections that overthrew it, the multiple realization argument

--- Page 15 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 3 
advanced by Hilary Putnam4 and the anomalist argument of 
Donald Davidson,5 contained within them seeds for appealing 
alternative pictures of mentality, namely functionalism and 
anomalous monism. The core idea of functionalism, that mental 
kinds and properties are functional kinds at a higher level of 
abstraction than physicochemical or biological kinds, was a sug­
gestive and eye-opening idea that seemed to help us make sense 
of cognitive science, which was being launched about the same 
time. The functionalist approach to mentality seemed made to 
order for the new science of mentality and cognition, for its 
central doctrine seemed to postulate a distinctive domain of 
mental/ cognitive properties that could be scientifically investi­
gated independently of their physical/biological implementa­
tions-an idea that promised for psychology both legitimacy 
and autonomy as a science. Functionalism provided the new 
science of cognition with both a metaphysics and a methodology. 
Davidson's anomalous monism, too, offered us another ap­
pealing package, although its special attractions were different 
from those of functionalism. On the one hand, it told us that the 
mental domain, on account of its essential anomalousness and 
normativity, cannot be the object of serious scientific investiga­
tion,6 placing the mental on a wholly different plane from the 
physical. In particular, its anomalousness vis-a-vis the physi­
cal-that is, the impossibility of laws connecting mental kinds 
with physical kinds-was thought to entail the irreducibility of 
mental kinds to physical kinds. This meant that mental kinds are 
distinct from physical or biological kinds, contradicting the 
Smart-Feigl mind-body identity thesis. In this way Davidson's 
anomalous monism secured for us the autonomy of the mental, 
although for reasons that are different from those offered by 
functionalism. On the other hand, the monistic component of 
anomalous monism insisted that all individual events ("token 
events") are physical events subject to laws of physics, thereby 
giving the physical the pride of place in our ontology. This as­
suaged our physicalist aspirations. Each in its own distinctive 
way, therefore, both anomalous monism and functionalism 
made it possible for us to shed the restrictive constraints of

--- Page 16 ---

4 Chapter 1 
monolithic reductionism without losing our credentials as physi­
calists. Or so it seemed. 
Supervenience, Realization, and Emergence 
What do these two doctrines, anomalous monism and function­
alism, say about the mind-body problem, the problem of how 
the mental and the physical are related? Anomalous monism is 
a physicalist monism that holds that every individual mental 
event is a physical event, but it also maintains that the mental 
is anomalous, that is, not governed by laws (or "strict laws," as 
Davidson sometimes puts it). In particular, it famously claims 
that there are no laws connecting mental kinds or properties 
with physical ones. This component of the doctrine, the anomal­
ousness of the mental in relation to the physical, is a negative 
thesis: it tells us how the mental is not related to the physical, 
and says nothing about how the two are related. The burden 
therefore falls on the first component of the doctrine-the claim 
that every mental event is a physical event-to tell us a positive 
story about the relationship between the mental and the 
physical. 
But exactly what does Davidson's physical monism tell us 
about the mind-body relation? The answer is: much less than 
what one might have expected. For Davidson, the content of the 
claim that all mental events are physical events turns out to be 
only this: every event that can be given a mental description can 
also be given a physical description, or, as we might say in 
current idiom, that every event that has a mental property (or 
falls under a mental kind) also has a physical property (falls 
under a physical kind). For, within Davidson's scheme, an event 
is physical or mental only as it is describable in the physical or 
mental vocabulary, or as it falls under a physical or a mental 
kind. So Davidson's monism comes to this proposition: there are 
no events that have only mental properties (descriptions), al­
though there may be, and presumably are, events with physical 
properties (descriptions) only. This requires no type-type con­
nections between mental and physical kinds, and Davidson's

--- Page 17 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 5 
doctrine of mental anomalism specifically prohibits nomological 
(or any stronger) linkages between mental types and physi­
cal types. But a doctrine that outlaws type-type, or property­
property, connections between the mental and the physical is 
one that in effect says there is no connection between our mental 
nature and our physical nature. This means that the monism of 
anomalous monism is no less a negative thesis than the anomal­
ism of anomalous monism. 
That anomalous monism doesn't say much about the mind­
body relation can be seen from an analogy. Consider the state­
ment, which presumably is true, that every object that has a color 
has a shape-or to put it in a way that is parallel to Davidson's 
monism, every object with a color is identical with an object with 
a shape. Clearly this statement says nothing about the relation 
between colors and shapes; in fact we know there are no inter­
esting connections between them. Analogously in the mind­
body case, the statement that every event with a mental property 
is an event with a physical property says nothing about-and it 
is designed by Davidson to say nothing about-the presence or 
absence of type-type connections between the mental and the 
physical. This means that Davidson's anomalous monism says 
no more about the relationship between the mental and the 
physical than the claim that all objects with a color have a shape 
says about the relationship between colors and shapes. As far as 
anomalous monism goes then, there need be no systematic rela­
tionships between mental properties and physical properties­
any more than between the colors and shapes of things around 
us. The same holds for any version of the so-called token physi­
calism similar to Davidson's physical monism.7 I believe we 
want our mind-body theories to tell us more, a positive story 
about how mental properties and physical properties are related, 
and hopefully also explain why they are so related. We don't get 
such a story from anomalous monism. 
This may well have been what led Davidson, in his "Mental 
Events," to invoke mind-body supervenience. After developing 
his argument for the impossibility of laws connecting the mental 
and the physical, he adds in a somewhat offhanded way:

--- Page 18 ---

6 Chapter 1 
Although the position I describe denies there are psycho­
physical laws, it is consistent with the view that mental 
characteristics are in some sense dependent, or superven­
ient, on physical characteristics. Such supervenience might 
be taken to mean that there cannot be two events alike in 
all physical respects but differing in some mental respects, 
or that an object cannot alter in some mental respect with­
out altering in some physical respect.8 
Although the British emergentists early in this century appear 
to have been the first to use the expression "supervenience" in 
connection with the mind-body problem and the concept had 
been around for some time in ethical theory, the passage just 
cited signaled the introduction of the supervenience idiom into 
the contemporary debate on the mind-body problem. In any 
case mind-body supervenience understood in some such sense 
as Davidson's quickly caught on, I believe, precisely because it 
gave, or at least promised to give, a statement of how the mental 
and the physical are related to each other. Note, in particular, 
the fact that supervenience concerns mental and physical prop­
erties and kinds (or "characteristics" or "respects," in Davidson's 
words), not mental and physical tokens or Davidsonian events 
as structureless particulars. Unlike the two central theses of 
anomalous monism, the supervenience claim therefore finally 
says something positive about the relationship between mental 
and physical properties. 
Moreover the supervenience claim is physicalistically appeal­
ing: an asymmetric dependence of the mental on the physical is 
clearly implied, if not stated outright. This mind-body depend­
ence relation was thought (in fact, explicitly claimed by David­
son and others) to be consistent with the irreducibility of the 
mental to the physical. It is fair to say, I think, that the superven­
ience idea, which Davidson seemed to toss off almost like an 
afterthought and which he did little to explain or elaborate, 
much less defend, came to overshadow the core doctrines of 
anomalous monism, creating a new focus and direction for the 
physicalist program. Whether mind-body supervenience is to be

--- Page 19 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 7 
thought of as an integral component of Davidson's anomalous 
monism is not a question that concerns us here.9 Whatever we 
may want to say about that question, the fact remains that phi­
losophers found a promising physicalist metaphysics in mind­
body supervenience rather than in the two theses of anomalous 
monism, that is, physicalist event monism and the anomalism of 
the mental. That is why the supervenience idea took off, in the 
late 1970s, with a life of its own in the mind-body debate. 
Functionalists, by and large, were not metaphysicians, and 
few of them were self-consciously concerned about just what 
their position entailed about the mind-body problem.10 The key 
term the mainstream functionalists used to describe the relation 
between mental properties (kinds, states, etc.) and physical 
properties was "realization" (or sometimes "implementation," 
"execution," etc.): mental properties are "realized" or "imple­
mented" by (or in) physical properties, though neither identical 
nor reducible to them. But the term "realization" was intro­
duced,11 and quickly gained currency, chiefly on the strength of 
computational analogies (in particular, the idea that abstract, 
mathematically characterized computing machines are realized 
in concrete physical/ electronic devices), and few functionalists, 
especially in the early days, made an explicit effort to explain 
what the realization relation consisted in-in particular, what 
this relation implied as regards the traditional options on the 
mind-body problem. 
I believe that the idea of supervenience was embraced by some 
functionalists, and those influenced by the multiple realization 
argument, in part because it promised to fill this metaphysical 
void. The thesis that mental properties are supervenient on 
physical properties seemed to fit the metaphysical requirements 
of functionalism very nicely: it promised to give a clear sense to 
the primacy of the physical domain and its laws, thereby doing 
right by the physicalist commitments of most functionalists­
and this without implying physical reductionism, thereby pro­
tecting the autonomy of the mental. Further, in allowing 
multiple supervenience bases for supervenient properties, it

--- Page 20 ---

8 Chapter 1 
offered a perfect scheme for accommodating the multiple re­
alizability of mental properties. 
I believe this is why many philosophers, including those who 
espoused the functionalist outlook, saw in mind-body superven­
ience a satisfying metaphysical statement of physicalism without 
reductionism. This helped to create, in the mid-to late 1970s, 
what Ned Block has called "the antireductionist consensus"12 
and its subsequent entrenchment. This position, now standardly 
called "nonreductive physicalism" (or "nonreductive material­
ism"), has been, and still is, the most influential metaphysical 
position, not only on the mind-body problem but more generally 
on the relationship between higher-level properties and under­
lying lower-level. properties in all areas. Thus the approach 
yielded as a bonus a general philosophical account of how the 
special sciences are related to basic physics: properties in the 
domain of the special sciences-properties in terms of which 
laws and explanations in these sciences are formulated-are su­
pervenient on basic physical properties but not reducible to 
them, and in this sense the special sciences are autonomous from 
basic physics. If you are a scientist outside basic physics, it is 
probably comforting to know that you can do your science in­
dependently of what goes on in theoretical physics, and that you 
can formulate laws and explanations in your special discipline 
in its own distinctive vocabulary that need not answer to that of 
physics. Of course this is what scientists outside basic physics 
generally do anyway, but it's nice to have a philosophical ration­
ale for it. 
In any case, one direct consequence of the entrenchment of the 
antireductionist consensus has been the return of emergentism­
if not all the florid doctrines of classic emergentism of the 1920s 
and 1930s, at least its distinctive vocabulary and slogans. In the 
heyday of positivism and "unity of science," emergentism used 
to be relegated to the heap of unsavory pseudoscientific doc­
trines, not quite as disreputable as, say, neo-vitalism with its 
entelechies and elan vital, but nearly as obscure and incoherent. 
With the demise of reductive physicalism, emergentism has been 
showing strong signs of a comeback. 13 We now see an increasing

--- Page 21 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 9 
and unapologetic use of expressions like "emergent," "emergent 
property," and" emergent phenomenon," seemingly in the sense 
intended by the classic emergentists, not only in serious philo­
sophical literature14 but in the writings in psychology, cognitive 
science, systems theory, and the like.15 
To sum up, then, three ideas have been, and still are, promi­
nent in discussions of the mind-body problem since the demise 
of the reductive brain-state theory: the idea that the mental "su­
pervenes" on the physical, the idea that the mental is "realized" 
by the physical, and the idea that the mental is "emergent" from 
the physical. Exploration of these three ideas, and the roles they 
play in debates on the mind-body problem, will be one of the 
things I want to do in these lectures. Today I will focus on 
supervenience and realization. I will say something about emer­
gence along the way as my talks proceed, and especially in 
connection with my discussion of reduction and reductionism in 
a later talk (chapter 4).16 
Supervenience Is Not a Mind-Body Theory 
Let us begin with supervenience. Supervenience is standardly 
taken as a relation between two sets of properties, the super­
venient properties and their base properties. As is by now well 
known, a variety of supervenience relations is available; for our 
purposes we may focus on what is called "strong super­
venience." Consider then the following thesis of mind-body 
supervenience: 
Mental properties supervene on physical properties, in that 
necessarily, for any mental property M, if anything has M 
at time t, there exists a physical base (or subvenient) prop­
erty P such that it has Patt, and necessarily anything that 
has Pat a time has Mat that time. 
For example, if a person experiences pain, it must be the case 
that that person instantiates some physical property (presum­
ably, a complex neural property) such that whenever anyone 
instantiates this physical property, she must experience pain.

--- Page 22 ---

10 Chapter 1 
That is, every mental property has a physical base that guaran­
tees its instantiation. Moreover, without such a physical base, a 
mental property cannot be instantiated. Under certain assump­
tions concerning property composition, a supervenience thesis 
stated this way (sometimes called "the modal operator" formu­
lation) can be shown to be equivalent to another familiar for­
mulation of supervenience (sometimes called "the possible 
world" or "indiscernibility" definition): 
Mental properties supervene on physical properties, in that 
necessarily any two things (in the same or different possible 
worlds) indiscernible in all physical properties are indis­
cernible in mental respects. 
Or we can say: any two things that are exact physical duplicates 
necessarily are exact psychological duplicates as well-that is, 
physical duplicates are duplicates tout court. Or, as some have 
put it: no mental difference without a physical difference.17 We 
will consider these two formulations of mind-body superven­
ience to be equivalent18 and use one or the other to suit the 
context. 
Under mind-body supervenience a physical base property, P, 
for mental property M guarantees, as a matter of necessity, the 
occurrence of M; that is, necessarily if something instantiates P, 
it instantiates M. The modal force of necessity involved is a 
parameter to be fixed to suit one's view of the mind-body rela­
tion; some may go for metaphysical or even logical/ conceptual 
necessity, while others will settle for nomological necessity. (We 
should keep in mind that the modal force of supervenience may 
vary for different groups of mental properties; for example, it 
is possible for intentional properties to supervene with logi­
cal/ conceptual necessity, while phenomenal properties super­
vene only with nomological necessity.) As has been noted, one 
and the same mental property may have multiple physical bases: 
an instance of pain in a human may be grounded in one neural 
property, and another instance of pain, say in a reptile, may be 
grounded in another.

--- Page 23 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 11 
As we saw in Davidson, it is customary to associate superven­
ience with the idea of dependence or determination: if the mental 
supervenes on the physical, the mental is dependent on the 
physical, or the physical determines the mental, roughly in the 
sense that the mental nature of a thing is entirely fixed by its 
physical nature. Sometimes this is put in terms of "worlds": the 
psychological character of a world is determined entirely by its 
physical character-as it is often put, worlds that are physically 
indiscernible are psychologically indiscernible. The relation of 
dependence, or determination, is asymmetric: if x depends on, 
or is determined by y, it cannot be that yin turn depends on or 
is determined by x. What does the determining must be taken to 
be, in some sense, ontologically prior to, or more basic than, 
what gets determined by it. But mind-body supervenience as 
stated isn't asymmetric; in general, the supervenience of A on B 
does not exclude the supervenience of B on A. The notion of 
supervenience we introduced simply states a pattern of covari­
ance between the two families of properties, and such covari­
ances can occur in the absence of a metaphysical dependence or 
determination relation. For example, two sets of properties may 
show the required covariance because each depends on a third, 
somewhat in the manner in which two collateral effects of the 
single cause exhibit a pattern of lawful correlation. What needs 
to be added to property covariance to get dependence or deter­
mination, or whether dependence/ determination must be taken 
as an independent primitive, are difficult questions that prob­
ably have no clear answers. We will simply follow the customary 
usage and understand supervenience to incorporate a depend­
ence/ determination component as well. In fact common expres­
sions like "supervenience base" and "base property" all but 
explicitly suggest asymmetric dependence. 
Suppose then that the mental supervenes on the physical. 
Does this give us a possible account of how our mentality is 
related to the physical nature of our being? That is, can we use 
supervenience itself to state a philosophical theory of the way 
minds are related to bodies? It has sometimes been thought-as

--- Page 24 ---

12 Chapter 1 
I myself did at one point-that the answer is yes, that what 
might be called supervenience physicalism is a possible position · 
to take on the mind-body problem. There has been a controversy 
concerning whether supervenience, in the sense of strong super­
venience, is indeed consistent with the irreducibility of the 
supervenient properties to their subvenient bases. But the 
discussion of this question has been inconclusive,19 and I now 
believe that the debate was framed in terms of a seriously flawed 
notion of reduction (see chapter 4). Here we will focus on the 
question whether or not mind-body supervenience as such can 
be thought of as an account of the mind-body relation. 
Brief reflection shows that the answer is no, that mind-body 
supervenience in itself does not give us a theory of the mind­
body relation. There are at least two related reasons for this. 
First, mind-body supervenience is consistent with a host of clas­
sic positions on the mind-body problem; in fact it is a shared 
commitment of many mutually exclusionary mind-body theo­
ries. As we will see, both emergentism and the view that the 
mental must be physically realized-that is, there can be no 
nonphysical realizations of mental properties (we can call this 
physical realizationism)-imply mind-body supervenience. But 
emergentism is a form of dualism that takes mental properties 
to be nonphysical intrinsic causal powers, whereas physical re­
alizationism, as I will argue, is a monistic physicalism. What is 
more obvious, type physicalism, which reductively identifies 
mental properties with physical properties, implies mind-body 
supervenience. Moreover epiphenomenalism, viewed by some 
physicalists, for example, J. J. C. Smart, as their chief dualistic 
rival, is apparently committed to mind-body supervenience: if 
two organisms differ in some mental respect, that must be be­
cause they differ in some physical respect-it must be because 
the physical cause of the mental respect involved is present in 
one but absent from the other. That is, the epiphenomenalist 
would surely agree that two physically indistinguishable organ­
isms must manifest the same mental characteristics. If mind­
body supervenience is a commitment of each of these diverse, 
and conflicting, approaches to the mind-body problem, it cannot

--- Page 25 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 13 
itself be a position on this problem that can be set alongside these 
classic alternatives.20 
What this shows is that the mere claim of mind-body super­
venience leaves unaddressed the question what grounds or ac­
counts for it-that is, the question why the supervenience relation 
should hold for the mental and the physical.21 To see the general 
issue involved here, consider normative supervenience, the 
widely accepted doctrine that normative or evaluative proper­
ties supervene on nonnormative, nonevaluative properties. Vari­
ous metaethical positions accept normative supervenience but 
offer differing accounts of its provenance. For the ethical natu­
ralist, the supervenience holds because normative properties are 
definable in terms of nonnormative, naturalistic properties. An 
ethical intuitionist like G. E. Moore would see normative super­
venience as a fundamental synthetic a priori fact not susceptible 
to further explanation; it is something we directly apprehend 
through our moral sense. R. M. Hare, a noncognitivist, would 
attempt to tie it with certain regulative constraints on the lan­
guage of prescription. Still others may try to ground it in the very 
idea of normative evaluation: normative judgments and evalu­
ations must ultimately be based on reasons or grounds that are 
themselves nonnormative and nonevaluative, and this means 
that normative properties must have nonnormative criteria of 
application. In the mind-body case, too, we can think of rival 
mind-body theories as offering competing explanations of mind­
body supervenience. The explanation offered by reductive type 
physicalism is analogous to the naturalistic explanation of nor­
mative supervenience-mind-body supervenience holds be­
cause mentality is physically reducible. On type physicalism, 
mental properties are physical properties, just as on ethical natu­
ralism ethical properties are natural properties. Emergentism, 
like ethical intuitionism, views mind-body supervenience as 
something that admits no explanation; it is a brute fact that 
must be accepted with "natural piety," as a leading emergentist, 
Samuel Alexander, urged. In contrast, epiphenomenalism would 
invoke the causal relation (the "same cause, same effect" princi­
ple) to explain supervenience, while on physical realizationism

--- Page 26 ---

14 Chapter 1 
mind-body supervenience is a direct consequence of the fact that 
mental properties are, as we will see, second-order functional 
properties defined over first-order physical properties, and so 
on. 
We must conclude then that mind-body supervenience itself 
is not an explanatory theory; it merely states a pattern of property 
covariation between the mental and the physical and points to 
the existence of a dependency relation between the two. Yet 
supervenience is silent on the nature of the dependence relation 
that might explain why the mental supervenes on the physical. 
Another way of putting the point would be this: supervenience 
is not a type of dependence relation-it is not a relation that can 
be placed alongside causal dependence, reductive dependence, 
mereological dependence, dependence grounded in definability 
or entailment, and the like. Rather, any of these dependence 
relations can generate the required covariation of properties and 
thereby qualify as a supervenience relation. Supervenience 
therefore is not a metaphysically "deep" relation; it is only a 
"phenomenological" relation about patterns of property covaria­
tion, patterns that possibly are manifestations of some deeper 
dependence relationships. If this is right, mind-body superven­
ience states the mind-body problem-it is not a solution to it. 
This means that nonreductive physicalism must look elsewhere 
for its metaphysical grounding; supervenience itself is not capa­
ble of supplying it. Any putative account of the mind-body re­
lation that accepts mind-body supervenience must specify a 
dependence relation between the mental and physical that is 
capable of grounding and explaining mind-body supervenience. 
These considerations, however, need not be taken to be seri­
ously deflationary about the usefulness of the supervenience 
idea in the philosophy of mind. They certainly deflate the hope 
that supervenience itself might give us an account of the mind­
body relation. But there is also a positive side: our considerations 
indicate that mind-body supervenience captures a commitment 
common to all positions on the nature of mentality that are 
basically physicalistic. For it represents the idea that mentality is 
at bottom physically based, and that there is no free-floating

--- Page 27 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 15 
mentality unanchored in the physical nature of objects and 
events in which it is manifested. This is an idea that can be 
shared by many diverse positions on the mind-body problem, 
from reductive type physicalism at one extreme to dualistic 
emergentism at the other. In contrast, mind-body supervenience 
is inconsistent with more extreme forms of dualism, such as, 
Cartesian dualism, which allow the mental world to float freely, 
unconstrained by the physical domain.22 Thus mind-body super­
venience can serve as a useful dividing line: it can be viewed as 
defining minimal physicalism. 
The Layered Model and Mereological Supervenience 
Cartesian substance dualism pictures the world as consisting of 
two independent domains, the mental and the material, each 
with its own distinctive defining properties (consciousness and 
spatial extendedness, respectively). There are causal interactions 
across the domains, but entities in each domain, being "sub­
stances," are ontologically independent of those of the other, 
and it is metaphysically possible for one domain to exist in the 
total absence of the other. What has replaced this picture of a 
dichotomized world is the familiar multilayered model that 
views the world as stratified into different "levels," "orders," or 
"tiers" organized in a hierarchical structure. The bottom level 
is usually thought to consist of elementary particles, or what­
ever our best physics is going tell us are the basic bits of matter 
out of which all material things are composed.23 As we go up 
the ladder, we successively encounter atoms, molecules, cells, 
larger living organisms, and so on. The ordering relation that 
generates the hierarchical structure is the mereological (part­
whole) relation: entities belonging to a given level, except those 
at the very bottom, have an exhaustive decomposition, without 
remainder, into entities belonging to the lower levels. Entities 
at the bottom level have no physically significant proper parts. 
It is part of this layered picture that at each level there 
are properties, activities, and functions that make their first ap­
pearance, or "emerge," at that level (we may call them the

--- Page 28 ---

16 Chapter 1 
characteristic properties of that level). Thus among the charac­
teristic properties of the molecular level are electrical conductiv­
ity, inflammability, density, viscosity, and the like; activities and 
functions like metabolism and reproduction are among the char­
acteristic properties of the cellular and higher biological levels; 
and consciousness and other mental properties make their ap­
pearance at the level of higher organisms. For much of this 
century, a layered picture of the world like this has formed a 
constant-tacitly assumed if not explicitly stated-backdrop for 
debates on a variety of issues in metaphysics and philosophy of 
science-for example, reduction and reductionism, the mind­
body problem, emergence, the status of the special sciences, and 
the possibility of a unified science. In fact this picture has had a 
strong and pervasive influence on the way we formulate prob­
lems and their possible solutions in many areas. Sometimes the 
layered model is couched in terms of concepts and languages 
rather than entities and their properties. Talk of levels of organi­
zation, descriptions or languages, of analysis, of explanation, and the 
like is encountered everywhere-it has thoroughly permeated 
primary scientific literature in many fields, in particular, various 
areas of psychology and cognitive science, systems theory, and 
computer science-as well as philosophical writings about 
science.24 
Now we come to a crucial question: How are the characteristic 
properties of a given level related to the properties at the ad­
jacent levels-in particular, to those at the lower levels? How 
are biological ("vital") properties related to physicochemical 
properties? How are consciousness and intentionality related to 
biological/physical properties? How are social phenomena, phe­
nomena characteristic of social groups, related to phenomena 
involving individual members? As you will agree, these are 
among the central questions of philosophy of science, metaphys­
ics, and philosophy of mind. Possible answers to them define the 
philosophical options on the issues involved. Some of the well­
known major alternatives include reductionism, antireduction­
ism, methodological individualism, emergentism, neo-vitalism, 
and the like. You may attempt to give a single uniform answer

--- Page 29 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 17 
applicable to all pairs of adjacent levels, or you may take dif­
ferent positions regarding different levels. For example, you 
might argue that properties at every level (higher than the bot­
tom level) are reducible, in some clear and substantial sense, to 
lower-level properties and therefore ultimately to the basic 
properties of physics, or you might restrict the reductionist 
claim to certain selected levels (say, biological properties in re­
lation to physicochemical properties) and defend an anti­
reductionist stance concerning properties at other levels (say, 
consciousness and intentionality). And it isn't even necessary to 
give a uniform answer in regard to all characteristic properties 
of a given level; concerning mental properties, for example, it is 
possible to hold that phenomenal properties, or qualia, are ir­
reducible, while holding intentional properties, including prop­
ositional attitudes, to be reducible (say, causal/ functionally or 
biologically). 
Let us now look at the layered model with supervenience in 
mind. When supervenience is superposed on the layered model, 
something like the following emerges as a general schema of 
supervenience claims about properties at a given level (other 
than the lowest one) in relation to those at lower levels: 
For any x and y, belonging to level L (other than the lowest 
level), if x and y are indiscernible in relation to properties 
at all levels lower than L (or, as we may say, x and y are 
microindiscernible), then x and y are indiscernible with re­
spect to all properties at level L.
How do we explain the idea of microindiscernibility? The follow­
ing seems pretty natural and straightforward:25 
x and y, belonging to level L, are microindiscernible if and 
only if for every decomposition D of x into proper parts 
belonging to lower levels, y has an isomorphic decomposi­
tion C in the sense that there is a one-one function I from 
D to C such that for any n-adic property or relation P at 
levels lower than L, P(d") iff P(I(d11)), where dn is any n-tuple 
of elements in D and I(d11) is the image of dn under I, and 
conversely from y to x.

--- Page 30 ---

18 Chapter 1 
Not surprisingly, supervenience theses, when applied to the 
layered model, turn into claims of mereological supervenience, the 
doctrine that properties of wholes are fixed by the properties 
and relations that characterize their parts. A general claim of 
macro-micro supervenience then becomes the Democritean 
atomistic doctrine that the world is the way it is because the 
microworld is the way it is.26 
Let us now return to mental properties. Presumably mental 
properties arise as characteristic properties at the level of higher 
organisms, and like any other high-level properties, they are 
supervenient in the sense explained, on the lower-level proper­
ties characterizing their proper parts. That is, if M is a mental 
property had by something x, then any y that is microindis­
cernible from x will also have M. Mental properties, therefore, 
are macroproperties supervening on microproperties. 
We should resist the temptation to read more into this result 
than what's really there. On the layered model, mind-body su­
pervenience is an instance of mereological supervenience, and this 
might seem like an advance, tempting us into thinking that we 
might try explaining mind-body supervenience in parallel with 
the way macrophysical properties are determined and explained 
by microphysical properties. But supervenience or determina­
tion is one thing, explanation quite another. We may know that 
B determines A (or A supervenes on B) without having any idea 
why this is so-why A should arise from B, not C, or why A, 
rather than D, arises from B. Mereological supervenience of the 
mental on the physical would not automatically promise us an 
intelligible account of why the particular mind-body superven­
ience relations hold. Given that mental property M is superven­
ient on a certain physical mereological configuration P, the 
questions still remain: Is M reducible to Pin some appropriate 
sense? Can we explain why something has M in terms of its 
having P? Are the P-M and other such supervenience relations 
further explainable (and what can "explanation" mean here?), or 
must they be taken as brute and fundamental? These questions 
are independent of the question whether P is a microphysically 
characterized property.

--- Page 31 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 19 
These, I believe, are legitimate questions. The layered model 
provides us with a useful ontological scheme within which we 
can situate the mind-body problem. By placing the problem in 
the broader context of this model, we give it both generality and 
structure, and this raises the hope that we will be able to set some 
nonarbitrary parameters and constraints on the resolution of the 
problem, and to appreciate its possible distinctiveness as well as 
its commonality with problems in other areas. But the hard ques­
tions remain untouched. Let us now turn to the idea of physical 
realization as an approach to these questions. 
Physical Realizationism 
As you may recall, by physical realizationism I mean the claim 
that mental properties, if they are realized, must be physically 
realized-that is, no mental properties can have nonphysical 
realizations.27 The thesis therefore is equivalent to the conjunc­
tion of physicalism with the functionalist conception of mental 
properties, and "physicalist functionalism" would be an equally 
good name for this position. Functionalism takes mental prop­
erties and kinds as functional properties, properties specified in 
terms of their roles as causal intermediaries between sensory 
inputs and behavioral outputs, and the physicalist form of func­
tionalism takes physical properties as the only potential occu­
pants, or "realizers," of these causal roles.28 To use a stock 
example, for an organism to be in pain is for it to be in some 
internal state that is typically caused by tissue damage and that 
typically causes groans, winces, and other characteristic pain 
behavior. In this sense being in pain is said to be a second-order 
property: for a system x to have this property is for x to have 
some first-order property P that satisfies a certain condition D, 
where in the present case D specifies that P has pain's typical 
causes and typical effects. 
More generally, we can explain the idea of a second-order 
property in the following way.29 Let B be a set of properties; these 
are our first-order (or "base") properties. They are not first-order 
in any absolute sense; they may well be second-order relative to

--- Page 32 ---

20 Chapter 1 
another set of properties.30 When mental properties are to be 
generated out of B as second-order properties, we must of course 
take B to consist of nonmental properties (including physico­
chemical, biological, and behavioral properties31). We then have 
this: 
Fis a second-order property over set B of base (or first-order) 
properties iff F is the property of having some property P
in B such that D(P), where D specifies a condition on 
members of B. 
Second-order properties therefore are second-order in that they 
are generated by quantification-existential quantification in the 
present case-over the base properties. We may call the base 
properties satisfying condition D the realizers of second-order 
property F. For example, if the base set B comprises colors, then 
the property of having a primary color can be thought of as a 
second-order property: having a property P in B such that P = 
red or P = blue or P = green.32 Thus being red, being blue, and 
being green are the three realizers of having a primary color. If 
B is a set of minerals,33 being jade can be thought of as the 
second-order property of being a mineral that is pale green or 
white in color and fit for use as gemstones or for carving. This 
second-order property has two known realizers, jadeite and 
nephrite. 
We need to say something about the vocabulary allowed for 
formulating condition D; for present purposes we will assume 
that the causal/ nomological relation (holding for properties-or 
property instances, to be exact) is available, in addition to the 
usual logical expressions and appropriate descriptive terms (e.g., 
those referring to members of B). We may now explain functional 
properties over Bas those second-order properties over B whose 
specification D involves the causal/ nomic relation. That is, func­
tional properties are second-order properties defined in terms of 
causal/nomic relations among first-order properties. An exam­
ple of a functional property is dormitivity34: a substance has this 
property just in case it has a chemical property that causes peo­
ple to sleep. Both Valium and Seconal have dormitivity but in

--- Page 33 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 21 
virtue of different first-order (chemical) realizers-diazepam 
and secobarbital, respectively. Or consider water-solubility: some­
thing has this property just in case it has some property P such 
that when it is immersed in water P causes it to dissolve. This 
conception of functional property accords well with the standard 
usage in the functionalist literature. On the functionalist concep­
tion, mental properties are specified by causal roles, that is, in 
terms of causal relations holding for first-order physical proper­
ties (including biological and behavioral properties). In this 
sense mental properties turn out to be extrinsic or relational prop­
erties of individuals that have them. To be in a mental state is to 
be in a state with such-and-such as its typical causes and such­
and-such as its typical effects. Whether or not a given property 
qualifies as an occupant of a specified role-that is, whether or 
not it is a realizer of a functional property-depends essentially 
on its causal/nomological relations to other properties, not on 
its intrinsic character. Intrinsic characters do matter of course, 
but only because of their capacity to get causally hooked up with 
other properties. Thus we may think of intrinsic characters as 
representing the causal potentials of their bearers (relative to the 
prevailing laws) which help determine whether or not their 
bearers instantiate a given functional property. On the other 
hand, networks of causal/nomological relations are constitutive 
of functional properties.35 
If mental properties are functional properties, they are there­
fore not tied, definitionally or constitutively, to the composi­
tional/ structural details of their realizers. Whether a given 
property realizes a given functional property is a contingent, 
empirical question; any base properties with the right causal/ 
nomological relations to other properties can serve as its realiz­
ers. And any mechanism that gets activated by the right input 
and that, when activated, triggers the right response serves as a 
realizer of a psychological capacity or function. It has long been 
a platitude in philosophy of mind/psychology, and philosophi­
cal discussions of the special sciences, that mental properties and 
other special science properties can have extremely diverse real­
izers in different species and structures. This observation has

--- Page 34 ---

22 Chapter 1 
promoted a certain view about the nature of psychology and 
cognitive science, namely that the formal/ abstract character of 
mental properties, standardly taken to be a consequence of their 
multiple realizability, is just what makes cognitive science pos­
sible-a scientific investigation of cognitive properties as such, 
across the diverse biological species and perhaps nonbiological 
cognitive systems, independently of the particulars of their 
physical implementation. In fact some have even speculated 
about the possibility of nonphysical realizations of psychologies; 
it is a seductive thought that there may be contingent empirical 
laws of cognition, or psychology, that are valid for cognizers as 
such, whether they are protein-based biological organisms like 
us and other earthly creatures, electromechanical robots, noncar­
bon-based intelligent extraterrestrials, immaterial Cartesian 
souls, heavenly angels, or even the omniscient one itself! (This 
surely takes the idea of "rational psychology" too far.) Even 
when we bring in the materialist constraint of physical realiza­
tionism, the idea of universal laws of cognition and psychology, 
applicable to all nomologically possible physical systems with 
cognitive capacities, is heady stuff, indeed.36 
Whether a given physical property P is a realizer of a mental 
property M depends on the nature of the system in which P is 
embedded,37 since in psychology the input-output behavior of 
the total system is what is of concern, and the causal role that P 
plays will depend on the makeup (" causal wiring") of the system 
as a whole. For example, whether or not tissue damage will 
cause the nociceptive neurons to fire in a given organism obvi­
ously depends on the organism's neural organization, and 
whether or not the firing of these neural fibers will trigger ap­
propriate escape behavior will again depend on the organism's 
neural and motor systems. So the same property P, when em­
bedded in a different system, may not realize M. Conversely, 
there may well be functional substitutes for P in the following 
sense: if for some reason the normal mechanism for instantiating 
Pin an organism turns dysfunctional, another mechanism with 
appropriate causal capacities may be able to take its place and 
supply a near-enough realizer of M for that organism.

--- Page 35 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 23 
The status of P as a realizer of M varies along another dimen­
sion as well: since P's credentials as M's realizer depend on its 
causal/ nomic relations to other properties, if laws of nature 
should vary, thereby altering P's causal potential, that could 
affect P's status as a realizer of M. P realizes M in this and other 
nomologically similar worlds; however, in worlds in which dif­
ferent laws hold at the level of M's base domain, thereby gener­
ating different causal structures in those worlds, P may fail to 
satisfy the functional specification definitive of M. In such 
worlds, M may have realizers entirely different from its realizers 
in this world, or it may have no realizers at all.38 
Although the realization relation can shift in these ways, it is 
also important to note its constancy. Once the system's physical 
constitution and the prevailing laws of nature are fixed, that fixes 
whether or not P realizes M in that system. That is to say, if P 
realizes Min systems, then P will realize Min all systems which 
are subject to the same laws and which are relevantly indiscern­
ible from s-that is, in respect of nomic properties. If, as most of 
us would accept, the microstructure of a system determines its 
causal/nomic properties, it follows that with laws held constant, 
the realization relation remains invariant for systems with simi­
lar microstructures. 
Physical Realizationism Explains Mind-Body Supervenience 
Consider a class S of systems sharing a relevantly similar micro­
structure. Biological conspecifics may constitute such a class. 
Suppose that P realizes M in systems of kind S. From the 
definition of realization, it follows that Pis sufficient for M (that 
is, if a system of kind S instantiates P at t, it instantiates M at 
t)-in fact, given the nomological constancy just noted of the 
realization relation, it follows that P is nomologically sufficient 
for M. Thus, if (P1, ••• , Pn) is a realization of (M1, ••• , Mn), in 
the sense that each Pi is a realizer of M;, it follows that the Ms 
are supervenient on the Ps. Physical realizationism therefore
entails the supervenience thesis. Given the relativity of the re­
alization relation to prevailing laws, the entailed supervenience

--- Page 36 ---

24 Chapter 1 
thesis has only the force of nomological necessity, not that of 
full metaphysical or logical/ conceptual necessity. Thus physi­
cally indiscernible systems in worlds with different laws may 
not instantiate the same psychology. 
This means that physical realizationism would give us an 
explanation of the supervenience thesis: the mental supervenes 
on the physical because mental properties are second-order 
functional properties with physical realizers (and no nonphysi­
cal realizers). And we have an explanation of mental-physical 
correlations. Why is it that whenever Pis realized in a systems, 
it instantiates mental property M? The answer is that by defini­
tion, having Mis having a property with causal specification D, 
and in systems likes, Pis the property (or one of the properties) 
meeting specification D. For systems likes, then, having M con­
sists in having P. It isn't that when certain systems instantiate P, 
mental property M magically emerges or supervenes (in the 
dictionary sense of "supervene"). It is rather that having M for 
these systems, simply is having P. We might even say, using a 
familiar if shopworn reductive idiom, that having M, for these 
systems, is "nothing over and above" having P. Note that all of 
these explanations are nomological explanations-they depend 
on the fact that a certain set of laws prevail in our world, for 
these laws ultimately determine what physical properties are 
realizers of a given mental property. From a metaphysical point 
of view, therefore, the idea that mental properties are realized by 
physical properties goes considerably beyond such ideas as that 
mental properties have "physical correlates" or "neural sub­
strates," that they have "physical supervenience bases," and the 
like; unlike "realization," these ideas are not capable of generat­
ing an explanation of why a given mental property arises out of, 
or correlates with, certain physical properties, and do not war­
rant reductive talk like "Having M, for appropriate systems, 
consists in, or just is, having P." 
These considerations, I believe, point to a conception of reduc­
tion that accords well with the paradigm of reduction in science. 
To reduce a property, or phenomenon, we first construe it-or 
reconstrue it-functionally, in terms of its causal/nomic rela-

--- Page 37 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 25 
tions to other properties and phenomena. To reduce tempera­
ture, we must first stop thinking of it as an intrinsic property but 
construe it as an extrinsic property characterized relationally, in 
terms of causal/nomic relations, perhaps something like this: it 
is that magnitude of an object that increases (or is caused to 
increase) when the object is in contact with another with a higher 
degree of it, that, when high, causes a ball of wax in the vicinity 
to melt, that causes the sensation of warmth or cold in humans, 
that, when extremely low, can make steel brittle, that, when 
extremely high, can turn steel into a molten state-you get the 
idea. Here is another example: the gene is that mechanism in a 
biological organism causally responsible for the transmission of 
heritable characteristics from parents to offsprings. To be trans­
parent is to have the kind of molecular structure that causes light 
to pass through intact. And so on. We then find properties or 
mechanisms, often at the microlevel, that satisfy these causal/ 
nomic specifications and thereby fill the specified causal roles. 
Multiple realization and nomic relativity obtain in these cases as 
well. Temperature may be one thing in gases but something else 
in solids, plasmas, and vacuums. The DNA molecule is the real­
izer of the gene, but in worlds in which different basic laws 
prevail molecules of another kind may perform the causal func­
tions definitive of the gene. Reductions therefore are doubly 
relative: in systems with different structures, the underlying 
mechanisms realizing the reduced property may vary, and re­
ductions remain valid only when the basic laws of nature are 
held constant-that is, only for nomologically possible worlds 
(relative to the reference world).39 
What has just been described differs in important ways from 
the standard model of theory reduction that has dominated the 
discussion of reduction, in particular, the possibility of mind­
body reduction. This is Ernest Nagel's model of intertheoretic 
reduction whose principal focus is the derivation of laws.40 Ac­
cording to Nagel, reduction is basically a proof procedure, con­
sisting in the logical-mathematical derivation of the laws of the 
target theory from those of the base theory, taken in conjunction 
with "bridge laws" connecting the predicates of the two theories.

--- Page 38 ---

26 Chapter 1 
Standardly, these correlating bridge laws are taken to be bicon­
ditional in form, providing each property in the domain of the 
theory to be reduced with a nomologically coextensive property 
in the reduction base. For mind-body reduction Nagel's model 
requires that each mental property be provided with a no­
mologically coextensive physical property, across all species and 
structure types. This has made mind-body reductionism-in fact 
all reductionisms-an easy target. As everyone knows, the most 
influential antireductionist argument, one that had a decisive 
role in starting off the antireductionist bandwagon which is still 
going strong, is based on the claim that on account of the multi­
ple realizability of mental properties, mental properties fail to 
have coextensions in the physical domain, thereby making 
mind-body bridge laws unavailable for Nagelian reduction. This 
argument was then generalized in defense of a general anti­
reductionist position in regard to all special sciences.41 For three 
decades the battle over reductionisms has been fought on the 
question whether or not appropriate bridge laws are available 
for the domains involved. 
But this is the wrong battlefield on which to contest the issue 
of reduction. What has gone largely unappreciated is the fact 
that the Nagel model of reduction is in effect the Hempelian D-N 
model of scientific explanation applied to intertheoretic contexts. 
Just as Hempelian explanation consists in the derivation of the 
statement describing the phenomenon to be explained from laws 
taken together with auxiliary premises describing relevant initial 
conditions, Nagelian reduction is accomplished in the derivation 
of the target theory from the base theory taken in conjunction 
with bridge laws as auxiliary premises. It is therefore more than 
a little surprising that while the D-N model of explanation has 
had few committed adherents for over three decades, Nagel's 
derivational model of reduction is still serving as the dominant 
standard in discussions of reduction and reductionism.42 I be­
lieve that Nagelian uniform reductions based on universal bi­
conditional bridge laws are extremely rare (if any exists) in the 
sciences43-especially, in the case of microreductions-and that 
the kind of model adumbrated above is not only more realistic

--- Page 39 ---

The Mind-Body Problem: Where We Now Are 27 
but also, as we will see in a later lecture, more appropriate from 
a metaphysical point of view. If this is right, the reducibility of 
a property critically depends on its functionalizability-whether 
or not it can be construed as a second-order functional property 
over properties in the base domain-not on the availability of 
bridge laws. Bridge laws are neither necessary nor sufficient for 
reduction. 
We will later take up this and related questions, in connection 
with mind-body reduction and reductionism (chapter 4). Today 
I have tried to set the stage for more detailed discussion of some 
central issues that make up the mind-body problem, in particu­
lar the problems of mental causation and mind-body reduction. 
But several things have become clear: (1) if we are to understand 
the mind-body relation, we need a positive explanatory account 
of how mental properties are related to physical properties; (2) 
Davidson's anomalous monism fails to do this, and likewise with 
any other similar form of "token physicalism;" (3) even when 
mind-body supervenience is invoked, that does not help to gen­
erate such an account, for the supervenience itself is in need of 
an explanation; and (4) physical realizationism, whether or not 
it is ultimately correct, does promise such an account-at least, 
it has the right form and content. In particular, it can yield an 
explanation of mind-body supervenience and points to a more 
realistic model of reduction in terms of which the issue of mind­
body reductionism can be more fruitfully debated.

--- Page 40 ---

Chapter 2
The Many Problems of Mental Causation
Giving an account of mental causation-in particular, explain-
i.g how it is possible for the mental to exercise causal influences
in the physical world-has been one of the main preoccupations
in the philosophy of mind over the past two decades. The
problem of course is not new: as we learn early in our philoso-
phy classes, Descartes was confronted forcefully by his contem-
poraries on this issue,l to explain how there could be causal
transactions between minds and bodies. But this does not mean
that Descartes's problem is our problem. His problem, as his
contemporaries saw was to show just how his all-too-common-
sensical thesis of mind-body interaction was tenable within his
ontolo gy of two radically diverse domains of substances, minds
and bodies. In his replies, Descartes hemmed and hawed, and
was ultimately unable to produce an effective response. Many
of his contemporaries, like Leibniz and Malebranche, chose to
abandon mental causation in favor of substantival dualism. In
staying with mental causation to the end, however, Descartes
showed a healthy and commendable respect for philosophical
commonsense-more so than many of his major philosophical
rivals who opted for radical and implausible solutions-and I
believe we should remember him for this as well as for his much
publictzed failure to reconcile mental causation with his ontol-
ogy. In any case substance dualism is not the source of our
current worries about mental causation; substantival minds are
no longer a live philosophical option for most of us.
Philosophical problems do not arise in a vacuum. Typically
they emerge when we come to see a conflict among the assump-
tions and presumptions that we explicitly or tacitly accept,
or commitments that command our presumptive respect. The

--- Page 41 ---

Chapter 2 
The Many Problems of Mental Causation 
Giving an account of mental causation-in particular, explain­
ing how it is possible for the mental to exercise causal influences 
in the physical world-has been one of the main preoccupations 
in the philosophy of mind over the past two decades. The 
problem of course is not new: as we learn early in our philoso­
phy classes, Descartes was confronted forcefully by his contem­
poraries on this issue,1 to explain how there could be causal 
transactions between minds and bodies. But this does not mean 
that Descartes's problem is our problem. His problem, as his 
contemporaries saw, was to show just how his all-too-common­
sensical thesis of mind-body interaction was tenable within his 
ontology of two radically diverse domains of substances, minds 
and bodies. In his replies, Descartes hemmed and hawed, and 
was ultimately unable to produce an effective response. Many 
of his contemporaries, like Leibniz and Malebranche, chose to 
abandon mental causation in favor of substantival dualism. In 
staying with mental causation to the end, however, Descartes 
showed a healthy and commendable respect for philosophical 
commonsense-more so than many of his major philosophical 
rivals who opted for radical and implausible solutions-and I 
believe we should remember him for this as well as for his much 
publicized failure to reconcile mental causation with his ontol­
ogy. In any case substance dualism is not the source of our 
current worries about mental causation; substantival minds are 
no longer a live philosophical option for most of us. 
Philosophical problems do not arise in a vacuum. Typically 
they emerge when we come to see a conflict among the assump­
tions and presumptions that we explicitly or tacitly accept, 
or commitments that command our presumptive respect. The

--- Page 42 ---

30 Chapter 2 
seriousness of a philosophical problem therefore depends on 
two related questions: First, how deep is our attachment to the 
assumptions and commitments that give rise to the apparent 
conflict? Second, how easy or difficult is it to bring the conflicting 
assumptions into an acceptable reconciliation? The process of 
reconciliation may require serious modifications to our original 
commitments. Short of abandoning the entire framework of the 
existing commitments, compromises must be negotiated. There 
are no free lunches in philosophy any more than in real life. 
In this lecture I want to set out, in what to my mind is the 
simplest and starkest way, how our principal current problem of 
mental causation arises. In saying this, I do not want to imply 
that there is a single problem of mental causation. In fact, as we 
will shortly see, several different sets of assumptions and prin­
ciples that many of us find plausible can make trouble for mental 
causation. I will first describe three sources that seem to generate 
difficulties for mental causation. This means that we are faced 
with at least three distinct problems of mental causation. How­
ever, in the rest of this lecture, I will focus on one particular 
version of the third of these problems ("the exclusion problem"). 
This problem arises from what I will call "the supervenience 
argument." This, I claim, is our principal problem of mental 
causation. In referring to this as "our" problem of mental causa­
tion, what I mean to suggest is that it is a problem that arises for 
anyone with the kind of broadly physicalist outlook that many 
philosophers, including myself, find compelling or, at least, 
plausible and attractive. In contrast, the other two problems (the 
mental anomaly problem and the extrinsicness problem) are not 
essentially tied to physicalism. They are largely independent of 
physicalist commitments and can arise outside the physicalist 
framework. As we will see, the exclusion problem is distinctive 
in that it strikes at the very heart of physicalism, and I believe 
that the supervenience argument captures the essence of the 
difficulties involved. The fundamental problem of mental causa­
tion for us, then, is to answer this question: How is it possible 
for the mind to exercise its causal powers in a world that is 
fundamentally physical?

--- Page 43 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 31 
Let me begin with some reasons for wanting to save mental 
causation-why it is important to us that mental causation is real 
(some will say that its existence is an ultimate, nonnegotiable 
commitment). First, the possibility of human agency evidently 
requires that our mental states-our beliefs, desires, and inten­
tions-have causal effects in the physical world: in voluntary 
actions our beliefs and desires, or intentions and decisions, must 
somehow cause our limbs to move in appropriate ways, thereby 
causing the objects around us to be rearranged. That is how we 
manage to cope with our surroundings, write philosophy pa­
pers, build bridges and cities, and make holes in the ozone 
layers. Second, the possibility of human knowledge presupposes 
the reality of mental causation: perception, our sole window on 
the world, requires the causation of perceptual experiences and 
beliefs by physical objects and events around us. Reasoning, by 
which we acquire new knowledge and belief from the existing 
fund of what we already know or believe, involves the causation 
of new belief by old belief; more generally, causation arguably is 
essential to the transmission of evidential groundedness. Mem­
ory is a complex causal process involving interactions between 
experiences, their physical storage, and retrieval in the form of 
belief. If you take away perception, memory, and reasoning, you 
pretty much take away all of human knowledge. To move on, it 
seems plain that the possibility of psychology as a theoretical 
science capable of generating law-based explanations of human 
behavior depends on the reality of mental causation: mental 
phenomena must be capable of functioning as indispensable 
links in causal chains leading to physical behavior. A science that 
invokes mental phenomena in its explanations is presumptively 
committed to their causal efficacy; for any phenomenon to have 
an explanatory role, its presence or absence in a given situation 
must make a difference-a causal difference. 
It is no wonder then that for most philosophers the causal 
efficacy of the mental is something that absolutely cannot be 
given away no matter how great the pressures are from other 
quarters. Jerry Fodor is among these philosophers; he writes:

--- Page 44 ---

32 Chapter 2 
... if it isn't literally true that my wanting is causally re­
sponsible for my reaching, and my itching is causally re­
sponsible for my scratching, and my believing is causally 
responsible for my saying ... , if none of that is literally 
true, then practically everything I believe about anything 
is false and it's the end of the world.2 
If mental causation is only an illusion, that perhaps is not the 
end of the world, but it surely seems like the end of a world 
that includes Fodor and the rest of us as agents and cognizers. 
The problem of determinism threatens human agency, and the 
challenge of skepticism threatens human knowledge. The stakes 
seem even higher with the problem of mental causation, for this 
problem threatens to take away both agency and cognition. 
Three Problems of Mental Causation 
What then are the assumptions and presumptions that make 
trouble for mental causation, prompting us to attempt its "vin­
dication"? I believe there are three doctrines currently on the 
scene each of which poses prima facie difficulties for mental 
causation. The first two have been with us for some time; the 
third, though not new, has begun to receive serious new con­
siderations. One is "mental anomalism," the claim that there are 
no causal laws about psychological phenomena. The second 
source of the problem is computationalism and content exter­
nalism. The third I call "causal exclusion." Each of these gener­
ates a distinct problem of mental causation, though the 
problems are to some extent interconnected. A truly comprehen­
sive theory of mental causation must provide a solution to each 
problem, a solution that simultaneously satisfies the demands 
of all three problems. 
The Problem of Anomalous Mental Properties 
Let us begin with mental anomalism. Davidson's version of this 
doctrine holds that there are no causal laws (or, in Davidson's 
terms, "strict" laws) about psychological phenomena-no such

--- Page 45 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 33 
laws connecting mental events with physical events and no such 
laws connecting mental events with other mental events.3 But 
why does mental anomalism pose a difficulty for mental causa­
tion? The initial difficulty arises when anomalism is combined 
with the widely accepted nomological requirement on causal 
relations,4 the condition that events standing in a causal relation 
must instantiate a causal law. But this seems to make mental 
causation impossible: mental causation requires mental events 
to instantiate laws, but mental anomalism says there are no laws 
about mental events. 
Davidson's own proposal is well-known; he calls it "anoma­
lous monism." We have already considered it as a mind-body 
theory and found it wanting (chapter 1); but here our interest 
lies in Davidson's ingenious argument leading to his physical 
monism. True, says Davidson, mental events in causal relations 
must instantiate laws but since there aren't any psychological 
laws, that can only mean that they instantiate physical laws. This 
shows that mental events fall under physical kinds (or have true 
physical descriptions), from which it further follows, argues 
Davidson, that they are physical events. This is the monism in 
his anomalous monism. The general upshot of the argument is 
that for any event to enter into a causal relation, it must be 
covered by a physical law and hence be part of the physical 
domain. Causal relations can obtain only between physical 
events covered by physical laws, although of course some of 
these events are also mental events. The causal structure of this 
world-the total set of causal relations that hold in this world­
is entirely due to the prevailing physical laws. Mental events are 
causally efficacious therefore only because they are identical 
with causally efficacious physical events. 
But this ingenious solution has failed to satisfy very many 
philosophers. On the contrary, there has been an impressive 
unanimity among Davidson's commentators on just why 
anomalous monism falls short as an account of mental causa­
tion.5 Take any mental event m that stands in a causal relation, 
say as a cause of event e. According to Davidson, this causal 
relation obtains just in case m and e instantiate a physical law.

--- Page 46 ---

34 Chapter 2 
Thus m falls under a certain physical (perhaps, neural) kind N, 
e falls under a physical kind P, and an appropriate causal law 
connects events of kind N with events of kind P. But this appar­
ently threatens the causal relevance of mentality: the fact that m
is a mental event-that it is the kind of mental event it is­
appears to have no role in determining what causal relations it 
enters into. Event m's causal relations are fixed, wholly and 
exclusively, by the totality of its physical properties, and there is 
in this picture no causal work that m's mental properties can, or 
need to, contribute.6 If mental properties were arbitrarily redis­
tributed over the events of this world, or even if mentality were 
wholly removed from this world-possibilities apparently left 
open by Davidson's mental anomalism-that would not affect a 
single causal relation between events of this world, leaving the 
causal structure of the world entirely untouched. This seems to 
consign mental properties to the status of epiphenomena.7 Thus 
the problem of mental causation arising out of mental anomal­
ism is to answer this question: How can anomalous properties be 
causal properties? A solution to this problem would have to show 
either that contrary to Davidson, mental properties are not in 
reality anomalous, or that being anomalous in Davidson's sense 
is no barrier to their having causal relevance or being causally 
efficacious. 
There have been several attempts to rehabilitate the causal 
status of mental properties within the constraint of mental 
anomalism. Most of these attempts have taken the tack of relax­
ing, or somehow circumventing, the nomological requirement 
on causal relations. This is usually done in one of three ways. 
First, you may want to allow laws that are less than "strict," 
perhaps laws tacitly qualified by "ceteris paribus" clauses, to 
subsume individual events in causal relations, and argue that 
there are nonstrict laws of this kind involving mental properties. 
Second, you look to some form of counterfactual dependency, 
rather than subsumptive causal laws, to generate causal rela­
tions. Fodor's approach8 is an example of the first strategy; those 
of LePore and Loewer's9 and of Horgan's10 are examples of the 
second. A third approach (which is consistent with the second)

--- Page 47 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 35 
is to define a notion of causal relevance or efficacy weaker than 
causation regulated by strict laws. A version of this approach, 
recently embraced by Davidson,11 attempts to invoke super­
venience of the mental on the physical to explain the causal 
relevance of the mental. But, as we will see, mind-body super­
venience itself can be seen to lead to difficulties for mental 
causation. 
The Problem of Extrinsic Mental Properties 
Let us begin with syntacticalism, the view that only "syntactic" 
properties of mental states, not their "semantic" (or "content" 
or "representational") properties, can be causally relevant-in 
particular, to behavior causation.12 Given the further assumption 
that the mentality of an important class of mental states, like 
beliefs and desires, consists in their semantic or represen­
tational character, syntacticalism appears to force upon us the 
conclusion that the intentional properties of mental states, the 
properties that are constitutive of their mentality, are causally 
irrelevant. But what persuades us to take syntacticalism 
seriously? 
Syntacticalism most naturally arises in the context of compu­
tationalism, an approach that urges us to view mental processes 
as computational processes on internal representations, on the 
model of information processing in digital computers. It is ap­
parent that computational processes-that is, causal processes 
that constitute computation-are sensitive to the syntax, not se­
mantics, of the representations or data structures that are being 
manipulated; it is the shapes, not meanings, of symbols that 
determine the course of computation. It matters none to compu­
tation whether a given string of ls and Os means the inventory 
count of toothpaste at the local supermarket, the atmospheric 
pressure in Providence at noon today, the altitude of an airplane 
on a landing approach, or nothing at all. Similarly, if mental 
activities are computational processes on beliefs, desires, and 
such, it would seem that it is the syntactic shapes of these states, 
not their representational contents, that are causally relevant.13

--- Page 48 ---

36 Chapter 2 
The essential problem here is easily divorced from computa­
tionalism and talk of an inner mental language with a syntax and 
semantics. The internal cause of physical behavior must be su­
pervenient on the total internal state of the agent or organism at 
the time.14 For it seems highly plausible to assume that if two 
organisms are in an identical total internal state at a given time, 
they will emit identical motor output. However, semantic prop­
erties of internal states are not in general supervenient on their 
synchronous internal properties, for as a rule they involve facts 
about the organism's history and ecological conditions.15 Thus 
two organisms whose total states at a given time have identical 
intrinsic properties can differ in respect of the semantical prop­
erties they instantiate; they can differ in the contents of their 
beliefs and desires, the extensions of their homophonic predi­
cates, and the truth conditions of their homophonic sentences. 
But prima facie these semantical differences should make no 
difference to behavior output. The realization that ordinary con­
tent ascriptions have this extrinsic/relational dimension is one 
of the more notable developments in the philosophy of mind 
and language during the past two decades.16 You on this earth 
have the belief that water is wet; yet, as the story goes, your exact 
physical duplicate on Twin Earth believes that XYZ is wet, not 
that water is wet. Frogs on the earth, when appropriately stimu­
lated optically, have the "belief" that a fly is flitting across its 
visual field (or, at any rate," sees" a fly); frogs on another planet 
without flies, when identically stimulated, don't have a belief 
about flies, or at any rate are not in a state that represent flies­
they "believe" that a "schmy" is flitting across its visual field 
(schmies are tiny black bats which the frogs of this other planet 
feed on). Thus, that a given intentional state of an organism 
instantiates a certain semantic property is a relational fact, a fact 
that essentially involves the organism's relationship to various 
external environmental and historical factors. This makes se­
mantic properties relational, or extrinsic, whereas we expect 
causative properties involved in behavior production to be non­
relational, or intrinsic, properties of the organism. If inner states 
are implicated in behavior causation, it seems that all the causal

--- Page 49 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 37 
work is done by their II syntactic," or at any rate internal/ intrin­
sic, properties, leaving their semantic properties causally otiose. 
The problem of mental causation generated by syntacticalism 
therefore is to answer the following question: How can extrinsic, 
relational properties be causally efficacious in behavior production? 
So the crux of the problem lies in the supposed fact that mental 
properties, in particular, content properties (e.g., being a belief 
that P), are relational properties, extrinsic to the organisms in­
stantiating them, whereas we expect the causative properties of 
behavior to be intrinsic and internal.17 
The Problem of Causal Exclusion 
The third, and final, problem about mental causation I have in 
mind arises as follows: suppose that we have somehow put 
together an account of how mental events can be causes of 
physical events, an account that meets the requirements of the 
problems of anomalous mental properties and of syntacticalism. 
Suppose then that mental event m, occurring at time t, causes 
physical event p, and let us suppose that this causal relation 
holds in virtue of the fact that m is an event of mental kind M 
and p an event of physical kind P. Does p also have a physical 
cause at t, an event of some physical kind N?
To acknowledge mental event m (occurring at t) as a cause of 
physical event p but deny that p has a physical cause at t Would 
be a clear violation of the causal closure of the physical domain, 
a relapse into Cartesian interactionist dualism which mixes 
physical and nonphysical events in a single causal chain. But to 
acknowledge that p has also a physical cause, p*, at tis to invite 
the question: Given that p has a physical cause p*, what causal 
work is left for m to contribute? The physical cause therefore 
threatens to exclude, and preempt, the mental cause. This is the 
problem of causal exclusion. The antireductive physicalist who 
wants to remain a mental realist, therefore, must give an account 
of how the mental cause and the physical cause of one and the 
same event are related to each other. Token physicalism, like 
Davidson's anomalous monism, is not enough, since the ques­
tion ultimately involves the causal efficacy of mental properties,

--- Page 50 ---

38 Chapter 2 
and antireductionism precludes their reductive identification 
with physical properties. Thus the problem of causal exclusion 
is to answer this question: Given that every physical event that has 
a cause has a physical cause, how is a mental cause also possible? 
These then are the three principal ways in which I believe the 
problem of mental causation arises in current debates in philoso­
phy of mind. This means that there really are three separable 
problems, although of course this does not preclude their reso­
lution by a single unified approach. Here I will not deal directly 
with the first two problems; as I said at the outset of this talk, 
what I want to do is to develop the third problem-the exclusion 
problem-in a more concrete and detailed way by focusing on 
the two theses we discussed in my first lecture, namely the claim 
that the mental supervenes on the physical and the claim that 
the mental is realized in the physical. I hope to show how both 
mind-body supervenience and physical realizationism can be 
seen to lead to prima facie difficulties for mental causation. In a 
later lecture I will discuss how physical realizationism, via a 
functional reduction of mental properties, presents an opening 
for a possible accommodation of mentality within the causal 
structure of the physical world, although the opening may well 
turn out to be not wide enough to let in all mental properties. 
The Supervenience Argument, or Descartes's Revenge 
In my first lecture I argued that mind-body supervenience could 
usefully be thought of as defining minimal physicalism-that it 
is the minimal commitment that anyone who calls herself a 
physicalist should be willing to accept. We saw also that mind­
body supervenience is entailed by physical realizationism, the 
thesis that mental properties are instantiated in virtue of being 
realized by physical properties in physical systems. Moreover 
emergentism, too, is arguably committed to mind-body super­
venience: if two systems are wholly alike physically, we should 
expect the same mental properties to emerge, or fail to emerge, 
in each.

--- Page 51 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 39 
Let us now turn to an argument designed to show that mind­
body supervenience itself leads to apparent difficulties with 
mental causation. If we take the supervenience thesis to define 
minimal physicalism, as I earlier suggested, the argument will 
show that these difficulties will beset physicalism in general­
that is, even the weakest form of physicalism must come to terms 
with this argument one way or another. If this is right, abandon­
ing the substantival dualism of Descartes doesn't get us out of 
the woods as far as mental causation is concerned. Indeed one 
notable development in the recent philosophy of mind is the 
return of the problem of mental causation as a serious challenge 
to mainstream physicalism, a phenomenon that would have 
amused Descartes. 
I will now proceed to construct a dilemma-style argument that 
apparently leads to the conclusion that mental causation is un­
intelligible. In essence the argument to be presented is the result 
of superimposing mind-body supervenience on the causal exclu­
sion problem. We begin by setting forth the two horns of the 
dilemma: 
(i)Either mind-body supervenience holds or it fails.
But what does mind-body supervenience assert? Let me restate 
the mind-body supervenience thesis: 
Mind-body supervenience Mental properties supervene on 
physical properties in the sense that if something instanti­
ates any mental property M at t, there is a physical base 
property P such that the thing has P at t, and necessarily 
anything with Pat a time has Mat that time. 
Note that a base property is necessarily sufficient for the super­
venient property; the necessity involved here is standardly 
taken to be at least nomological necessity-so that if mind-body 
supervenience holds, it holds in all worlds that share with our 
world the same fundamental laws of nature. 
Returning to (i), we briefly pursue the second horn first:

--- Page 52 ---

40 Chapter 2 
(ii)If mind-body supervenience fails, there is no visible
way of understanding the possibility of mental causation.
According to Jerry Fodor, "If mind/body supervenience goes, 
the intelligibility of mental causation goes with it."18 To my 
knowledge he has never explained why he has said this (and 
not just once!). Fodor is not alone in tying the fate of mental 
causation to supervenience: Horgan, for example, has argued 
for the physical supervenience of qualia on the ground that it 
is needed to make qualia causally efficacious.19 But what exactly 
is the connection between supervenience and mental causation? 
The simplest and most obvious reason for the physicalist to 
accept (ii) lies, I think, in her commitment to the causal closure 
of the physical domain, an idea that has already made a brief 
appearance above. One way of stating the principle of physical 
causal closure is this: If you pick any physical event and trace 
out its causal ancestry or posterity, that will never take you 
outside the physical domain. That is, no causal chain will ever 
cross the boundary between the physical and the nonphysical. 
The interactionist dualism of Descartes is in clear contravention 
of this principle. If you reject this principle, you are ipso facto 
rejecting the in-principle completability of physics-that is, the 
possibility of a complete and comprehensive physical theory of 
all physical phenomena. For you would be saying that any 
complete explanatory theory of the physical domain must in­
voke nonphysical causal agents. Never mind a complete physi­
cal explanation of everything there is; there couldn't even be a 
complete physical explanation of everything physical. It is safe 
to assume that no serious physicalist could accept such a 
prospect. 
Now if mind-body supervenience fails-that is, if the mental 
domain floats freely, unanchored in the physical domain, causa­
tion from the mental to the physical would obviously breach the 
physical causal closure. Mind-body supervenience grounds each 
mental phenomenon in the physical domain by providing for it 
a set of physical conditions that are (at least) nomologically 
sufficient for it and on which its occurrence depends. A corollary

--- Page 53 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 41 
is the thesis that no mental phenomenon can occur, and no 
mental property can be instantiated, unless an appropriate 
physical base condition is present. Every mental event, be it a 
sensation like pain or itch, or an intentional state like belief and 
desire, must have a physical basis: it occurs because an appro­
priate physical basis is present, and it would not occur if such a 
basis was absent.20 These comments hold true if you wish to 
speak in terms of realization. If any mental property gets instan­
tiated because, and only because, one of its physical realizers is 
instantiated, there is a similar dependence of mental occurrences 
on physical occurrences. 
In any case mind-body supervenience brings mental phenom­
ena within the ambit of the physical: the physical determines the 
mental, and in that sense the mental does not constitute an 
ontologically independent domain that injects causal influences 
into the physical domain from the outside. Now it is another 
question whether or not mind-body supervenience brings the 
mental close enough to the physical to allow mental causation to 
circumvent the constraint of the physical causal closure.21 But we 
can skirt this question here, for if the answer is no, that would 
only show that mind-body supervenience isn't enough to give 
us a solution to the problem of causal exclusion of the mental by 
the physical. But there is a potentially more serious problem 
with supervenience: mind-body supervenience may itself be a 
source of the problem. That is, mind-body supervenience, far 
from being part of the solution, as hoped for by Fodor, Horgan, 
and others, may turn out to be part of the problem. Let us now 
look into this possibility. 
(iii)Suppose that an instance of mental property M causes
another mental property M* to be instantiated.
So this is a case of mental-to-mental causation, one in which an 
instance of a mental property causes an instance of another 
mental property. We may take "instances" or "instantiations" of 
properties as events, states, or phenomena. For brevity, I will . 
often speak of one property causing another property; this is to 
be understood to mean that an instance of the first causes an

--- Page 54 ---

42 Chapter 2 
instance of the second.22 Returning to our argument, we see that 
(ii), the supervenience premise, yields: 
(iv) M* has a physical supervenience base P*. 
We now ask the following critical question: Where does this 
instance of M* come from? How does M* get instantiated on this 
occasion? There apparently are two possible answers to consider: 
(v) M* is instantiated on this occasion: (a) because, ex 
hypothesi, M caused M* to be instantiated; (b) because P*, 
the physical supervenience base of M*, is instantiated on 
this occasion. 
I hope that you are like me in seeing a real tension between 
these two answers: Under the assumption of mind-body super­
venience, M* occurs because its supervenience base P* occurs, 
and as long as P* occurs, M* must occur no matter what other 
events preceded this instance of M*-in particular, regardless of 
whether or not an instance of M preceded it. This puts the claim 
of M to be a cause of M* in jeopardy: P* alone seems fully 
responsible for, and capable of accounting for, the occurrence of 
M*.23 As long as P*, or another base property of M*, is present, 
that absolutely guarantees the presence of M*, and unless such 
a base is there on this occasion, M* can't be there either. Given 
this, the only way anything can have a role in the causation of 
M* would have to be via its relationship to M*'s supervenience 
base P*, and as far as I can see, the only way of reconciling the 
claim of M to be a cause of M* with the fact that M* has P* as 
its supervenience base is to accept this: 
(vi) M caused M* by causing P*. That is how this instance 
of M caused M* to be instantiated on this occasion. 
There may be a plausible general principle involved here, 
which is by itself sufficient to justify (vi) even if you do not see 
the tension in (v), and it is this: To cause a supervenient property to 
be instantiated, you must cause its base property (or one of its base 
properties) to be instantiated. To relieve a headache, you take aspi-

--- Page 55 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 43 
rin: that is, you causally intervene in the brain process on which 
the headache supervenes. That's the only way we can do any­
thing about our headaches. To make your painting more beauti­
ful, more expressive, or more dramatic, you must do physical 
work on the painting and thereby alter the physical superven­
ience base of the aesthetic properties you want to improve. There 
is no direct way of making your painting more beautiful or less 
beautiful; you must change it physically if you want to change 
it aesthetically-there is no other way. 
But note what (vi) asserts: it says that a mental property M 
causes a physical property P* to be instantiated. This of course 
is a case of mental-to-physical causation. So what our argument 
has shown so far is this: Under the mind-body supervenience as­
sumption, mental-to-mental causation implies, or presupposes, mental­
to-physical causation. So the question that we now face is whether 
we can make sense of mental-to-physical causation-that is, un­
der the premise of mind-body supervenience.24 
Going back to (vi): we see that on the assumption of mind­
body supervenience, it follows: 
(vii) M itself has a physical supervenience base P. 
We must now compare M and P in regard to their causal status 
with respect to P*. When we reflect on this point, I believe, we 
begin to see reasons for taking P as preempting the claim of M 
as a cause of P*. If you take causation as grounded in nomologi­
cal sufficiency, P qualifies as a cause of P*, for, since P is 
sufficient for Mand Mis sufficient for P*, Pis sufficient for P*. 
If you choose to understand causation in terms of counterfac­
tuals, again there is good reason to think that P qualifies: if P 
hadn't occurred M would not have occurred (we may assume, 
without prejudice, that no alternative physical base of M would 
have been available on this occasion), and given that if M had 
not occurred P* would not have occurred, we may reasonably 
conclude that if P had not occurred, P* would not have either.25 
It seems then that we are now blessed with an overabundance 
of causes: both M and P seem severally eligible as a sufficient

--- Page 56 ---

44 Chapter 2 
cause of P*. And it is not possible to escape the threat of causal 
overdetermination by thinking of the situation as involving a 
causal chain from P to Mand then to P*, with Mas an interme­
diate causal link. For the relation from P to M is not happily 
thought of as a causal relation; in general, the relation between 
base properties and supervenient properties is not happily con­
strued as causal.26 For one thing, the instantiations of the related 
properties are wholly simultaneous, whereas causes are stan­
dardly thought to precede their effects; second, it is difficult, 
perhaps incoherent, to imagine a causal chain, with intermediate 
links, between the subvenient and the supervenient properties. 
What intermediate stages could link the beauty of a painting to 
its physical properties? What intermediary events could causally 
connect a mental event with its subvenient physical base? Would 
such intermediaries themselves be mental or physical? More­
over, for the present case, the causal chain approach, in taking 
M to be a nonphysical cause of P*, would violate the causal 
closure of the physical domain, an option foreclosed to the 
physicalist. 
Nor does it seem plausible to take Mand P together to consti­
tute a single sufficient cause of P*. There are two reasons for this. 
First, P alone is causally sufficient for P*, and so is M. It is 
difficult to see how M and P together can pack any more causal 
power than M alone or P alone. Second, this approach is plausi­
ble only if it claims M to be a necessary component in the cau­
sation of P*, and this means that, as with the causal chain 
proposal, it involves a violation of the physical causal closure. 
For a complete causal explanation of why P* was instantiated on 
this occasion would have to advert to the presence of a non­
physical causal agent, M, in addition to P. 
And, finally, it is not possible to take this simply as a case of 
causal overdetermination-that the instance of P* is causally 
overdetermined by two sufficient causes, P and M. Apart from 
the implausible consequence that it makes every case of mental 
causation a case of overdetermination, this approach encounters 
two difficulties: first, in making a physical cause available to

--- Page 57 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 45 
substitute for every mental cause, it appears to make mental 
causes dispensable in any case; second, the approach may come 
into conflict with the physical causal closure. For consider a 
world in which the physical cause does not occur and which in 
other respects is as much like our world as possible. The over­
determination approach says that in such a world, the mental 
cause causes a physical event-namely that the principle of 
causal closure of the physical domain no longer holds. I do not 
think we can accept this consequence: that a minimal counter­
factual supposition like that can lead to a major change in the 
world. 
It seems to me that the most natural way of viewing the 
situation is this: 
(viii) P caused P*, and M supervenes on P and M* super­
venes on P*. 
This explains the observed regularities between M-instances 
and M*-instances, and those between M-instances and P*­
instances.27 These regularities are by no means accidental; in a 
clear sense they are law-based, and may even be able to support 
appropriate counterfactuals. However, if we understand the 
difference between genuine, productive and generative causal 
processes, on the one hand, and the noncausal regularities that 
are observed because they are parasitic on real causal processes, 
we are in a position to understand the picture recommended by 
(viii). In the case of supposed M-M* causation, the situation is 
rather like a series of shadows cast by a moving car: there is no 
causal connection between the shadow of the car at one instant 
and its shadow an instant later, each being an effect of the 
moving car. The moving car represents a genuine causal proc­
ess, but the series of shadows it casts, however regular and 
lawlike it may be, does not constitute a causal process.28 Hence 
we have: 
(ix) The M-to-M* and M-to-P* causal relations are only 
apparent, arising out of a genuine causal process from P 
to P*.

--- Page 58 ---

46 Chapter 2 
Whence a dilemma: 
(x) If mind-body supervenience fails, mental causation is 
unintelligible; if it holds, mental causation is again unintel­
ligible. Hence mental causation is unintelligible. 
That then is the supervenience argument against mental cau­
sation, or Descartes's revenge against the physicalists. I believe 
it poses a serious challenge to physicalism by casting doubts on 
the possibility of mental causation within the parameters it sets 
for itself. Descartes's difficulties arose from the duality of mental 
and material substances. Current mainstream physicalism, 
which calls itself "nonreductive physicalism," runs into parallel 
difficulties on account of its commitment to the duality of psy­
chological and physical properties-or its failure to make a re­
ductionist commitment for psychological properties. For it is 
clear that the tacit assumption that gets the supervenience argu­
ment going is mind-body antireductionism; if the mental prop­
erties are viewed as reducible to physical properties in an 
appropriate way, we should expect to be able to disarm the 
argument (although of course the details will need to be worked 
out). 
One good question to raise about the foregoing argument is 
this: Wouldn't the same argument show that all properties that 
supervene on basic physical properties are epiphenomena!, and 
that their causal efficacy is unintelligible? However, there seems 
to be more than ample reason to think that geological properties, 
say, are supervenient on fundamental physical properties, and if 
mind-body supervenience could be shown to put mental causa­
tion in jeopardy, wouldn't the very same considerations do the 
same for geological properties? But no one seems to worry about 
geological causation, and there evidently seems no reason to 
start worrying. If so, shouldn't we conclude that there must be 
something wrong with the argument of the preceding section?29 
I will deal with this question in detail in my two remaining 
lectures. As I see it, however, the heart of the issue here is this: 
with properties like geological and biological properties, we are 
much more willing, intuitively, to accept a reductionist picture

--- Page 59 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 47 
in relation to basic physical properties. I believe that this is true 
even for philosophers who are vocal in their claim that anti­
reductionism holds across the board, at all levels in relation to 
their lower levels, and that geological and biological properties 
are no more reducible to basic physical properties than mental 
properties. Clearly it is possible that their antireductionism is 
more correct about mental properties than about these other 
"higher-level" physical properties. 
We will take up the reductionist way out in a later lecture. Let 
us now turn to a consideration of some real-life philosophical 
positions that appear to be directly vulnerable to the argument 
we have constructed. 
Searle, Fodor, and the Supervenience Argument 
I now want to show that the recent proposals by two well­
known philosophers of mind apparently succumb to the super­
venience argument. In The Rediscovery of Mind30 John Searle 
argues for a position he calls "biological naturalism." Broadly, 
it is the view that mental phenomena, with all their subjectivity 
and qualitative character, are natural biological phenomena, no 
different in principle from phenomena of digestion or reproduc­
tion. In particular, Searle maintains that mental phenomena are 
caused by biological phenomena, presumably neural processes 
in the brain, and that this makes them "features of the brain." 
Although Searle sometimes makes use of the idioms of "super­
venience" and "emergence," he gives them highly idiosyncratic 
causal readings, and it is clear that where others would say that 
mental phenomena supervene on, or emerge from, their under­
lying neural substrates, Searle would say that they are caused 
by these lower-level processes. 
Searle is a mental realist, and believes in the causal efficacy of 
the mental-in particular, the causal powers of consciousness. 
According to him, "consciousness does all sorts of things," and 
"consciousness enables the organism to act on the world, to 
produce effects in the world."31 As just noted, Searle substitutes 
the causal idiom for the supervenience idiom and would

--- Page 60 ---

48 Chapter 2 
describe the relation between a mental property and its under­
lying neural correlate in terms of causation rather than super­
venience or emergence (in their standard senses). However, it is 
not difficult to see that this does not enable Searle to escape the 
dilemma posed by the supervenience argument. Suppose that 
an instance of a mental property, M, causes another mental prop­
erty, M*, to be instantiated-an instance of "going left to right 
from macro to macro" as Searle calls it32 (this corresponds to step 
(iii)in the supervenience argument). According to Searle's bio­
logical naturalism, every mental phenomenon is caused by a
neurobiological phenomenon, and this means that this instance
of M* is caused by (an instance of) a neural property P* (step
(iv)). We now must ask: Where does this instance of M* come
from? How does M* get instantiated on this occasion?
And again we get two answers: (1) ex hypothesi, M* was 
caused to be instantiated by M, and (2) according to Searle's 
biological naturalism, M* was caused to be instantiated by neu­
ral property P*. It looks as though the instantiation of M* is 
causally overdetermined, and this generalizes to all mental phe­
nomena. We are clearly in need of a plausible story that recon­
ciles (1) and (2) without making every case of mental-to-mental 
causation an instance of causal overdetermination. From here on 
we can run the same argument, with little alteration, that we 
developed earlier. 
To arguments of this kind Searle has responded as follows:33 
Does this imply overdetermination? Not at all. The same 
system is being described at different levels .... In short, 
the same system admits of different causal descriptions at 
different levels all of which are consistent and none of 
which implies either overdetermination or failure of causal 
closure. 
I now, let us suppose, have a conscious feeling of pain. This 
is caused by patterns of neuron firings and is realized in 
the system of neurons. Suppose the pain causes a desire to 
take an aspirin. The desire is also caused by patterns of

--- Page 61 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 49 
neuron firings and is realized in the system of neurons .... 
I can truly say both that my pain caused my desire and that 
sequences of neuron firings caused other sequences. These 
are two different but consistent descriptions of the same 
system given at different levels. 
According to Searle then we can affirm, without fear of overde­
termination, all of the following: (1) that M (pain) causes M* 
(desire to take aspirin); (2) that P (a sequence of neuron firings) 
causes P* (another sequence of neuron firings); (3) P causes M; 
and (4) P* causes M*. This is perfectly all right, Searle assures 
us, because (1) and (2) are "descriptions of the same system 
given at different levels." This certainly is a view one could hold 
of the situation; however, what isn't at all clear is whether Searle 
can, or should wish to. For saying that "pain causes a desire for 
aspirin" and "neural firings P cause neural firings P*" are de­
scriptions of the same situation34 is plausible only if you are pre­
pared to say that "pain" and "neural firings P" are descriptions 
of the same phenomenon (at "different levels"), and similarly 
for "desire for aspirin" and "neural firings P*"-that is, only if 
you are willing to say that pain = neural firings P, and that 
desire for aspirin = neural firings P*. 
Speaking for myself, I don't think that this is an implausible 
move; in fact some form of reductionism of this kind may well 
turn out to be the only viable view if mental events are to have 
a genuine causal role in the physical world. But let us return to 
Searle: it should be clear that psychoneural identities of this kind 
put into jeopardy Searle's claim that neural firings P cause the 
pain, and that neural firings P* cause the aspirin desire. If these 
causal claims are to stand, "pain" and "neural firings P" can't be 
descriptions of the same phenomenon, and similarly for the 
other pair. Searle of course says that these descriptions are "at 
different levels." But what could that mean? And what differ­
ence could that make? Searle needs to come up with a reasonable 
ontology and language of causation to make his central claims 
about the mind-body relation intelligible and consistent. Also, 
and perhaps more important, it is not at all clear how the view

--- Page 62 ---

50 Chapter 2 
that pain talk and talk of neural firings are about the very same 
phenomena but only at different levels squares with Searle's 
doctrine of the "subjective ontology" of the mental and the irre­
ducibility of consciousness. But these are not matters that con­
cern us here. 
Let us now turn to Fodor. In a recent paper in which he 
attempts to defend the causal efficacy of the mental,35 he writes: 
According to the present view, the properties projected in 
the laws of basic science are causally responsible, and so 
too are the properties projected in the laws of the special 
sciences .... Notice, in particular, that even if the properties 
that the special sciences talk about are supervenient upon 
the properties that the basic sciences talk about, that does 
not argue that the properties that the special sciences talk 
about are epiphenomena!. 
The burden of the supervenience argument is precisely that the 
supervenience of the special-science properties on the basic-sci­
ence properties does in fact argue, at least presumptively, for 
the conclusion that the special-science properties are threatened 
by epiphenomenalism. But why is Fodor so confident that we 
can have it both ways-the supervenience and causal efficacy 
of special-science properties? The passage quoted above contin­
ues as follows: 
Not, at least, if there are causal laws of the special sciences. 
The causal laws of the special sciences and causal laws of 
basic sciences have in common that they both license ascrip­
tions of causal responsibility. 
We can concede to Fodor the claim that there are special-science 
laws-statements of the form "F-events are regularly followed 
by G-events" with a modal force appropriate for laws, where F
and G are properties or kinds in a special science. And these 
laws may support counterfactuals, serve as predictive instru­
ments, and may even generate serviceable explanations.36 But 
whether these are causal laws, laws of the form "F-events, in 
virtue of being instantiations of property F, cause G-events," is

--- Page 63 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 51 
what is at issue. And this question takes us right back to the 
supervenience argument; for until the pressure of this argument 
has satisfactorily been relieved, we are not entitled to interpret 
special-science laws as causal laws in their own right. 
Block's Worries about Second-Order Properties 
The red color of the bullfighter's cape provokes the bull (or so 
the story goes)-that is, it causes the bull to get angry. But is 
the provocativeness of the cape-its "second-order" property of 
having some property or other that causes anger-also a cause of 
the bull's anger? A certain chemical property of a Seconal pill 
puts you to sleep. The pill also has dormitivity, the second-order 
property of having some property or other that puts people to 
sleep; in short, it is a "sleeping pill." Is the dormitivity of the 
pill itself also a cause of your falling asleep? 
In a recent paper,37 Ned Block worries about such questions, 
and an examination of these worries, I believe, is a good way of 
seeing how the realization relation, like the supervenience rela­
tion, can lead to problems with mental causation. In any case the 
reason Block worries about these questions is that he thinks the 
correct answer to them is no (that is, the provocativeness of the 
cape is not a cause, in addition to its redness, of the bull's anger), 
and that, on the functionalist conception of mental properties 
that he favors,38 mental properties might be in the same boat­
they too are second-order properties that consist in the having 
of some property or other satisfying a certain causal specifica­
tion. Being in pain, on the functionalist account, is the second­
order property of instantiating some property or other, 
presumably a neurobiological property, that causes wincings, 
cryings, limb withdrawals, and the like. If so, can pain itself, in 
addition to its neural realizers, be considered a cause of wincings 
and cryings? 
If Block's worries are well-founded, functionalists are in deep 
trouble: mental properties would be threatened with the loss of 
causal powers, and the fact that an event falls under a given 
mental kind (say, pain) would have nothing to do with what

--- Page 64 ---

52 Chapter 2 
effects it may cause. In short, functionalism might turn out to be 
a form of epiphenomenalism, and the received (" official") view 
of cognitive science as an autonomous special science, which 
generates its own distinctive law-based causal explanations at 
higher, formal/ abstract cognitive levels, faces an imminent col­
lapse. There is irony in the fact that this is precisely the concep­
tion of cognitive science that has been inspired and promoted by 
functionalism-in particular, the view that the properties stud­
ied by cognitive science are second-order properties that abstract 
from the nitty-gritty physical/biological details of the cognitive 
systems that realize them. 
But why does it seem wrong, at least odd, to say that the 
provocativeness of the cape, in addition to its red color, is a cause 
of the bull's anger? It seems that Block sees two prima fade 
reasons, only one of which he decides to take seriously. First, 
Block's serious reason: for the cape to be provocative (in relation 
to bulls) is, by definition, for it to have a property that causes bulls 
to get angry. This seems to make the singular causal attribution 
analytic, or definitionally true, whereas we would expect such 
attributions to be contingent and empirical. We will return to this 
point later. Second, the point Block does not in the end take 
seriously: counting the cape's provocativeness as well as its color 
as a cause seemingly leads to an overabundance of causes-that 
is, causal overdetermination. For the bull's anger would have 
two distinct causes, the cape's color and its provocativeness. 
(Notice the parallel with the move from (vii) to (viii) in the 
supervenience argument.) 
But why doesn't Block think the multiplicity of causes is a real 
problem? He says that "we are normally reluctant to accept 
overdetermination because it is wrong, other things equal, to 
postulate coincidences."39 We can agree with Block that, unlike 
in the paradigmatic cases of causal overdetermination (say, two 
bullets hitting a person in the heart simultaneously), the cape's 
having the two properties, redness and provocativeness, is not 
a case of coincidence (for presumably its provocativeness 
depends on its being red). But it is not clear why Block thinks 
that this diffuses the problem. Perhaps, Block's reasoning is that

--- Page 65 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 53 
in cases of standard overdetermination, the overdetermining 
causes are independent events-two or more independent causal 
chains, each causally sufficient, converge upon a single effect. In 
contrast, in the case of the cape's color and its provocativeness, 
we do not evidently have two independent causes: the instantia­
tion of provocativeness, as a second-order property, is depend­
ent on the instantiation of the color red. What isn't clear, 
however, is why this removes the difficulty: if the color of the 
cape is, in and of itself, a sufficient cause of the anger (at least, 
sufficient in the circumstance), what further causal work is left 
for its provocativeness? What special contribution of its own can 
the cape's provocativeness make in the causation of the anger? 
The answer obviously is none: given the color of the cape as a 
full cause, there is no additional causal work left for its provoca­
tiveness, or anything else.40 It should be clear then that there is 
a real problem, the exclusion problem, in recognizing second­
order properties as causally efficacious in addition to their real­
izers. This is not surprising, since second-order properties, hence 
mental properties construed as functional properties, supervene 
on their first-order realizers. The exclusion problem doesn't go 
away when we recognize the two purported causes as in some 
way related to each other, perhaps one being dependent on the 
other. As long as they are recognized as distinct events, each 
claiming to be a full cause of a single event, the problem remains. 
Describing this case as a case of overdetermination perhaps has 
clouded the issues for Block; perhaps this led him to think that 
to dissolve the problem it suffices to show that the present case 
is not a standard case of causal overdetermination. However, our 
problem is not exactly that of causal overdetermination, al­
though both have to do with an overabundance of causes. It 
is important to see that the problem that we face arises because 
the two putative causes are not independent events. The dif­
ficulty is exactly that the causal status of the dependent event is 
threatened by the event on which it depends. The exclusion 
problem, therefore, is very much alive with the case of the cape's 
color and its provocativeness as multiple causes of one and the 
same event.41

--- Page 66 ---

54 Chapter 2 
For this reason, I believe, Block mislocates the real problem 
that arises for the causal efficacy of mental properties when they 
are taken to be second-order properties defined in terms of 
causal roles. That he takes, erroneously in my view, the analytic­
ity issue as the main difficulty, can be seen in the significant 
qualification he places on the epiphenomenalism that he believes 
we must accept. For his epiphenomenalism comes only to this: 
Block's epiphenomenalism: A second-order property, defined 
as the property of having some property that causes property 
K,42 is epiphenomena! with respect to K. 
Thus pain, defined as a state apt for causing winces, groans, and 
escape behavior, cannot be considered as a cause of winces, 
groans, and escape behavior, but it presumably can have causal 
effects of other sorts. Block in fact claims that the dormitivity of 
Seconal, in spite of its admitted impotence to cause sleep, can 
have effects of other kinds, for it is possible, he says, that there 
is a law to the effect that dormitivity of a pill is causally 
sufficient for the ingester's getting cancer.43 However, as is evi­
dent, this could be the case only if each specific chemical realizer 
of dormitivity caused cancer; it is difficult to see how dormitiv­
ity as such, independently of its realizers, can cause cancer or 
anything else. To generalize, I find the following principle 
highly plausible (I have elsewhere called it "the causal inheri­
tance principle"44): 
If a second-order property F is realized on a given occasion 
by a first-order property H (that is, if F is instantiated on a 
given occasion in virtue of the fact that one of its realizers, 
H, is instantiated on that occasion), then the causal powers 
of this particular instance of F are identical with (or are 
a subset of45) the causal powers of H (or of this instance 
of H). 
For there is nothing in the instantiation of F on this occasion 
over and above the instantiation of its realizer H. Given this, to 
think that this instance of F has causal powers in excess of those 
of H is tantamount to belief in magic: somehow new causal

--- Page 67 ---

The Many Problems of Mental Causation 55 
powers miraculously materialize as we define second-order and 
higher-order properties from a fixed stock of first-order 
properties! 
Notice that the analyticity issue arises only for functional 
properties-second-order properties defined by causal specifica­
tions-not for all second-order properties. But the exclusion 
problem-that is, the threat posed by first-order realizers to 
preempt the causal claims of the second-order properties they 
realize-is entirely general; it arises for all second-order proper­
ties, whether or not they are functional. Block, and the rest of us, 
have reason to worry about epiphenomenalism for functional 
mental properties tout court, not just in relation to the effects in 
terms of which they are defined. 
How does the supervenience argument presented earlier ap­
ply to mental properties construed as functional properties, that 
is, second-order properties defined by causal specification? It is 
clear that the argument places the causal efficacy of such prop­
erties in jeopardy. For suppose that a given instance of M causes 
an instance of M*. On this occasion M* is realized, let us assume, 
by first-order physical property P*. We ask: How did M* get to 
be instantiated on this occasion? And again we get two answers: 
(1) because M caused M*, and (2) because P* realized M*. And 
this creates an apparent tension, and so forth. But notice that the 
argument gets appreciably more direct and its impact more sa­
lient. For when we try to relieve the said tension by saying that 
this instance of M caused P* to be instantiated (thereby causing 
M* to be instantiated), we must reflect on what this means in 
light of the causal inheritance principle. For the principle says 
that our instance of M inherits all of its causal powers from the 
first-order property that realizes M on this occasion, and this 
first-order property is P. So this instance of M can claim to cause 
the P*-instance insofar as, and only insofar as, this instance of P 
causes it. And it becomes entirely unclear what could motivate 
us to countenance the M-instance, in addition to the P-instance 
that realizes it, as a cause of the P* instance. 
At this point we are compelled to make some choices. In 
particular, the pressure to identify the M-instance with the

--- Page 68 ---

56 Chapter 2 
P-instance is all but irresistible, and there are at least two reasons 
for this. First, as we saw, the very conception of second-order 
properties and their realizers strongly incline us to deny that 
there can be anything to the instantiation of a second-order 
property over and above the instantiation of one of its realizers. 
For M to be instantiated on a given occasion is for one of its 
realizers to be instantiated on that occasion, and on this occasion 
it is P that realizes M. Second, if the causal powers of the M-in­
stance are identical with those of its realizing P-instance, what 
reasons can we have for thinking there are here two events, not 
one? On a plausible view of properties,46 only causally relevant 
or efficacious properties should count as individuating proper­
ties, and it is in any case highly implausible to say that events 
that are indiscernible in respect of causal properties can yet be 
distinct events.47 
This then is one way in which the pressure toward mind-body 
reductionism is generated. We will on a later occasion examine 
the issue of reductionism in greater detail (chapter 4).48

--- Page 69 ---

Chapter 3 
Mental Causation: The Backlash and 
Free Lunches 
The problem of mental causation is coeval with the mind-body 
problem-Descartes invented them both, or at least was respon­
sible for them. For Descartes, mental causation became a prob­
lem-ultimately an insuperable one-because of his ontology 
of two radically diverse sorts of substances-material bodies 
whose essence is having a bulk in space and minds with con­
sciousness as their essence. It is part of the common lore of 
western philosophy that Descartes invited the difficulty for him­
self by wanting too much-he wanted not only a sharply dualist 
ontology of mental and material substances but also an intimate 
causal commerce across the two domains. As we all know, many 
of Descartes's contemporaries immediately pounced on what 
they perceived to be a fatal flaw in the Cartesian position: How 
could such disparate substances, one extended in space and the 
other essentially lacking in spatial properties, causally influence 
one another, or "intermingle," as Descartes said, to form a 
"union" that we call a human being? 
One of the surprising developments in the philosophy of mind 
during the past two decades or so has been the return of the 
mind-body problem-not as a problem for the substance dual­
ists, a breed that has virtually vanished from the scene,1 but as 
a threat to the physicalists who aspire to take mentality seriously. 
And there is an instructive parallel between Descartes's mind­
body problem and the way the current debate on mind-body 
causation arose. For it was Davidson's anomalous monism that 
first touched off the current worries about mental causation, 
although, as we saw in yesterday's lecture, the problem has 
since taken many other shapes and directions. In a way that is

--- Page 70 ---

58 Chapter 3 
reminiscent of Descartes's sharp separation of mind from matter, 
Davidson conceived of mental phenomena as constitutively dis­
tinct from physical phenomena. The mental, according to him, 
is essentially normative and regulated by the principles of ra­
tionality, whereas these normative constraints have no place in 
the physical domain. This constitutive difference between the 
mental and the physical is the essential premise from which 
Davidson argues for his "anomalism of the mental," the claim 
that there are no "strict" causal/predictive laws in the mental 
domain, and in particular no laws connecting mental phenom­
ena with physical phenomena.2 And yet, like Descartes, David­
son wanted causal interaction between mental and physical 
events as another fundamental component of his theory of the 
mind-it is one of the three basic "premises" from which he 
derives his anomalous monism. Again, in a way that is interest­
ingly reminiscent of the reaction of Descartes's contemporaries 
to his interactionist dualism, critics and commentators of David­
son wasted no time in pouncing on his dualism of mental and 
physical properties, arguing in unison that anomalous monism 
renders mental properties of events causally irrelevant.3 The 
only difference between Descartes and Davidson is that for the 
former it was the dualism of substances that caused the trouble, 
while for the latter it was his dualism of properties. For both the 
difficulty the critics saw arose from a serious, and well-founded, 
doubt that mind-body causation could be made consistent with 
the dualism each espoused. 
The debate about mental causation that ensued from David­
son's anomalous monism has concerned the causal efficacy, or 
relevance, of mental properties vis-a-vis physical properties. 
This new problem was then seen to generalize beyond David­
son's anomalous monism, to apply to all forms of nonreductive 
physicalism, or property dualism, which has been the orthodoxy 
since the demise of the mind-brain identity theory, or, more 
broadly, reductive type physicalism. Again, the question at bot­
tom has always been this: if mental properties are physically 
irreducible and remain outside the physical domain, then, given 
that the physical domain is causally closed, how can they exer-

--- Page 71 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 59 
cise causal powers, or enjoy any kind of causal relevance, in the 
physical domain? 
One sort of reaction on the part of some philosophers, which 
has gained significant popularity, to the reemergence of mental 
causation as a philosophical problem is to try to dissipate it by 
arguing that there is in fact no such "problem" worth worrying 
about, or, at any rate, to downplay its philosophical significance. 
It has been argued that worries about mental causation arise out 
of our misplaced philosophical priorities; that overindulgence in 
unmotivated metaphysical assumptions and arguments is the 
source of the unnecessary worries; that a misunderstanding of 
the logic and metaphysics of causation is at the core of the 
apparent troubles; that we should look to explanations and ex­
planatory practices, not to metaphysics, for guidance on the 
matter of mental causation; that if there are problems about 
mental causation, exactly the same problems would arise for 
macrolevel causation in general, including causation in all the 
special sciences-for, say, biological causation and chemical cau­
sation; and so on. 
Another related type of reaction has been to offer solutions at 
minimal philosophical costs-that is, to show that the problem 
can be solved in a simple and easy way, without having to pay 
a heavy metaphysical price, like giving up property dualism and 
embracing either reductionism or eliminativism, or trying to live 
with epiphenomenalism, or even seriously contemplating a re­
turn to substantival dualism. These are what we might call "free 
lunch" solutions-or, if not entirely free, at least pretty cheap 
ones. 
My aim here is to examine some of these deflationary strate­
gies for coping with the problem of mental causation. I will 
argue that none of them really succeed, and that we cannot make 
the problem go away by making simple and inexpensive repairs 
here and there. I believe that the problem goes deep, deep into 
our fundamental metaphysical views about ourselves and the 
world we live in, and that we need to make fairly drastic adjust­
ments if we are serious about coming to terms with the problem. 
When we are properly done with the problem, our metaphysics

--- Page 72 ---

60 Chapter 3 
of the mind would have undergone some serious alterations. 
There are no free lunches in philosophy any more than in real 
life, and I believe the cheap ones aren't worth the money. We 
might as well go for the real stuff and pay the price. When 
substance dualism was confronted by the problem of mental 
causation, dualism was the loser: mental substance is no longer 
with us. History may very well repeat itself: in the confrontation 
between property dualism and mental causation, dualism may 
again lose out, leaving irreducible mental properties in the dust. 
Unavoidability of Metaphysics: The Exclusion Problem 
Some philosophers have argued that if we would only free 
ourselves from our metaphysical preoccupations and attend to 
our actual explanatory practices involving mental phenomena, 
we would stop worrying about mental causation and learn to 
love it. Tyler Burge is an example; he writes: 
But what interests me more is the very existence of the 
worries. I think that they are symptomatic of a mistaken 
set of philosophical priorities. Materialist metaphysics has 
been given more weight than it deserves. Reflection on 
explanatory practice has been given too little. The meta­
physical grounds that support the worries are vastly less 
strong than the more ordinary grounds we already have 
for rejecting them.4 
What are the "ordinary grounds" that undermine the "meta­
physical grounds" of materialism? Burge goes on: 
I think it more natural and fruitful to begin by assuming, 
defeasibly perhaps but firmly, that attributions of inten­
tional mental events are central to psychological explana­
tion both in ordinary life and in various parts of 
psychology. We may also assume that intentional mental 
events are often causes and that psychological explanation 
is often a form of causal explanation. Given these assump­
tions, the 'worry' about epiphenomenalism seems very re-

--- Page 73 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 61 
mote .... None of the metaphysical considerations ad­
vanced in current discussion seem to me remotely strong 
enough to threaten this conclusion.5 
In a similar vein Lynne Rudder Baker has argued that all that 
we need to do to dissipate the problem of mind-body causation 
is to reverse our priorities between metaphysics and explana­
tion. She urges: 
My suggestion is to take as our philosophical starting point, 
not a metaphysical doctrine about the nature of causation 
or of reality, but a range of explanations that have been 
found worthy of acceptance .... If we reverse the priority 
of explanation and causation that is favoured by the meta­
physician, the problem of mental causation just melts away. 
We begin with the question: Does what we think ever affect 
what we do? ... With the reversal of priority of cause and 
explanation, the metaphysical version of the question does 
not arise, and the original question has an easy answer.6 
Baker and Burge are clearly right on one point. As Burge says, 
our confidence in the truth of familiar intentional explanations 
does exceed our commitment to any recondite metaphysical 
principles. In this sense the epiphenomenalist "worries" are 
overstated. But I doubt that very many of us who have "wor­
ried" about mental causation have actually been concerned 
about the possibility that our thoughts and desires might turn 
out to have no powers to move our limbs. Our worries are not 
evidential or epistemological worries. Burge is right when he says 
that there is an air of make-believe about the epiphenomenalist 
threats, likening epiphenomenalism with epistemological skep­
ticism. But what all this shows is that the problem of mental 
causation is primarily a metaphysical problem. It is the problem 
of showing how mental causation is possible, not whether it is 
possible, although of course what happens with the how-ques­
tion may in the end induce us to reconsider our stance on the 
whether-question. In raising the how-question, we are assum­
ing, "defeasibly but firmly" as Burge says, that the whether-

--- Page 74 ---

62 Chapter 3 
question has already been affirmatively answered.7 If, as Burge 
suggests, the problem of mental causation is on a par with the 
problem of epistemological skepticism, it should be problem 
enough. Just as reflections on skeptical arguments have deep­
ened our understanding of the nature and limits of human 
knowledge, "worries" about epiphenomenalism may well lead 
to a deeper understanding of just what our mentality consists 
in and how it is related to our physical nature. 
But metaphysical questions don't just pop up, out of nowhere. 
As I noted in yesterday's lecture, the how-question of mental 
causation arises because there are certain other commitments, 
whether metaphysical or of other sorts, that demand our pre­
sumptive respect but that make mental causation prima facie 
problematic. The issue is not metaphysics versus explanatory 
practice, as Burge would have it, nor metaphysics versus episte­
mology, as Baker would have it. Nor is the issue one of choosing 
between metaphysics and mental causation: most of us have 
already chosen mental causation, although as philosophers we 
should regard pretty much everything ultimately negotiable. 
The issue is how to make our metaphysics consistent with mental 
causation, and the choice that we need to make is between 
various metaphysical alternatives, not between some recondite 
metaphysical principle on the one hand and some cherished 
epistemological practice or principle on the other. This of course 
is not to say that metaphysics and epistemology are necessarily 
independent; as we will see below, epistemology and metaphys­
ics do have something to do with each other in this area, and the 
choices we make in one can require adjustments and accommo­
dations in the other. 
Would the problem of mental causation take its leave if we did 
less metaphysics, as Burge and Baker urge, and instead focused 
our attention on psychological explanation? Burge says that" our 
understanding of mental causation derives primarily from our 
understanding of mentalistic explanation."8 But what is our un­
derstanding of mentalistic explanation? Burge doesn't address 
this question directly, but we can see what he has in mind: 
mentalistic explanations-explanations that invoke mental

--- Page 75 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 63 
states in their explanantia-are often causal explanations. In the 
second quoted passage above he says that "we may assume that 
intentional mental states are often causes and that psychological 
explanation is often a form of causal explanation." As some of 
you may recall, there was a prolonged debate in the 1950s and 
1960s, no less intense than the current debate on mental causa­
tion, on the question whether belief-desire explanations of action 
are causal explanations or whether "reasons are causes." Largely 
due to the confluence of various philosophical influences includ­
ing Wittgenstein and the British school of ordinary language 
philosophy, the anticausal position had very much the upper 
hand for many years,9 until Davidson's causal theory overturned 
it and became the new orthodoxy in the late 1960s and early 
1970s.10 If, as Burge says, we "may assume" that belief-desire 
explanation is a form of causal explanation, we owe this license 
substantially to Davidson. What carried the day for the causal 
view was Davidson's philosophical argument, not the pervasive­
ness of our explanatory practice of rationalizing actions in terms 
of belief and desire. There was no disagreement on the explana­
tory practice; the debate was about its nature and rationale. 
Moreover Davidson's own account of rationalizing explana­
tion as causal explanation involved not an insubstantial amount 
of metaphysics-to mention a couple of its key components, a 
view about singular causal statements and their relationship to 
general causal laws and a much-debated theory about events 
and their descriptions. A full statement of his argument is likely 
to implicate the whole metaphysical package of anomalous mo­
nism, including the controversial doctrine of the anomalism of 
the mental. Much of the current debate on mental causation has 
stemmed from a widely shared dissatisfaction with Davidson's 
account-the worry that Davidson's theory does not accord 
mental kinds and properties an appropriate causal role in behav­
ior production.11 Surely this brief history should suffice to per­
suade us that we cannot easily insulate the explanatory practice 
of behavior rationalization from metaphysical involvements. 
The question whether rationalizations are a species of causal 
explanation itself involves substantive metaphysical issues.

--- Page 76 ---

64 Chapter 3 
Even after we have answered this question-affirmatively, let 
us assume-metaphysics still won't go away. For the only way 
in which I believe that we can understand the idea of causal 
explanation presupposes the idea that the event invoked in a 
causal explanation is in reality a cause of the phenomenon to be 
explained. That is, if c (or a description or representation of c) 
causally explains e, c must be a cause of e. If my desire for a drink 
of water causally explains my body's movement toward the 
kitchen, the desire must really be a cause of the bodily move­
ment. I take this to be an untendentious and uncontroversial 
point. 
Suppose then that my desire for water causes a certain motion 
of my body. This is a case of mental-to-physical causation. So far 
so good. But metaphysical problems begin to emerge in several 
ways. First, suppose that we trace the causal chain back from my 
bodily motion-to simplify, the movement of my left foot as I 
take my first step toward the kitchen. I assume we have a pretty 
good neurophysiological story to tell about how such limb mo­
tion occurs, a story involving transmission of neural signals, 
contraction of a group of muscles, and so on; let us suppose that 
the story ends with some neural event in my central nervous 
system, presumably the firing of a group of neural fibers some­
where deep in the brain. There seems every reason to think that 
such a neurophysiological causal explanation also exists; at least, 
we cannot rule out such a possibility. What then is the relation­
ship between this explanation and the intentional explanation in 
terms of my belief and desire? One invokes a neural state, N, as 
a cause of my foot movement; the other invokes my desire for a 
drink of water, as a cause of the very same event. How are these 
two causes related to each other? 
When we are faced with two purported causes, or causal ex­
planations, of a single event, the following alternative accounts 
of the situation are initially available: (a) each is a sufficient cause 
and the effect is causally overdetermined, (b) they are each nec­
essary and jointly help make up a sufficient cause (that is, each 
is only a "partial cause"), (c) one is part of the other, (d) the 
causes are in fact one and the same but given under different

--- Page 77 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 65 
descriptions, (e) one (presumably the mental cause in the present 
case) is in some appropriate sense reducible to the other, and (f) 
one (again the mental cause) is a derivative cause with its causal 
status dependent in some sense on the neural cause, N. Perhaps 
there are others, but it is clear that for our present case, most of 
them, including (a), (b), and (c), are nonstarters. The general 
point I want to stress is this: the presence of two causal stories, 
each claiming to offer a full causal account of a given event, 
creates an unstable situation requiring us to find an account of 
how the two purported causes are related to each other. This is 
the problem of "causal/ explanatory exclusion."12 
Burge, as I take it, would reply that intentional explanations 
and physiological explanations need not, and do not, compete 
with each other. He says: 
It would be perverse to think that the mentalistic explana­
tion excludes or interferes with non-intentional explanation 
of the physical movement. I think that these ideas seem 
perverse not because we know that the mental events are 
material. They seem perverse because we know that the 
two causal explanations are explaining the same physical 
effect as the outcome of two very different patterns of 
events. The explanations of these patterns answer two very 
different types of inquiry. Neither type of explanation 
makes essential, specific assumptions about the other .... 
The perversity of thinking that mental causes must fill gaps 
in physical chains of events probably has its source in 
traditional dualism, or in libertarian worries about free 
will.13 
No, "the perversity" has nothing to do with dualism or free will; 
it has only to do with two causal claims, each purporting to 
provide a sufficient cause of a single effect. The interesting fact 
about explanations that Burge misses is that two or more expla­
nations can be rival explanations even though their explanatory prem­
ises are mutually consistent and in fact all true, if they purport to 
explain (in particular, causally explain) a single explanandum. That 
the explanations arise in different areas of inquiry, that they are

--- Page 78 ---

66 Chapter 3 
given at" different levels" of analysis or description, or that they 
are responses to different epistemic or pragmatic concerns, 
makes no difference. Thus a car accident is explained by a 
highway designer as having been caused by the incorrect cam­
ber of the highway curve, and by a police officer as caused by 
the inattentive driving of an inexperienced driver. But in a case 
like this we naturally think of the offered causes as partial 
causes; they together help make up a full and sufficient cause 
of the accident. As long as each claims to be a full cause of the 
event to be explained, a tension is created and we are entitled 
to ask, indeed compelled to ask, how the two purported causes 
are related to each other. In fact, it is precisely because "neither 
... explanation makes essential, specific assumptions about the 
other" that we need to know how the two explanations are 
related, how the two causal stories about a single phenomenon 
mesh with each other. Are the two stories at bottom one story 
couched in different languages? Do the two stories supplement 
one another, each being only partial? And so on. Metaphysics 
is the domain where different languages, theories, explanations, 
and conceptual systems come together and have their mutual 
ontological relationships sorted out and clarified. That there is 
such a common domain is the assumption of a broad and 
untendentious realism about our cognitive activities. If you be­
lieve that there is no such common domain, well, that's meta­
physics, too. 
The problem of causal/ explanatory exclusion arises if there 
are cases of psychological explanations of physical behavior in 
which we are prepared to believe that the physical effect has, or 
must have, a physical causal explanation as well. And we do not 
need to subscribe to a general doctrine of the causal closure of 
the physical domain to believe that there indeed must be such 
cases; the physical causal closure only makes the exclusion prob­
lem a general one for all mentalistic explanations of physical 
behavior. To appreciate the exclusion problem, we do not require 
much heavy-duty metaphysics-overarching doctrines about 
mental anomalism, "strict laws" in causal relations, a physi­
cal/mechanical conception of causality, token physicalism, and

--- Page 79 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 67 
the rest. It arises from the very notion of causal explanation and 
what strikes me as a perfectly intuitive and ordinary under­
standing of the causal relation. If this is right, turning away from 
metaphysics to embrace epistemology, or away from causation 
to embrace explanation, will not dissipate the need for an ac­
count of mental causation. There is a short and straight route 
from mentalistic explanation to mental causation, and from the 
possibility of dual explanations of a physical occurrence to the 
vexing problem of causal/ explanatory exclusion. 
It is interesting to note that both Burge and Baker, in their 
papers, explicitly acknowledge some form of mind-body super­
venience or dependence. Burge writes: 
There are surely some systematic, even necessary, relations 
between mental events and underlying physical processes. 
We have good be reason to believe that mental processes 
depend on underlying physical processes.14 
Although Burge isn't very specific on the nature of the depend­
ence he posits between the mental and the physical, we may 
safely assume that it must at least come to supervenience. In 
contrast, Baker explicitly acknowledges the mind-body depend­
ence in the sense of strong supervenience (see chapter 1). She 
thinks that the doctrine she calls "SS" (for strong mind-body 
supervenience) is an "idle speculation," but she is willing to let 
it be and focus her attack on causation. In any case, if Baker and 
Burge accept mind-body supervenience, they need to respond 
to the supervenience argument of my last lecture: they need to 
tell us how they would resist the chain of reasoning that appar­
ently leads from mind-body supervenience to an epipheno­
menalist conclusion. 
Do Counterfactuals Help? 
In a recent paper Terence Horgan, whose work in this area has 
been important and influential, addresses the issue of mental 
causation and reductionism, writing:

--- Page 80 ---

68 Chapter 3 
Regarding causal-exclusion reasoning, I advocate robust 
causal compatibilism-as indeed I think any philosopher 
must do who espouses nonreductive materialism. I cer­
tainly acknowledge that my compatibilism needs articula­
tion and defense; that is an important philosophical 
project ... 
First, how might the view be articulated and defended? 
Robust causal compatibilism is a byproduct of a general 
conception of causal properties and of causal explanation 
that I think is credible and well motivated apart from 
worries about causal exclusion. The leading idea is that 
causal properties are ones that figure in robust, objective, 
patterns of diachronic counterfactual dependence among 
properties ... 
Higher-order causal natural-kind properties, according to 
such views, are ones that figure centrally in the relevant 
higher-order dependence-patterns and nomic generaliza­
tions. As such, these properties need not be nomically co­
extensive with lower-order causal properties-not even 
locally coextensive by conforming to species-relative or 
structure-relative biconditional bridge laws. Instead, 
higher-order causal properties can perfectly well cross­
classify lower-order ones, even locally for a given species 
of creatures and for single individuals within a species.15 
As I take it, Horgan's suggestion that higher-order properties 
"cross-classify" lower-order ones is meant to suggest the 
causal/ theoretical autonomy of the special sciences in relation 
to physical theory. Since this is a point often made by nonre­
ductive physicalists as an argument for the irreducibility of 
higher-order properties, let us briefly look at what is involved. 
To begin, what does "cross-classify" mean in this context? To 
say a given taxonomic system cross-classifies another must 
mean something like this: there are items that are classified in 
the same way, and cannot be distinguished, by the second 
taxonomy (that is, indiscernible in respect of properties recog­
nized in this taxonomy) but that are classified differently ac-

--- Page 81 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 69 
cording to the first taxonomy (that is, discernible in respect of 
properties recognized in that taxonomy), and perhaps vice 
versa. That is, a taxonomy cross-classifies another just in case 
the former makes distinctions that cannot be made by the latter 
(and perhaps also conversely). But then this means that the first 
taxonomy fails to supervene on the second, and Horgan's claim 
when understood this way must come to the denial of super­
venience of higher-order properties. If mental properties and 
biological properties cross-classify basic physical properties, 
they cannot supervene on the latter. This is an interesting sug­
gestion. The claim is that certain higher-order properties of 
physical systems are not supervenient on their physical proper­
ties, and that they are nomically connected to each other by 
higher-order laws irreducible to more basic laws. These higher­
order laws would generate an autonomous causal domain that 
need not answer to the more basic physical causal domain. This 
is a serious form of dualism, perhaps an approach worthy of 
serious consideration. In denying supervenience, however, it 
falls short of minimal physicalism, and for this reason I am 
uncertain whether this is what Horgan really intends. I think 
that in talking about cross-classifying, he may simply be refer­
ring to the familiar claim of multiple realizability of higher­
order properties in relation to basic physical properties. As we 
saw in the first lecture, the idea that mental properties are 
physically realized, whether multiply or uniquely, logically en­
tails the supervenience thesis. If you accept physical realization­
ism, as I believe Horgan does, you cannot at the same time hold 
the "cross-classification" thesis, at least in the present sense. 
Let us return to the other theme in Horgan, namely that the 
causal exclusion problem can be avoided if we choose to base 
our causal claims on counterfactual dependencies. This is a 
popular approach, advocated by a number of philosophers. 
Lynne Baker is one of them; she says that an "easy" answer to 
the question "Does what we think ever affect what we do?" is 
forthcoming when we reflect on certain counterfactuals. For ex­
ample, to see that Jill's thought that she left her keys on the 
counter and her wanting them back caused her to return to the

--- Page 82 ---

70 Chapter 3 
bookstore, all we need to do, Baker says, is to appreciate the 
following" explanatory fact": "If she hadn't thought that she had 
left her keys, then, other things being equal, she wouldn't have 
returned to the bookstore; and given that she did think that she 
had left her keys, then, other things being equal, her returning 
was inevitable."16 Tyler Burge appears to have something similar 
in mind when he says: " ... one can specify various ways in 
which mental causes 'make a difference' which do not conflict 
with physical explanations. The differences they make are speci­
fied by psychological causal explanations, and by counterfactu­
als associated with these explanations."17 
Let us briefly look at Baker's suggestion. Her idea is to explain 
causation in terms of explanation (so that" causation becomes an 
explanatory concept"18) and then explain explanation in terms 
of appropriate counterfactuals and the "inevitability" of the out­
come given the putative cause. We can agree with Baker, Horgan, 
Burge, and others that our confidence in the reality of mental 
causation is grounded, substantially if not wholly, in our accep­
tance of such explanations and counterfactuals. (Not wholly be­
cause surely our belief in mental causation is inseparable from 
our view of ourselves as agents-that is, the belief that our 
desires, beliefs, and intentions can, and do, cause us to move our 
limbs in appropriate ways and thereby rearrange things around 
us.) We can also agree that our explanatory practices involving 
intentional states and actions must be respected in any discus­
sion of mental causation. However, an appeal to familiar coun­
terfactuals involving mental states will not make the need of 
further metaphysical clarification go away. We can see this, I 
think, in connection with Baker's proposal. For consider the 
epiphenomenalist who claims that some neural state, N, was the 
cause of both Jill's thought that she left her keys at the bookstore 
counter and of her returning to the bookstore. The epipheno­
menalist may well be prepared to accept both clauses of Baker's 
explanatory/ counterfactual gloss on the causal claim, for he 
might reason as follows: "If Jill's thought had not occurred, then 
Jill would not have been in N, and given that Jill's thought did 
occur, N must have occurred, and this made Jill's return inevita-

--- Page 83 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 71 
ble." It seems to me that there is no incoherence in this epiphe­
nomenalist account of the situation. I am not saying that an 
epiphenomenalist account of this form will work in every case; 
the point is only that it is not ruled out by Baker's proposals. 
In more general terms, the counterfactual test is a poor test to 
assess causal directionality: given that c caused e, the "backtrack­
ing" counterfactual "if e had not occurred, c would not have 
occurred either" can often be defended, on almost any model of 
counterfactuals.19 Also, when e1 and e2 are collateral effects of a 
single common cause c, the counterfactual "If e1 had not oc­
curred, e2 would not have" and its converse can both be true, and 
there are likely to be cases of this kind where it is true to say that 
"given e1, e2 was inevitable." Moreover the concept of "inevita­
bility" invoked by Baker seems badly in need of further clarifica­
tion; saying "given c, e is inevitable" sounds very much like just 
another way of saying "c (causally) necessitates e" -a concept 
that has been the nemesis of the Humeans. Unless Baker can 
provide us with a nonquestion-begging explanation of the no­
tion of inevitability involved, her project of replacing causation 
with explanation must be judged incomplete. The problem of 
mental causation won't just "melt away." 
To summarize our discussion of the counterfactual approach 
then, what the counterfactual theorists need to do is to give an 
account of just what makes those mind-body counterfactuals we 
want for mental causation true, and show that on that account 
those counterfactuals we don't want, for example, epipheno­
menalist counterfactuals, turn out to be false. Merely to point to 
the apparent truth, and acceptability, of certain mind-body coun­
terfactuals as a vindication of mind-body causation is to mis­
construe the philosophical task at hand. It has no greater 
philosophical significance as regards the problem of mental cau­
sation than pointing to the truth of sundry "because" statements 
involving mental states. Such gestures only show that mind­
body causation is part of what we normally take to be the real 
world; they go no further than a mere reaffirmation of our belief 
in the reality of mental causation. What we want-at least, what 
some of us are looking for-is a philosophical account of how it

--- Page 84 ---

72 Chapter 3 
can be real in light of other principles and truths that seem to be 
forced upon us.20 
"Program Explanation" and Supervenient Causation 
Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit have recently proposed what 
they call "program explanation" to account for the causal/ 
explanatory relevance of the mental.21 In stressing explanation 
their approach resembles that of Baker and others. However, in 
a crucial respect it is different, since Jackson and Pettit begin by 
accepting the premise that the mental lacks causal efficacy: it is 
causal relevance that they hope to save for the mental through 
its role in "program explanations." Consider an example: we 
explain the breaking of a vase by pointing to its fragility. But a 
set of intuitively plausible principles, Jackson and Pettit argue, 
leads to the conclusion that the causally efficacious property in 
this situation is the molecular structure of the glass of which the 
vase is made, not the vase's fragility. Again, this problem ap­
pears to be what we have called "the exclusion problem." We 
will not go into the principles that, according to Jackson and 
Pettit, lead to this conclusion, nor their definition of causal 
efficacy; instead, we will focus on their strategy for saving an 
explanatory/ causal role for fragility, its assumed lack of causal 
efficacy notwithstanding. For if their strategy has merit, it could 
be one way in which mental causation can be saved-especially, 
since their problem, like ours, appears to be that of causal 
exclusion. 
The main idea that drives Jackson and Pettit's approach is that 
a property, F, which is causally inefficacious in bringing about an 
instantiation of another property G, can yet be relevant in the 
causation of an instance of G in virtue of the fact that" G occurred 
because F occurred" is a good "program explanation." But what 
is a program explanation? According to Jackson and Pettit, "G 
occurred because F occurred" can be a good, informative expla­
nation in one of two ways: (i) Fis a causally efficacious property 
with respect to G, or (ii) F "programs for," or "ensures," the 
presence of some property, P, which is causally efficacious with

--- Page 85 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 73 
respect to G, although F itself lacks causal efficacy in relation to 
G. (This evidently allows for different causally efficacious prop­
erties, Ps, for different instances of F.) We can see how this works 
in the case of the fragile vase and its breaking: although fragility 
is not itself causally efficacious, and fails to be a productive cause 
of the breaking, it is nonetheless causally relevant in that it 
programs for, or ensures, the presence of a causally efficacious 
property, that is, the specific molecular structure of the glass. As 
they put it, "although not efficacious itself, [fragility] was such 
that its realization ensured that there was an efficacious property 
in the offing."22 Where does the term "program" come from? 
Jackson and Pettit write: 
The property-instance does not figure in the productive 
process leading to the event but it more or less ensures that 
a property-instance which is required for that process does 
figure. A useful metaphor for describing the role of the 
property is to say that its realization programs for the 
appearance of the productive property and, under a certain 
description, for the event produced. The analogy is with a 
computer program which ensures that certain things will 
happen-things satisfying certain descriptions-though all 
the work of producing those things goes on at a lower, 
mechanical level.23 
A computational explanation that purports to explain a given 
step in a computational process in terms of earlier computa­
tional stages therefore is a program explanation; the earlier 
stages are causally inefficacious, though explanatorily relevant, 
for the explanandum, with all the genuine causal processes 
taking place at the electronic level. Jackson and Pettit believe 
that this approach will save explanations in the special sciences, 
including psychology: 
... though we shall not explore the cases here, it seems to 
extend to explanations in common sense and the special 
sciences: for example, to explanations in sociology which 
invoke a property like group-cohesion, to explanations in

--- Page 86 ---

74 Chapter 3 
psychology which invoke attitudinal contents as causally 
relevant properties, and to explanations in biology which 
appeal to a property such as that of maximizing inclusive 
fitness. In all such cases it is hard to see how the explana­
tions can have the interest they clearly possess other than 
through being the programming variety.24 
What should we think of this proposal? Let us first note that 
this approach does not substantially differ from what I used to 
advocate as a way of handling mental causation-the model of 
"supervenient causation." Here the main idea is that a property 
can derive its causal role, and have a role in causal explanation, 
in virtue of its supervenience on a property involved in causal 
processes. Suppose that F has P1, •.. , Pn as its supervenience 
bases. This means that whenever Fis instantiated, one of its base 
properties, P;, is instantiated. Suppose further that each of these 
Psis causally productive of an effect G. We can then say that F 
is a" supervenient cause" of G. That was the idea of supervenient 
causation. But it is clear that this nicely fits the model of program 
explanation. The occurrence of F "ensures" or" programs for" an 
occurrence of one of these causally efficacious base properties, 
Ps. The two models appear to come to pretty much the same 
thing; at least, where there is supervenient causation in the 
above sense there will be a program explanation and causal 
relevance in Jackson and Pettit's sense. 
Since Jackson and Pettit begin with the assumption that men­
tal properties, and properties of the special sciences, lack causal 
efficacy, it seems fair enough to consider them epiphenom­
enalists. And it is worth noting that the model of program 
explanation is something that is entirely consistent with epiphe­
nomenalism. Like the supervenience theorist, the epipheno­
menalist can perfectly well say that the occurrence of, say, a pain, 
"ensures" or "programs for" the presence of its neural cause, say 
the firings of C-fibers, and it is this neural event that caused me 
to wince. As we have already noted, epiphenomenalism is com­
mitted to mind-body supervenience.

--- Page 87 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 75 
Since Jackson and Pettit concede the causal impotence of the 
mental, the vindication of mental causation cannot be something 
they seek. Given this, how appropriate is it to speak of the 
"causal relevance" of the mental? In the total absence of causal 
efficacy it is difficult to see how there can be room for causal 
relevance. The only relevance that is present here seems informa­
tional relevance: the occurrence of a programming property 
gives us information that some causally efficacious property is 
present and doing its work, though we may know not what. It 
would have been better for them to focus exclusively on the 
vindication of special-science explanations-that is, on vindicat­
ing the explanatory efficacy or relevance of special-science prop­
erties rather than their causal efficacy or relevance. The question 
then is this: Does the model of program explanation succeed in 
vindicating special-science explanations and in demonstrating 
the explanatory efficacy of special-science properties? 
The answer evidently depends on your view of explanation. 
However, it is clear that program explanations, whatever their 
explanatory value, cannot be causal explanations (Jackson and 
Pettit don't claim that they are), and the "because" in "Doreen 
winced because she felt a sharp pain in her elbow" cannot be 
read as invoking a causal relation between Doreen's pain and 
her wincing any more than the "because" in "The vase broke 
because it was fragile" can be given such a reading. To repeat a 
point I have made before, a causal explanation of an event that 
invokes another as its cause can be a correct explanation only if 
the putative cause really is a cause of the event to be explained. 
Any weaker conception would merely cheapen the idea of causal 
explanation. 
But if you are willing to give up on mental causation and a 
robust notion of mental causal explanation, and live with a 
looser and weaker model of explanatory relevance, you can per­
haps make use of David Lewis's idea that "to explain an event 
is to provide some information about its causal history,"25 with 
a simple but not insubstantial alteration. An alteration is re­
quired because on Lewis's notion the causal history of an event

--- Page 88 ---

76 Chapter 3 
includes itself, any of its parts, and is closed under causal 
dependence. That is, any event on which an event in a causal 
history is dependent is part of the same history. However, causal 
histories are not closed under the converse of causal depend­
ence, and in consequence epiphenomena of an event are not part 
of its causal history. This means that, on Lewis's model, the 
invoking of an epiphenomenon (say, pain) of the real cause 
(neuronal firings) of the event to be explained will not count as 
an explanation, or causal explanation, of that event. What can be 
done is to define, say, the "causal network" of an event, which 
is closed under both causal dependence and its converse,26 and 
then explain the idea of explanation in terms of providing infor­
mation about the causal network in which an event is embedded. 
Pointing to an epiphenomenon of a true cause of an event does 
give some causal information about the event. 
I believe it is only this sort of extremely relaxed, loose notion 
of explanation that can accommodate Jackson and Pettit's pro­
gram explanations. Explanation is a pretty loose and elastic no­
tion-essentially as loose and elastic as the underlying notions 
of understanding and making something intelligible-and no 
one should legislate what counts and what doesn't count as 
explanation, excepting only this, namely that when we speak of 
"causal explanation," we should insist, as I said, that what is 
invoked as a cause really be a cause of whatever it is that is being 
explained. Realism about explanation should at least cover 
causal explanation. The main question about program explana­
tion then is this: Is a notion of explanation this loose and relaxed 
any way of vindicating explanations invoking special-science 
properties, in particular, psychological properties? 
Here I expect people to disagree, and that, I believe, only 
reflects the elasticity of the notion of explanation. But I am in­
clined to believe that this way of saving the explanatory rele­
vance or efficacy, or whatever else you may choose to call it, is 
too weak to be satisfying. To my mind any vindication of psy­
chological explanation worth having must do justice to the "be­
cause" in "She winced because she felt a sudden sharp pain in

--- Page 89 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 77 
the elbow," and to do this we need a more robust sense of 
"because" than is provided by program explanation. 
Does the Problem of Mental Causation Generalize? 
Jackson and Pettit, as well as Horgan, treat mental causation 
only as a special case of the problem of causation in the special 
sciences-causation involving "higher-order" properties and 
events. Commendably these writers take the general problem 
seriously and offer ways of solving, or dissolving, the problem. 
In contrast, there are those who appear to believe that the 
supposed generalizability of the problem of mental causation to 
other areas, as biology and geology, only goes to show that the 
problem is a bogus problem, something not worth worrying 
about. In the following passage Burge expresses just such an 
attitude: 
The existence of a closed system reflects a pattern of causal 
relations and of causal explanation that needs no supple­
mentation from the outside. There are no gaps. It does not 
follow from this that such a system excludes or overrides 
causal relations or causal explanation in terms of properties 
from outside the system. Indeed, if it did follow, as often 
been pointed out, there would be no room for causal 
efficacy in the special sciences, even in natural sciences like 
chemistry and physiology. For there is no gap (other than 
perhaps quantum gaps) in the causal relations explained in 
terms of the properties of physics. But few are tempted by 
the idea that physical events cannot be caused in virtue of 
physiological properties of physical events.27 
Burge's claim is that if the causal closure of the physical domain 
excluded mental-to-physical causation (that is, the causal effi­
cacy of mental properties in relation to physical properties), the 
same considerations would show that no special-science prop­
erties could be causally efficacious with respect to their under­
lying lower-level properties. To put it another way, just as the

--- Page 90 ---

78 Chapter 3 
causal closure of the fundamental physical domain does not 
exclude the causal efficacy of properties in the physical special 
sciences, like chemistry and biology, the causal closure of 
the physical domain (taken as a whole, to include biology, 
chemistry, etc.) does not exclude the causal efficacy of mental 
properties. 
Reasoning of this sort seems widespread. Baker too writes: 
Moreover, I want to show that the metaphysical assump­
tions with which we began inevitably lead to scepticism not 
only about the efficacy of contentful thought, but about 
macro-causation generally. But if we lack warrant for claim­
ing that macro-properties are generally causally relevant, 
and if we take explanations to mention causes, then most, 
if not all, of the putative explanations that are routinely 
offered and accepted in science and everyday life are not 
explanatory at all.28 
Note that Baker mentions all macrolevel causation as being jeop­
ardized by "the metaphysical assumptions" (which, by the way, 
include mind-body supervenience), all causation being monop­
olized by microphysical processes. Robert Van Gulick, too, 
brings up the threat of microphysical causal monopoly: 
... reserving causal status for strictly physical properties 
... would make not only intentional properties epipheno­
menal, it would also make the properties of chemistry, 
biology, neurophysiology and every theory outside micro­
physics epiphenomenal ... If the only sense in which in­
tentional properties are epiphenomenal is a sense in which 
chemical and geological properties are also epiphenomenal, 
need we have any real concern about their status: they seem 
to be in the best of company and no one seems worried 
about the causal status of chemical properties.29 
(This is a little like being told that we shouldn't worry about, 
say, being depressed because everyone else has the same prob­
lem.) Perhaps no one is worried about the causal efficacy of 
chemical properties or biological properties, but then not many

--- Page 91 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 79 
people are really worried about mental causation either. What 
some of us are worried about is finding an intelligible account 
of mental causation. This is a different worry and, I dare say, a 
philosophically legitimate one. Do we have an account of causal 
efficacy for chemical or biological properties in relation to fun­
damental physical properties? Perhaps everyone believes that 
we can find one without too much trouble. But I certainly cannot 
think one up on demand, and if anyone else can, I would like 
to see it put down on paper. (If anyone is inclined to retort, 
"Who needs an account of how chemical or biological properties 
have causal efficacy?" I hope you will agree that that is not a 
philosophical attitude we should recommend.) Further, how can 
we be sure that an account that works, say, for chemical prop­
erties will work as well in the mental-physical case? 
What forms the background of the issues being raised here is 
the standard hierarchical picture of the world that I discussed in 
the first lecture. Things of this world, and their properties, are 
pictured in a vertically organized hierarchical system, micro to 
macro, from the elementary particles of microphysics to atoms 
and molecules, and their aggregates, and then upward to cells 
and organisms, and so on-a picture that is implicit in the famil­
iar talk of levels and orders-as in "level of organization," "level 
of description," "level of analysis," "level of explanation," and 
the like. As you will recall, Horgan, Jackson, and Pettit, and 
others cast their arguments in terms of "higher-order" properties 
of the special sciences; if there is "higher-order," there must also 
be "lower-order," and this again suggests an ordered hierarchy 
of properties. 
It is clear that our thinking about mentality and psychology 
has been shaped by this picture: psychology is a special science 
located at one of these levels, toward the higher end, in this 
multilayered system, and mentality is a distinctive set of prop­
erties that make their first appearance at this level. It is natural 
for those who share this picture to see nothing special about 
mental causation: if there is a difficulty at the mental level vis-a.­
vis the lower neural/biological level, we should expect the same 
difficulty to attend every level in relation to its lower levels.

--- Page 92 ---

80 Chapter 3 
Since there is, or at least appears to be, no special problem at 
these lower levels, why should we think there is a problem at 
the mental level? The implied answer is no. Let us call this "the 
generalization argument." 
In my second lecture we saw how a problem about mental 
causation can be seen to arise from the doctrine of mind-body 
supervenience. Our discussion there did not require an elaborate 
characterization of the supervenience relation involved, or any 
special characteristic of the mental except for its supervenience. 
Reasoning that leads to the generalization argument is based on 
the assumption that the mental-neural relationship is, in all rele­
vant respects, the same relationship that characterizes, say, the 
chemical-microphysical, biological-physicochemical, or other in­
terlevel cases. The supervenience argument, if correct, shows 
that where there is supervenience there is a potential problem 
about the causal efficacy of the supervenient properties in rela­
tion to their base properties. It would seem then that the gener­
alization argument applies directly to the supervenience 
argument, and this may give us a possible strategy for dealing 
with it. We will consider the issues raised by the generalization 
argument in the balance of this lecture, returning to them briefly 
again in my final lecture. 
Properties: "Levels" and "Orders" 
Let us return to the idea that mental properties are "realized" 
by physical/ neural properties, or what is usually taken to be an 
equivalent idea that mental properties are the "roles" of which 
the physical/neural properties are the "occupants." It is often 
assumed that this realization relation is what generates the 
hierarchical ordering of levels. William Lycan is very explicit 
about this: 
Very generally put, my [point] is that 'software' /'hardware' 
talk encourages the idea of a bipartite Nature, divided into 
two levels, roughly the physicochemical and the (superven­
ient) 'functional' or higher-organizational-as against real-

--- Page 93 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 81 
ity, which is multiple hierarchy of levels of nature, each level 
marked by nexus of nomic generalizations and superven­
ient on all those levels below it on the continuum. See 
Nature as hierarchically organized in this way, and the 
'function' /'structure' distinction goes relative: something is 
a role as opposed to occupant, a functional state as opposed 
to a realizer, or vice versa, only modulo a designated level 
of nature.30 
We have already discussed Block's epiphenomenalist worries 
concerning the causal status of functionally defined second­
order properties-whether dormitivity, as a second-order prop­
erty distinct from its first-order chemical realizers, can be ac­
corded causal powers to put people to sleep.31 But does Block's 
problem generalize? It's clear from the example of dormitivity, 
the same problem can arise in different areas-different levels, 
if you wish. Think of importing Block's problem into the hier­
archy of the sort pictured by Lycan: neural realizers of pain are 
themselves second-order with respect to certain lower-level 
properties (which preempt their causal powers), the latter in 
turn are second-order to their lower-level properties, and so on 
ad infinitum, until you reach the rock bottom level of micro­
physics (if such a level exists), which turns out to be the only 
level where genuine causal powers reside. Whence Burge's, 
Baker's, and Van Gulick's claim that the usual worries about 
mental property epiphenomenalism lead to the consequence 
that all causal powers seep down and get deposited at the 
microphysical level, leaving microphysics as the only theory 
capable of generating causal explanations. As Baker worries, it 
would follow that all macrolevel causation is a mere illusion. 
The errant baseball didn't after all break the window, and the 
earthquake didn't cause the buildings to collapse! This strikes 
us as intolerable. What's more: What if there is no bottom level 
(as Block challenges us to consider32)? It looks as though if there 
is no bottom level in this picture, causal powers would drain 
away into a bottomless pit and there wouldn't be any causation 
anywhere!

--- Page 94 ---

82 Chapter 3 
Lycan in the above quotation appears to think that his hierar­
chy of levels is generated by the operation of forming second­
order functional properties, or, to look at the hierarchy in the 
other direction, by the realization relation, the relation that a 
first-order property bears to a second-order property whose 
functional specification ("role") it satisfies. We can clearly think 
of a hierarchy of properties generated this way. But notice the 
following important fact about this hierarchy: this hierarchy does 
not parallel the micro-macro hierarchy-to put it another way, the 
realization relation does not track the micro-macro relation. The rea­
son is simple: both second-order properties and their first-order real­
izers are properties of the same entities and systems. The pill you 
ingest has both dormitivity and the chemical property which 
realizes dormitivity; you are in pain and have your c-fibers 
firing. It is evident that a second-order property and its realizers are 
at the same level in the micro-macro hierarchy; they are properties of 
the very same objects. This is a simple and direct consequence of 
the very concepts of II second-order property" and II realizer": for 
something to have a second-order property is for it to have one 
or another of its realizers, that is, a first-order property satisfying 
the specification that defines the second-order property. Con­
sequently, when we talk of second-order properties and their 
realizers, there is no movement downward, or upward, in the 
hierarchy of entities and their properties ordered by the micro­
macro relation. The series created by the second-order/ realizer 
relation does not track the ordered series of micro-macro levels; 
it stays entirely within a single level in the micro-macro 
hierarchy. 
An illusion of micro-macro movement is created, I believe, by 
the fact that in many philosophically interesting cases involving 
second-order properties, the first-order realizers are what we 
may call micro-based (or microstructural) properties, properties of a 
whole that are characterized in terms of its microstructure (we 
will shortly give a more precise explanation of this idea). But 
such properties are macroproperties (or, more precisely, properties 
at the same level as those they realize). It is clear that realizers 
of a second-order property are not always micro-based in this

--- Page 95 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 83 
sense: having a primary color, as we saw, is a second-order 
property over the domain of colors, but its realizers are just 
colors. Whether or not colors are micro-based properties obvi­
ously is not an issue here. The question whether something is a 
realizer of a certain second-order property is independent of 
issues concerning any micro-macro considerations. The situation 
is the same with functional properties defined in terms of causal 
roles. Consider the functional second-order property: having a 
property that is caused to instantiate by tissue damage and 
whose instantiations cause wincings and cryings. There could be 
a Cartesian functionalist who takes phenomenal pain, not any 
neural state, as a realizer of this property. And it is clear that such 
a nonphysical functionalist can allow multiple Cartesian realiz­
ers for functionally defined psychological properties (of course 
such a person would not consider them "psychological" proper­
ties); she might allow that in some species the sensation of itch, 
or tickle, could realize functional pain. 
I think we might usefully distinguish between "higher-level" 
and "higher-order," or "levels" and "orders," when speaking of 
properties in an ordering, using the "order" idiom for first-order, 
second-order, third-order, ... , properties, and reserving the 
"level" idiom for tracking the micro-macro hierarchy. That itself 
is merely a terminological proposal, but there is an important 
distinction to appreciate. As we saw, the first-order/ second­
order / third-order . . . progression does not track the micro­
macro ordering: these properties are all properties applying to 
entities at a single micro-macro level. In contrast, spin, charm, 
and such are properties of elementary particles, and they have 
no application to atoms, molecules, and higher objects in the 
micro-macro hierarchy; transparency and inflammability are 
properties of aggregates of molecules, and they have no place 
for atoms or more basic particles. Consciousness and intention­
ality are properties of biological organisms, or at least their neu­
ral systems, and they have no application to entities that are 
micro in relation to them. Having a mass of ten kilograms is a 
property of certain aggregates of molecules, like my coffee table. 
And it is a micro-based property of the table in the following

--- Page 96 ---

84 Chapter 3 
sense: for my table to have this property is for it to consist of two 
parts, its top and its pedestal, such that the first has a mass of six 
kilograms and the second a mass of four kilograms. 
I believe we can make use of David Armstrong's notion of 
"structural property"33 to explain the idea of "micro-based prop­
erty." We may say that: 
P is a micro-based property just in case P is the property of 
being completely decomposable into nonoverlapping 
proper parts, a11 a2, ••• , a11, such that P1(a1), Pz(a2), .•• , 
Pn(an), and R(a1, ... , a").34 
Being a water molecule therefore is a micro-based property in 
this sense: it is the property of having two hydrogen atoms and 
one oxygen atom in a such-and-such bonding relationship. A 
micro-based property therefore is constituted by micro-constitu­
ents-that is, by the micro-parts of the object that has it and the 
properties and relations characterizing these parts. But we 
should be clear that such properties are macroproperties, not 
micro properties. 
These considerations suffice to show that the generalization 
argument does not have the full generality its supporters attrib­
ute to it. In particular, the exclusion-based worries about mental 
causation do not generalize across micro-macro levels. Consider 
Block's worries about second-order properties: here the main 
worry is that the causal role of a second-order property is threat­
ened with preemption by its first-order realizers. As we noted, 
second-order properties and their realizers are all at the same 
level in the micro-macro hierarchy, and the causal worries about 
second-order properties are intralevel worries and do not cut 
across micro-macro boundaries. The exclusion-based arguments 
of the sort we considered in my second lecture therefore do not 
generalize across micro-macro levels, and do not have the dire 
consequence Block, Van Gulick, and others impute to them, 
namely that all causal powers might seep down, ending up 
deposited at the most basic level of microphysics, or draining 
away altogether if there is no such level.

--- Page 97 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 85 
That that cannot be so should be obvious from the most mun­
dane examples. This table has a mass of ten kilograms, and this 
property, that of having a mass of ten kilograms, represents a 
well-defined set of causal powers. But no micro-constituent of 
this table, none of its proper parts, has this property or the causal 
powers it represents. H2O molecules have causal powers that no 
oxygen or hydrogen atoms have. A neural assembly consisting 
of many thousands of neurons will have properties whose causal 
powers go beyond the causal powers of the properties of its 
constituent neurons, or subassemblies, and human beings have 
causal powers that none of our individual organs have. Clearly 
then macroproperties can, and in general do, have their own causal 
powers, powers that go beyond the causal powers of their micro­
constituents. This is an obvious but important point to keep in 
mind. 
But what of the supervenience-inspired considerations against 
mental causation, of the sort we considered in my second lec­
ture? Don't all properties supervene, as we saw in my first 
lecture, on lower-level properties in the micro-macro hierarchy, 
and ultimately on microphysical properties? And doesn't the 
argument of the second lecture ("the supervenience argument") 
show that the causal powers of the supervenient properties 
are threatened with preemption by their microphysical base 
properties? 
The answer is that when we speak of microphysical or 
mereological supervenience-that is, the supervenience of all 
properties on microphysical properties and relations-we are 
speaking often quite loosely. We must see just what is involved 
in such a claim. Suppose that we say that a certain property P of 
something s supervenes on microphysical properties or facts 
about s. What we mean to say is that the fact that s has P, or 
whether or not s has P, is fixed once the micro-constituents of s 
and the properties and relations characterizing these constitu­
ents are fixed. This means that the base property on which P 
supervenes is a micro-based property, the property of having 
such-and-such proper parts that have such-and-such properties

--- Page 98 ---

86 Chapter 3 
and are configured by such-and-such relations. This is a micro­
based macroproperty of s, not a property that belongs to any of 
its proper parts. In general, supervenient properties and their 
base properties are instantiated by the same objects and hence 
are on the same level. This again is a simple consequence of the 
concept of supervenience: Socrates's goodness supervenes on his 
honesty, generosity, courage, and wisdom, and it is the same 
person, Socrates, who instantiates both these subvenient virtues 
and the supervenient goodness. 
So microphysical, or mereological, supervenience does not 
track the micro-macro hierarchy any more than the realization 
relation does; the series of supervenient properties, one 
mereologically supervenient on the next, when we go deeper 
and deeper into the micro, remains at the same level in the 
micro-macro hierarchy, just as the properties ordered by the 
realization relation stay at the same level. This means that the 
supervenience argument, which exploits the supervenience re­
lation, does not have the effect of emptying macrolevels of causal 
powers and rendering familiar macro-objects and their proper­
ties causally impotent. 
This answers some, but not all, of the points raised by the 
generalization argument. The part that has been answered is the 
worry that the only causally active agents in this world might 
turn out to be basic particles and their microphysical properties, 
and that the familiar objects of our daily experience, like tables, 
chairs, and brains, and their properties might be deprived of 
causal powers. But there is a part of the generalization argument 
that has not been properly addressed, and it is this: If superven­
ience puts psychological properties in trouble with causal po­
tency, why doesn't it put all other special-science properties, like 
chemical and biological properties, into the same sort of trouble? 
For the core of the supervenience argument apparently is the 
simple idea that if property P supervenes on base property P*, 
P* threatens to preempt the causal status of P. The argument is 
quite general and appears to have nothing to do with the fact 
that P is a mental property and P* is a physical property. So if 
the argument works, it should work against the causal potency

--- Page 99 ---

Mental Causation: The Backlash and Free Lunches 87 
of all supervenient properties, and since there is good reason to 
believe that biological, geological, and other special-science 
properties are supervenient properties in the same sense in 
which mental properties are supervenient, the argument should 
work equally well against these properties. Granted that both 
the supervenient properties and their base properties are prop­
erties of the same objects and hence belong to the same ontologi­
cal level, there still is the problem of intralevel causal exclusion. 
What we have shown is only that the causal exclusion problem 
is not an interlevel problem. I will return to this issue in my next 
lecture.35

--- Page 100 ---

Chapter 4
Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look
Expressions like "reductionr" " reductionisrn," "reductionist the-
ory," and "reductionist explanation" have become pejoratives
not only in philosophy, on both sides of the Atlantic, but also
in the general intellectual culture of today. They have become
common epithets thrown at one's critical targets to tarnish them
with intellectual naivete and backwardness. To call someo ne " a
reductionist," in, high-culture press if not in serious philosophy,
goes beyond mere criticism or expression of doctrinal disagree-
ment; it is to put a person down, to heap scorn on him and his
work. We used to read about "bourgeois reductionism" in left-
wing press; we now regularly encounter charges of "btological
reductionism," "sociological reductionisrn," "economic reduc-
tionism," and the like, in the writings about culture, race, gen-
d"r, and social class. If you want to be politically correct in
philosophical matters, you would not dare come anywhere near
reductionism, nor a reductionist. It is interesting to note that
philosophers who are engaged in what clearly seem like re-
ductionist projects would not call themselves reductionists or
advertise their work as reductionist programs.l A general reha-
bilitation of the reductionist strategy is not something I would
attempt-at least not here. What I want to do is to discuss how
best to understand reduction in the sense that is relevant to our
present concerns, what might motivate mind-body reduction-
ism, and what its costs and benefits might be. I hope to persuade
you that reductionism about the mind is a serious, motivated
philosophical position, and that although in the end we may
decide to reject it, we should do so for the right reasons. There
is also some unfinished business to attend to in this final lec-
ture-in particular, I need to say a bit more about what I called

--- Page 101 ---

Chapter 4 
Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 
Expressions like "reduction," "reductionism," "reductionist the­
ory," and "reductionist explanation" have become pejoratives 
not only in philosophy, on both sides of the Atlantic, but also 
in the general intellectual culture of today. They have become 
common epithets thrown at one's critical targets to tarnish them 
with intellectual naivete and backwardness. To call someone "a 
reductionist," in high-culture press if not in serious philosophy, 
goes beyond mere criticism or expression of doctrinal disagree­
ment; it is to put a person down, to heap scorn on him and his 
work. We used to read about "bourgeois reductionism" in left­
wing press; we now regularly encounter charges of "biological 
reductionism," "sociological reductionism," 11 economic reduc­
tionism," and the like, in the writings about culture, race, gen­
der, and social class. If you want to be politically correct in 
philosophical matters, you would not dare come anywhere near 
reductionism, nor a reductionist. It is interesting to note that 
philosophers who are engaged in what clearly seem like re­
ductionist projects would not call themselves reductionists or 
advertise their work as reductionist programs.1 A general reha­
bilitation of the reductionist strategy is not something I would 
attempt-at least not here. What I want to do is to discuss how 
best to understand reduction in the sense that is relevant to our 
present concerns, what might motivate mind-body reduction­
ism, and what its costs and benefits might be. I hope to persuade 
you that reductionism about the mind is a serious, motivated 
philosophical position, and that although in the end we may 
decide to reject it, we should do so for the right reasons. There 
is also some unfinished business to attend to in this final lec­
ture-in particular, I need to say a bit more about what I called

--- Page 102 ---

90 Chapter 4 
the generalization argument. As you may recall, this is the 
contention that the supervenience argument against mental cau­
sation and related considerations apply to all other special­
science properties, and that this demonstrates the emptiness of 
the problem of mental causation. Our final consideration of the 
issue of the generalizability of the mental causation problem 
will lead us to some concluding reflections concerning what 
options are open to us in regard to the mind-body problem and 
mental causation. 
Nagel Reduction: Troubles with "Bridge Laws" 
Toward the end of my first lecture, I criticized Nagel's deriva­
tional model of theory reduction, especially its use in the debate 
over mind-body reductionism, and urged another way of look­
ing at reduction, namely the functional model. As I noted, 
Nagel's model, although its limitations have been widely noted 
and many variants of it have been on the scene,2 has dominated 
philosophical discussions of reduction and reductionism during 
the past three decades. At the heart of Nagel's model are "bridge 
laws," which provide the essential reductive links between the 
vocabulary of the theory targeted for reduction and that of the 
base theory, and thereby enable the derivation of the target 
theory from its reducer. In the philosophical applications of the 
model, it has been customary to assume these bridge laws to 
take the biconditional form, providing for each primitive predi­
cate of the theory to be reduced with a nomologically coexten­
sive predicate in the base theory. When the idiom in which 
reductionism was debated took a metaphysical turn and talk of 
properties became respectable again, the bridge-law require­
ment came to be understood as saying that each property in the 
domain to be reduced must be provided with a coextensive 
property (coextensive at least with nomic necessity) in the base 
domain. 
Actually Nagel himself did not require that his bridge laws be 
biconditionals in form; his focus was on the derivability of the 
laws of the reduced theory from those of the base theory, and all

--- Page 103 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 91 
he wanted was bridge laws in enough numbers and strength to 
enable the derivation. But this leaves the question of what bridge 
laws are needed dependent on the specific pairs of theories 
under consideration, and there is nothing general one can say 
about how the predicates of two theories, or properties in the 
domains of the two theories, must be related to each other to 
enable the reduction of one theory to the other. This means that 
unless we have two fixed and completed theories, we cannot 
really say anything useful about what bridge laws may be 
needed for reduction. As philosophers, however, we do want to 
discuss reducibility and reductionism before the final theories 
are in; in particular, in the mind-body case, neither psychology 
nor its putative reduction base, neurobiology or whatever, is 
anywhere near a finished form, and unlikely ever to get to that 
stage. Moreover it is obvious that the availability of bridge laws 
is the critical factor for questions about Nagel-reducibility of 
theories. In light of this the idea that bridge laws must be bicon­
ditionals makes excellent sense: if each predicate or property, M, 
in the target domain can be correlated with a coextension, P, in 
the base domain, that in itself would guarantee Nagelian reduc­
tion (assuming that both theories are true). For let L be any law 
of the theory being reduced: either L is derivable from the base 
theory via the biconditional bridge laws or it is not. If it is, Nagel 
reduction goes through for L. If it is not, rewrite L in the vocabu­
lary of the base theory using the bridge laws as definitions, and 
add this rewrite as an additional law of the base theory. L would 
then be derivable from the laws of the enhanced based theory 
via the bridge laws, again satisfying Nagel's derivability condi­
tion. This rewrite of L is a true lawlike generalization expressed 
entirely in the vocabulary of the base theory, and the original 
theory was incomplete in that it missed a true generalization 
within its domain. Augmenting the base theory this way ex­
pands neither its ontology nor its ideology (that is, its system of 
concepts) and does not diminish in any way the scientific or 
philosophical interest of the reduction.3 
Consider, then, bridge laws of the form M HP, where Mis a 
property in the target domain and P is a property in the base

--- Page 104 ---

92 Chapter 4 
domain. I believe there are three important questions we need 
to consider concerning such laws. 
(i) The availability question. This is the question raised explicitly 
by the multiple realization argument against type physicalism 
and later generalized by others to apply to all special-science 
properties.4 The gist of this argument, which is by now familiar, 
is the observation that any higher-order property P has multiple 
realizers in lower-order properties, Q1, Q2, ••• , so that it is not 
possible to provide P with a single lower-order correlate Q to 
yield a biconditional bridge law of the form PH Q. Thus Pis 
irreducible to some single lower-order property, and more gen­
erally, this shows that the requirement of biconditional bridge 
laws cannot be satisfied. That, at least, is the argument. 
Davidson takes mental anomalism, in particular, his claim that 
there are no laws connecting mental and physical properties, to 
undermine mind-body reductionism. Under mental anomalism 
there cannot be any type of bridge laws between the mental and 
the physical, let alone biconditional ones. So, unlike Putnam's 
multiple realization argument, Davidson's argument doesn't de­
pend on the assumption that bridge laws must be biconditionals. 
It is clear that considerations of multiple realizability do not 
show that there can be no laws connecting the two domains 
involved. In fact, if Qi is a realizer of M, then Qi ➔ M must hold 
with nomological necessity. There is a further difference between 
Davidson's and Putnam's argument. As noted, the multiple re­
alization argument seems quickly and naturally to generalize to 
other special-science properties outside psychology. However, 
Davidson's argument depends on mental anomalism, which in 
turn depends on the supposed special character of mental phe­
nomena (specifically, propositional attitudes), namely their nor­
mativity and rationality. For this reason there is no reason to 
think that his argument can be generalized outside the mental 
domain. At any rate we will not consider Davidson's argument 
further here, for the following reason. For, as Davidson has lately 
emphasized,5 his mental anomalism only denies the existence of

--- Page 105 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 93 
what he calls "strict laws" between the mental and the physical, 
and on his understanding of strict law, it turns out that there can 
be strict laws only in basic physics (or, in Davidson's words, "de­
veloped physics"). Since Davidson bases his antireductive argu­
ment on mental anomalism, he must be requiring that the bridge 
laws used in a reduction must be strict laws. But, on his account, 
there aren't strict laws anywhere outside basic physics, from 
which it follows that there cannot be reduction anywhere in the 
sciences.6 What this shows is that Davidson's idea of reduction 
is too narrow and unrealistic to be of much philosophical inter­
est. If there is any reduction in science, the question whether 
there are strict bridge laws connecting the two domains involved 
(e.g., whether his mind-body anomalism is true) cannot be an 
issue of any relevance to reduction and reductionism. 
There are two possible responses to the availability question 
raised by the multiple realizationists: (1) the disjunctive strategy 
and (2) the move to species-or structure-specific bridge laws and 
"local" reductions (as distinguished from "global" or "uniform" 
reductions).7 The disjunctive strategy, briefly, is this: if Mis mul­
tiply realizable in, say, three ways, P1, P2, and P3, then why not 
take the disjunction, P1 v P2 v P3, as M's coextension in the base 
domain? Clearly, given that each of the Pis is a realizer of M, it 
must hold with (at least) nomological necessity that Pi ➔ M, and 
given that the P;s are all the nomologically possible realizers of 
M, it must hold with (at least) nomological necessity that M H 
(P1 v P2 v P3). But let us postpone discussion of the disjunction 
move (to a later section) and turn our attention to the idea of 
local reduction via species-or structure-specific bridge laws. 
It is often a tacit supposition of the friends of the multiple 
realization argument that neural correlates of mental states, say 
pain, are species-specific-that pain is correlated with, and real­
ized by, one neural state in humans, by a different neural state 
in octopuses, and perhaps by some electrochemical state in Mar­
tians. And this is understood to mean that if N1 is pain's realizer 
in humans, the following biconditional restricted to humans 
holds: H ➔ (pain H N1), where "H" stands for being a human. 
A pervasive system of these biconditionals covering all mental

--- Page 106 ---

94 Chapter 4 
states in humans would enable a Nagelian derivational reduc­
tion of human psychology to, say, human neurobiology, and 
canine psychology to canine neurobiology, Martian psychology 
to Martian electrochemistry, and so on. It seems to me that from 
the general philosophical and methodological point of view that 
motivates the Nagelian model of reduction, these species-re­
stricted, or "local," reductions are reduction enough. Given that 
the physical substrates for mentality differ for humans, canines, 
and Martians, what more could we expect or want, to begin with? 
Three questions, however, can be raised concerning local re­
ductions. The first, raised by a number of philosophers,8 begins 
by pointing out that multiple realization goes deeper and wider 
than biological species, and that even in the same individual the 
neural realizer, or correlate, of a given mental state or function, 
may change over time through maturation and brain injuries. I 
think this is true, but the point, though it may be pragmatically 
relevant, is irrelevant from a metaphysical point of view. Pre­
sumably, if two conspecifics have different realizers for some 
single mental state, then that is so presumably because they 
differ in the organization of their neural systems. Maturation 
and injuries to the brain can cause changes in the basic neural 
substrates of our mental life, and that is why different neural 
states come to realize the same mental state over time. But con­
specifics do share largely similar neural systems, and this is what 
makes psychology possible. It is a contingent, and fortunate, fact 
that human psychology is uniform enough to make its scientific 
investigation possible and practically worthwhile.9 But the uni­
formity of human psychology, to the degree that it obtains, is due 
to the similarity in our neural systems-that is, the uniformity 
of human physiology. In the worst-case scenario in which there 
is wildly heterogeneous multiple realization everywhere among 
the humans, and for the same individual over time, there still 
would be structure-specific biconditional laws (if psychology is 
indeed physically realized), and there still would be perfectly 
good local reductions, even if they are only for single individuals 
at a particular moment of their lives. The idea that psychology 
is physically realized is the idea that it is the physical properties

--- Page 107 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 95 
of the realizers of psychological states that generate psychologi­
cal regularities and underlie psychological explanations. Given 
an extreme diversity and heterogeneity of realization, it would 
no longer be interesting or worthwhile to look for neural realiz­
ers of mental states for every human being at every moment of 
his/her existence. If psychology as a science were possible under 
these circumstances, that would be due to a massive and miracu­
lous set of coincidences. We may conclude then that pushing 
multiple realizability to extremes does not impugn the idea of 
local reduction. It only makes local reductions more fine-grained 
and atomistic and perhaps renders them practically not worth­
while. 
The second and third questions regarding local reductions are 
more serious and require substantive responses, not simple re­
buttals. In fact these questions pose serious challenges to the 
whole idea of Nagel reduction and its appeal to bridge laws, not 
just to local reduction and species-specific bridge laws. Let us 
return to bridge laws in general and consider a pair of further 
questions. 
(ii) The explanatory question. C-fiber stimulation correlates with 
pain (in all pain-capable organisms, or in humans and higher 
mammals-this makes no difference). But why? Can we under­
stand why we experience pain when our C-fibers are firing, and 
not when our A-fibers are firing? Can we explain why pains, 
not itches or tickles, correlate with C-fiber firings? Exactly what 
is it about C-fibers and their excitation that explains the occur­
rence of a painful, hurting sensation? Why is any sensory qual­
ity experienced at all when C-fibers fire? When the emergentists 
claimed that consciousness was an emergent property that 
could not be explained in terms of its physical/biological "basal 
conditions," it was these explanatory questions that they de­
spaired of ever answering. For them reduction was primarily, 
or at least importantly, an explanatory procedure: reduction 
must make intelligible how certain phenomena arise out of 
more basic phenomena, and if that is our goal, as I believe it 
should be, a Nagelian derivational reduction of psychology,

--- Page 108 ---

96 Chapter 4 
with bridge laws taken as unexplained auxiliary premises, will 
not advance our understanding of mentality by an inch. For it 
is the explanation of these bridge laws, an explanation of why there 
are just these mind-body correlations, that is at the heart of the demand 
for an explanation of mentality. You will recall that we raised 
similar questions about mind-body supervenience (chapter 1); 
it is evident that the Nagel reduction of psychology is like taking 
mind-body supervenience as an unexplained brute fact. 
I believe physicalists should take the explanatory question 
seriously. It isn't that on physicalism every phenomenon must 
be physically explainable; there may well be physical phenom­
ena that aren't physically explainable-that is, this world may 
be a physical world but not fully physically explainable. Nor 
are we demanding that we actually succeed at some point in 
formulating a physical explanation of everything that can be 
explained. We may not be smart enough, diligent enough, or live 
long enough. But if a whole system of phenomena that are prima 
fade not among basic physical phenomena resists physical 
explanation, and especially if we don't even know where or 
how to begin, it would be time to reexamine one's physicalist 
commitments. 
So Nagelian reductions, whether global or local, do not give 
us reductions that explain. Even if all phenomena have been 
Nagel-reduced to basic physical theory, of which let us suppose 
we have a completed version, the world would still be full of 
mysteries, mysteries that defy our completed physics. 
(iii) The ontological question. It is arguably analytic that reduc­
tion must simplify; after all, reductions must reduce. We expect 
our reductions to yield simpler systems-a simpler system of 
concepts, or simpler system of assumptions, or simpler system 
of entities. On this score bridge laws of the form M H P appar­
ently are wanting in various ways. Since M H P is supposed to 
be a contingent law, the concepts Mand P remain distinct; hence 
bridge laws yield no conceptual simplification. Further, since we 
have only a contingent biconditional "iff" connecting properties

--- Page 109 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 97 
M and P, M and P remain distinct properties and there is no 
ontological simplification. The idea of local reduction appears 
to make the situation worse: there isn't even a single P that can 
be considered a candidate for identification with M, but a mul­
titude of M's realizers, P1, P2, .••. True, Nagel reduction gives 
us a simplified set of laws, through a derivational absorption of 
the laws of the reduced theory by the reducer. However, the 
simplicity so purchased may be largely illusory: the price paid 
is the addition of the bridge laws as new basic laws of the base 
theory, and moreover these laws, by bringing with them new 
descriptive terms, will expand both the language and ontology 
of the base theory. In any case the metaphysically significant 
fact is that Nagel reduction gives us no ontological simplifica­
tion, and fails to give meaning to the intuitive "nothing over 
and above" that we rightly associate with the idea of reduction. 
The philosophical poverty of a Nagel reduction of psychology 
to physical theory becomes evident when we reflect on the fact 
that nothing in emergentism, or many other forms of dualism 
such as the double-aspect theory, epiphenomenalism, and the 
doctrine of pre-established harmony, rules out a purely deriva­
tional reduction of psychology. Nor does substantival dualism 
as such preclude a Nagel reduction of psychology to physical 
theory. Moreover some of these dualist theories, for example, the 
double-aspect theory, entail the Nagel reducibility of psychology 
by providing us with all the mind-body bridge laws we need. 
We see therefore that the question whether or not mentality is 
Nagel-reducible via bridge laws to the physical cannot be a 
significant metaphysical issue. Nor can a refutation of reduction­
ism that is premised on Nagelian reduction be considered a 
significant philosophical contribution. 
The Functional Model of Reduction 
If we want ontological simplification out of our reductions, we 
must somehow find a way of enhancing bridge laws, MB P, 
into identities, M = P. (To simplify the discussion, we will for

--- Page 110 ---

98 Chapter 4 
the moment ignore the issue of multiple realization and assume 
that M has a single correlate or realizer; we return to multiple 
realization later in this chapter.) A nice thing about these iden­
tities is that they serve to answer the explanatory question about 
bridge laws as well: M and P are coinstantiated because they 
are in fact one and the same property. Identity takes away the 
logical space in which explanatory questions can be formulated. 
To the question "Why is that whenever and wherever Hillary 
Rodham shows up, the President's wife also shows up?" there 
is no better, or conclusive, answer than "Hillary Rodham is the 
President's wife." 
If M and P are both intrinsic properties and the bridge law 
connecting them is contingent, there is no hope of identifying 
them. Distinct properties are just distinct, and we can't pretend 
they are the same. I don't think it's good philosophy to say, as 
some materialists used to say, "But why can't we just say that 
they are one and the same? Give me good reasons why we 
shouldn't say that!" I think that we must try to provide positive 
reasons for saying that things that appear to be distinct are in 
fact one and the same. Moreover, if M H P is contingent, the 
identification of M with P must be made consistent with the 
thesis, defended by Kripke with great plausibility and now 
widely accepted, that identities whose terms are "rigid" are nec­
essary. For if M = P is necessary, M H P cannot be contingent­
unless either M or P is nonrigid. 
All this suggests that we should go back to the functional 
model of reduction described toward the end of my first lecture. 
To recapitulate: to reduce a property M to a domain of base 
properties, we must first "prime" M for reduction by construing, 
or reconstruing, it relationally or extrinsically. This turns M into a 
relational/ extrinsic property. For functional reduction we con­
strue M as a second-order property defined by its causal role­
that is, by a causal specification H describing its (typical) causes 
and effects. So M is now the property of having a property with 
such-and-such causal potentials, and it turns out that property 
P is exactly the property that fits the causal specification. And 
this grounds the identification of M with P.10 Mis the property

--- Page 111 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 99 
of having some property that meets specification H, and P is the 
property that meets H. So Mis the property of having P. But in 
general the property of having property Q = property Q. It 
follows then that Mis P.11 
I have already given some examples of such functional reduc­
tions: the reduction of temperature and the gene (see chapter 1). 
A functional construal of the property to be reduced, M, serves 
as an explanation of why the M H P correlation holds and as a 
ground for the identity M = P, and it gives satisfying responses 
to both the explanatory and the ontological questions that arise 
for bare bridge laws unaccompanied by identities. I believe most 
cases of interlevel12 reduction conform to the model I have just 
sketched. The crucial step in the process of course is the function­
alization of the properties to be reduced. Indeed the possibility 
of functionalization is a necessary condition of reduction. As I 
have already said, if both M; and P; are distinct intrinsic proper­
ties in their own right, replacing H with = in the correlation 
M; H P; is entirely out of the question, and the correlation must 
be regarded as a brute fact that is not further explainable. 
To functionalize M is to make M nonrigid, and this is easily 
seen: Mis defined in terms of its causal/nomic relations to other 
properties, and since these relations are contingent-contingent 
on the laws that prevail in a given world-it is a contingent fact 
whether a given property satisfies the causal/ nomic specifica­
tion that is definitive of M.13 This makes the realization relation 
vary from world to world, and the identity M = P becomes 
metaphysically contingent. Does this lead to difficulties? Kripke 
has argued that such "theoretical" or reductive identities as 
"Heat is molecular motion" and "The gene is a DNA molecule" 
are metaphysically necessary.14 Note, though, that on the func­
tional model of reduction, M = P is not wholly contingent: it is 
nomologically necessary. Since whether or not P is a realizer of 
the functional property M is determined by the prevailing laws 
of nature, the realization relation remains invariant across all 
worlds with the same basic laws. Thus M = P holds in all no­
mologically possible worlds (in relation to the reference world). 
Accordingly we may say "M" is nomologically rigid or semi-

--- Page 112 ---

100 Chapter 4 
rigid. This result seems right: given the prevailing laws, DNA­
molecules are the carriers of genetic information in this world, 
but in worlds with different basic laws, it may well be molecules 
of another kind that perform this causal work. The upshot is that 
some theoretical identities, especially those arising out of func­
tional reductions, are only nomologically necessary, not neces­
sary tout court. We of course need not say that all reductive 
identities are only nomologically necessary; water = H20 can 
remain metaphysically necessary, since we need not think of 
water, or being water, as a functional property. 
The emergentists would have denied the functionalizability of 
the properties they claimed to be emergent. For them these prop­
erties are intrinsic properties in their own right, with their own 
distinctive causal powers that are irreducible to those of the 
processes from which they emerge. Their reason for thinking 
that the emergent relations are brute and unexplainable, or that 
emergents are irreducible to their "basal conditions," is often put 
in epistemic terms, to the effect that from a complete knowledge 
of the basal conditions, it is not possible to predict what proper­
ties will emerge at the higher level. For example, the emergen­
tists early in this century argued that most chemical properties 
are emergent in this sense: from a complete knowledge of the 
hydrogen and the oxygen atoms in isolation, it is not possible to 
predict that when they bond in the ratio of 2 to 1, the resulting 
substance will be transparent and dissolve sugar but not copper. 
However, the emergentists were wrong about these examples: 
solid-state physics has explained, and is capable of predicting, 
these phenomena on the basis of microphysical facts.15 I believe 
that the key to such explanation and prediction is the functional 
construal of the phenomenon, or property, to be explained. Con­
sider the transparency of water: it would seem that once this 
property has been functionally understood, as the capacity of a 
substance to transmit light beams intact, there should be no 
in-principled obstacle to formulating a microphysical explana­
tion of why H20 molecules have this power. The same strategy 
should allow microphysical explanations and predictions of bio­
logical phenomena as well, for it seems that many biological

--- Page 113 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 101 
properties seem construable as second-order functional proper­
ties over physicochemical properties.16 
So the central question for us, in the mind-body debate, is this: 
Is the mental amenable to the kind of functionalization required 
for reductive explanation, or does it in principle resist such func­
tionalization? If the functionalist conception of the mental is 
correct-correct for all mental properties-then mind-body re­
duction is in principle possible, if not practically feasible. This is 
contrary to one piece of current philosophical wisdom, the claim 
that functionalism, as distinguished from classic type physical­
ism, is a form-in fact the principal contemporary form-of 
mind-body antireductionism. What I am urging here is the exact 
opposite-that the functionalist conception of mental properties 
is required for mind-body reduction. In fact it is necessary and 
sufficient for reducibility. If this is right, mind-body reduction­
ism and the functionalist approach to mentality stand or fall 
together; they share the same metaphysical fate. 
It has been customary to distinguish between two broad cate­
gories of mental phenomena, the intentional and the phenome­
nal, without excluding those that have aspects of both (e.g., 
emotions). Intentionality is particularly evident in propositional 
attitudes-states carrying representational content. There has 
been much skepticism about the viability of a functionalist ac­
count of intentionality; in particular, Hilary Putnam, who intro­
duced functionalism in the late 1960s, has recently mounted 
sustained attacks on the functionalist accounts of content and 
reference, and John Searle has also vigorously resisted the func­
tionalization of intentionality.17 However, like many others, 18 I 
remain unconvinced by these arguments; I don't see principled 
obstacles to a functional account of intentionality. Let me just say 
here that it seems to me inconceivable that a possible world 
exists that is an exact physical duplicate of this world but lacking 
wholly in intentionality.19 
I am with those who believe that the main trouble comes from 
qualia. Unlike the case of intentional phenomena, we seem able, 
without much difficulty, to conceive an exact physical duplicate 
of this world in which qualia are distributed differently (worlds

--- Page 114 ---

102 Chapter 4 
with qualia inversions) or entirely absent ("zombie worlds"), 
although the latter possibility is more controversial. To get to the 
point without fuss, it seems to me that the felt, phenomenal 
qualities of experiences, or qualia, are intrinsic properties if any­
thing is.20 To be sure, we commonly refer to them using extrin­
sic/ causal descriptions like the color of jade, the smell of 
ammonia, or the taste of avocado. However, this is entirely con­
sistent with the claim that what these descriptions pick out are 
intrinsic qualities, not something extrinsic or relational. (Perhaps 
it is because they are intrinsic and subjective that we need to 
resort to relational descriptions for intersubjective reference.) 
Compare our practice of ascribing intrinsic physical properties 
to material objects by the use of relational descriptions such as 
two kilograms or 32 degrees Fahrenheit. To say that an object has 
a mass of 2 kilograms is to say that it will balance, on an equal 
arm balance, two objects each of which would balance the Pro­
totype Kilogram (an object stored somewhere in France, I be­
lieve). That is the linguistic meaning, or the concept if you prefer, 
of "2 kilograms;" however, the property it picks out, having a 
mass of 2 kilograms, is an intrinsic property of material bodies. 
Why do I think that the functionalization of qualia won't work, 
while at the same time staying open-minded about intentional­
ity? I obviously cannot open this much debated issue here, and 
I have nothing essentially new to offer. As noted, my doubts 
about the functionalist accounts of qualia are by and large based 
on the well-known, and not uncontested, arguments from qualia 
inversions and the familiar epistemic considerations. Further I 
find the following intuitive difference between qualia and inten­
tionality significant: If someone should ask us to create a device 
with consciousness, say something that can feel pain, itch, tickle, 
and the like, the only thing we can do, it seems to me, is to make 
an appropriate duplicate of a structure, presumably a biological 
organism like a human or a cat, that we know, or believe, to be 
conscious and capable of these sensations. We are not capable of 
designing, through theoretical reasoning, a wholly new kind of 
structure that we can predict will be conscious; I don't think we 
even know how to begin, or indeed how to measure our success.

--- Page 115 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 103 
Whereas, if we are asked to design a structure that can perceive, 
process information received through perception, store it, make 
use of it to make inferences and guide action, and so on, we don't 
necessarily have to make a replica of a system that is known to 
do these things. It seems to me that we can go about designing­
arguably we have already done so, in certain robots and com­
puter-driven devices-wholly new sorts of structures with such 
capacities, devices that we can predict, on the basis of our theo­
ries and their constructional detail, will have the capacity to 
perform these tasks. Evidently it is functionalizability that makes 
a critical difference here. In any case it seems to me that if 
emergentism is correct about anything, it is more likely to be 
correct about qualia than about anything else. 
Functional Properties versus Functional Concepts 
We must now confront the following question: if M is a second­
order property and P a first-order property (or if M is an ex­
trinsic/relational property and P an intrinsic one, or if M is a 
causal role and Pis an occupant of that role), how could M be 
identical with P? Isn't it incoherent to think that a property 
could be both first-order and second-order, both extrinsic/ 
relational and intrinsic, both a role and its occupier? 
So far we have been rather loose in our talk of properties, 
causal roles and their occupants, and the like. It is time to tidy 
up things a bit. I will now sketch a way of doing this. We may 
begin by explicitly recognizing that by existential quantification 
over a given domain of properties, we do not literally bring into 
being a new set of properties. That would be sheer magic, espe­
cially if we adopt the plausible view that distinct properties must 
represent distinct causal powers. By mere logical operations on 
our notations, we cannot alter our ontology-we cannot dimin­
ish or expand it. For something to have second-order property 
M is for it to have some first-order property or other meeting a 
certain specification. Say, there are three such first-order proper­
ties, P1, P2, and P3. For something to have M, then, is for it 
to have P1 or have P2 or have P3. Here there is a disjunctive

--- Page 116 ---

104 Chapter 4 
proposition or fact that the object has one or another of the three 
first-order properties; that is exactly what the fact that it has M 
amounts to. There is no need here to think of M itself as a 
property in its own right-not even a disjunctive property with 
the Ps as disjuncts. By quantifying over properties, we cannot 
create new properties any more than by quantifying over indi­
viduals we can create new individuals.21 Someone murdered 
Jones, and the murderer is Smith or Jones or Wang. That some­
one, who murdered Jones, is not a person in addition to Smith, 
Jones, and Wang, and it would be absurd to posit a disjunctive 
person, Smith-or-Jones-or-Wang, with whom to identify the 
murderer. The same goes for second-order properties and their 
realizers. 
So it is less misleading to speak of second-order descriptions or 
designators of properties, or second-order concepts, than second­
order properties. Second-order designators come in handy when 
we are not able or willing to name the properties we have in 
mind by the use of canonical first-order designators: so we say 
"having some property or other, P, such that ... P ... ," instead 
of naming all the specific properties meeting the stated condi­
tion. The situation is the same when we are dealing with indi­
viduals: we say, "I shook hands with a Democratic senator at the 
reception yesterday," instead of saying "I shook hands with Clai­
borne Pell, or Ted Kennedy, or Patrick Moynahan, or ... " (pretty 
soon you run out of names, or you may not even know any). Of 
course second-order designators also carry information that is 
valuable, perhaps indispensable in a given context, which is not 
conveyed by the canonical designators of the first-order realiz­
ers. We convey the information that we are talking about some­
one who is a Democratic senator, rather than, say, someone who 
owns a mansion in Newport or a family compound on Cape 
Cod. When we use the functional characterization of pain (that 
is, "pain" for the functionalist), we let others know that we are 
referring to a state with certain input-output properties; a neural 
characterization of its realizer, even if one is on hand, would in 
most ordinary contexts be useless and irrelevant. From the ordi­
nary epistemic and practical point of view, the use of second-

--- Page 117 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 105 
order property designators probably is unavoidable, and we 
should recognize that these designators introduce a set of useful 
and practically indispensable concepts that group first-order 
properties in ways that are essential for descriptive and commu­
nicative purposes. In building scientific theories, we hope that 
the concepts in our best theories pick out, or answer to, the real 
properties in the world. On the present view, the concepts intro­
duced by second-order designators pick out first-order proper­
ties disjunctively. When I say, x has property M, where "M" is a 
second-order designator (or property, if you insist), "the truth­
maker" of this statement is the fact, or state of affairs, that x has 
P1 or P2 or P3, where the Ps are the realizers of M. (The "or" here 
is sentence disjunction, not predicate disjunction; it does not 
introduce disjunctive predicates with disjunctive properties as 
semantic values.) Suppose that in this particular case, x has Min 
virtue of having P2, in which case the ultimate truth-maker of 
"x has M" is the fact that x has P2• There is no further fact of 
the matter to the fact that x has M over and above the fact that 
x has P2. 
So I am advocating here what is called a "sparse" conception 
of properties as distinguished from the "latitudinarian" or 
"abundant" conception. An extreme form of the latter would 
regard every predicate as denoting, or representing, a property, 
with synonymy or logical equivalence taken as the condition 
under which two predicates denote the same property. On this 
conception of propertyhood, second-order predicates would in­
deed represent properties distinct from their first-order realizers. 
If anyone should insist, we should have no objection to these 
second-order properties as long as we are clear about the liberal 
conception of properties involved. I believe it is clear, although 
I will not belabor the point, that the conception of properties 
appropriate to the present context is the sparse one. In fact cur­
rent debates over the mind-body problem and mental causation 
tacitly presuppose a particularly robust version of this approach 
according to which differences in properties must reflect differ­
ences in causal powers.22 If synonymy is required for property 
identity, we should have thrown in the towel on the issue of

--- Page 118 ---

106 Chapter 4 
reductionism a long time ago-when analytical behaviorism 
was generally acknowledged to have failed. Few problems that 
are now contested in discussions of the mind-body problem 
could even be intelligibly formulated in terms of the latitudinar­
ian conception (for example, the problem of mental causation 
does not concern the causal efficacy of psychological concepts). 
Let me briefly summarize the arguments of this section. A 
genuine explanatory reduction cannot be content with bridge 
laws assumed as unexplained premises of reductive derivations. 
For these are exactly what need to be explained. One way of 
satisfying the explanatory demand is to elevate the bridge laws 
to identities, and this can be done if the properties being reduced 
can be construed, or reconstrued, as causal/ functional proper­
ties, second-order properties defined over the properties in the 
reduction base. And for a tidier ontological/ conceptual land­
scape, we may want to, perhaps should, give up the talk of 
second-order properties altogether in favor of second-order des­
ignators of properties, or second-order concepts.23 
Multiple Realization Again 
The discussion thus far has assumed that the property M tar­
geted for functional reduction has a single realizer. Let us now 
see how we may deal with the more realistic case where M has 
multiple realizers, say P1 and P2. The situation will not be altered 
in a significant way if there are an indefinitely many realizers. 
Let us first suppose that we are serious about Mas a property. 
I believe that this can be accomplished only if we are willing to 
countenance M as a disjunctive property, P1 v P2, but there are 
weighty reasons for rejecting disjunctive properties of this kind. 
The upshot, then, will be that we are in danger of losing Mas a 
property, a property we will have to learn to live without. 
To begin, if M is the property of having a property meeting 
a certain specification and P1 and P2 are all and only properties 
meeting this specification, then it seems obvious and trivial that 
having M is just having P1 or P2; there is no other way of hav­
ing M.

--- Page 119 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 107 
(i) Having M = having P1 or P2. 
But (i) doesn't imply the following (ii), and it is clearly prema­
ture to think that the two say the same thing: 
(ii) Property M = disjunctive property P1 v P2• 
As we saw earlier, the reason is simply that the II or" in (i) is 
sentence disjunction. Thus what (i) says is that the fact that 
something has M amounts to the fact that it has P1 or it has P2; 
it doesn't say that the fact that something's having M comes to 
its having a disjunctive property P1 v P2. At this point there is 
no reason to think that such a property exists, as the semantic 
value of the disjunctive predicate "has P1 v P2." And there is no 
reason to think that we have, or need, a disjunction as a predi­
cate forming device. For most purposes the "or" that appears 
to disjoin predicates seems perfectly well understood as abbre­
viating sentence disjunctions; thus "The ball is red or white" is 
short for "The ball is red or the ball is white," and the semantics 
of sentences like this does not require disjunctive properties, like 
being red v white, any more than the sentence "She ate a 
hamburger or a hotdog" requires disjunctive snacks. 
But why shouldn't we help ourselves with disjunctive proper­
ties? If M can be saved only as a disjunctive property, perhaps 
that is good enough reason to allow disjunctive properties. I will 
not rehearse here the well-known general arguments against 
disjunctive properties.24 These general arguments are fine as far 
as they go, but I don't think they go far enough, and moreover 
they depend excessively on intuitive judgments whose import is 
often not very clear. Instead, I'll present some considerations 
against disjunctive properties that are more directly appropriate 
to the present context. 
Let us first consider disjunctive properties in a causal/ 
explanatory context. Suppose that a certain medical symptom 
can be caused by two quite different pathological conditions. For 
example, both rheumatoid arthritis and lupus cause pains in the 
joints (or so I have heard). Suppose Mary has painful joints, and 
tests indicate that she has either lupus or rheumatoid arthritis,

--- Page 120 ---

108 Chapter 4 
but we don't know which. Consider the following "deductive­
nomological" argument (a "Hempelian" explanation): 
Rheumatoid arthritis causes painful joints. 
So does lupus. 
Mary has either rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. 
Therefore Mary has painful joints. 
Do we have here an explanation of why Mary is experiencing 
pains in her joints? Do we know what is causing her pains? I 
think there is a perfectly clear and intelligible sense in which 
we don't as yet have an explanation: what we have is a disjunc­
tion of two explanations, not a single disjunctive explanation. What 
I mean is this: we have two possible explanations, and we know 
that one or the other is the correct one but not which it is. What 
we have, I claim, is not an explanation with a "disjunctive 
cause," having rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.25 There are no 
such "disjunctive diseases." 
At this point, one might object as follows: there are several 
types of lupus (as I understand it, lupus erythematosus and 
lupus vulgaris are the two principal types), so my point could 
be iterated for these subkinds of lupus, their subkinds, and so 
on, ad infinitum. My reply: if lupus erythematosus and lupus 
vulgaris are indeed different diseases, my point should apply to 
lupus as well. But that doesn't mean that it can be indefinitely 
iterated; not all subdivisions of a disease yield different diseases 
(for example, lupus in unemployed males and lupus in female 
government workers are not different diseases). And my point 
does not depend on there being an absolute, context-inde­
pendent classificatory scheme for diseases. The point is that on 
whatever scheme of classification that is operative in a given 
context, disjunctions of diseases on that scheme will not auto­
matically count, and usually will not count, as diseases in that 
context. 
This point is related to a point I have argued elsewhere,26 to 
the effect that the disjunction of heterogeneous properties can 
fail to be projectible nomic properties. I will briefly summarize

--- Page 121 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 109 
the argument: suppose that we want to verify the "disjunctive 
law": 
(D) Patients with either rheumatoid arthritis or lupus 
experience pains in their joints 
and have accumulated numerous (say, one million) positive 
instances, that is, people who have one or the other disease and 
have painful joints, and no negative instances. Do these obser­
vations confirm the putative law? Not necessarily. For suppose 
that it turns out that all one million positive instances we have 
examined are exclusively persons with rheumatoid arthritis, 
and none with lupus. If this turns out to be the case, we would 
not, and should not, regard the putative disjunctive law as well 
confirmed. In fact this "law" is logically equivalent to the con­
junction of the following two laws: 
Patients with arthritis have painful joints 
Patients with lupus have painful joints. 
Our observed samples have nothing to do with the law about 
lupus and painful joints. If our data confirmed the disjunctive 
law, they should also confirm this second law, which is logically 
implied by it. So the disjunctive antecedent of the alleged law 
fails to be projectible and should not be considered a nomic 
kind. What we have in (D) is properly thought of as a conjunc­
tion of two laws, not a single law with a disjunctive antecedent. 
These reflections show the close associations that exist between 
ideas like being a projectible nomic kind, being a kind of event, and 
being eligible as a cause (thus, being citable as a cause in a causal 
explanation). 
Thus, if we insist on having M as a disjunctive property, we 
may end up with a property that is largely useless. What good 
would it do to keep it as a property when it is not a projectible 
kind that can figure in laws, and cannot serve in causal ex­
planations? Moreover there is a further related point to con­
sider: Ex hypothesi, P1 and P2 are heterogeneous kinds, and if

--- Page 122 ---

110 Chapter 4 
heterogeneity is going to mean anything significant, it must 
mean causal/nomic heterogeneity. Now, any instance of M must 
be either a Pi-instance or a Prinstance, and this means that 
instances of M are not going to show the kind of causal/ 
nomological homogeneity we expect from a scientific kind. In 
short, multiply realizable properties are causally and nomologi­
cally heterogeneous kinds, and this at bottom is the reason for 
their inductive unprojectibility and ineligibility as causes.27 
I believe these considerations strengthen the case made earlier 
for eschewing the talk of functional properties in favor of func­
tional concepts and expressions. What lends unity to the talk of 
dormitivity and such is conceptual unity, not the unity of some 
underlying property. Qua property, dormitivity is heterogene­
ous and disjunctive, and it lacks the kind of causal homogeneity 
and projectibility that we demand from kinds and properties 
useful in formulating laws and explanations. But dormitivity 
may well serve important conceptual and epistemic needs, by 
grouping properties that share features of interest to us in a 
given context of inquiry. 
So where does all this leave us as regards reduction and re­
ductionism? Let M be a mental property (or any other property 
in consideration for reduction), and let us suppose how we 
should view the situation when the functional model of reduc­
tion is brought to bear on M (and its cohort). A functional reduc­
tion of M requires the functionalization of M; let us assume that 
this has been done. We also assume that M has multiple physical 
realizers in different species and structures and can have differ­
ent realizers in different possible worlds. The reduction consists 
in identifying M with its realizer P; relative to the species or 
structure under consideration (also relative to the reference 
world). Thus Mis P1 in species 1, P2 in species 2, and so on. Given 
that each instance of M has exactly the causal powers of its 
realizer on that occasion ("the causal inheritance principle"), all 
the causal/ explanatory work done by an instance of M that 
occurs in virtue of the instantiation of realizer P1 is done by P1, 
and similarly for other instances of M and their realizers. In fact 
each instance of M is an instance of P1, or of P2, or ... , where

--- Page 123 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 111 
the Ps are M's realizers. This contrasts with Nagelian reduction 
via bridge laws in which M only nomologically correlates with 
P1 in species 1 but remains distinct from it, and similarly for P2, 
and so on. 
In this way multiply realized properties are sundered into 
their diverse realizers in different species and structures, and in 
different possible worlds. To those who want to hang onto them 
as unified and robust properties in their own right, this no doubt 
comes as a disappointment. But I believe that the conclusion to 
which we have been led is inescapable, as long as we accept the 
causal inheritance principle and seriously believe in multiple 
realization.28 
Before concluding this section let us briefly consider how the 
explanatory question is answered by functionalist reduction in 
the context of multiple realization. You may recall that we found 
Nagel reduction to fall short as explanatory reduction on account 
of its failure to explain the bridge laws-that is, explain why M 
occurs just when P occurs, where M H P is a bridge law. When 
I dealt with this question in regard to functional reduction, I said 
that if P is M's unique realizer, the functional reduction of M to 
P motivates identification of M with P, and that this solves the 
explanatory question. Now the situation of course is different if 
M has multiple distinct realizers-say, P1 and P2-since the iden­
tification of M with either P1 or P2 is out of the question. And we 
saw some pitfalls in recognizing the disjunctive property P1 v P2 
with which to identify M. I also urged that M be viewed as a 
concept, not a property in the world; however, this is to duck the 
issue-we need a more straightforward answer. So what should 
we say about the explanatory question if we are to recognize M 
as a property with multiple realizers, P1 and P2? I believe there 
are perfectly satisfying answers to various explanatory questions 
that can be raised about the relationship between Mand P1 (or 
P2). Why does a systems instantiate M at t? Because it is instan­
tiating P1 at t, and P1 is a realizer of Min systems of the kind that 
sis-that is, having Mis, by definition, to have some property 
with causal specification Hand in systems likes, P1 meets spe­
cification H. Why do these systems instantiate M not M*

--- Page 124 ---

112 Chapter 4 
whenever they instantiate P1? Because in systems like these, P1 
is a realizer of M but not of M*. And so on. It seems to me clear 
that these are satisfying answers, and that to answer the explana­
tory question it is not necessary for functional reduction to yield 
general property identities. 
The Supervenience Argument Revisited 
In the third lecture, as you may recall, I left the generalization 
argument without a final resolution. To refresh your memory, 
the generalization argument is intended to show that the prob­
lem of mental causation is nothing to worry about because the 
same considerations lead to exactly parallel problems for all 
special science properties, not just psychological properties. The 
part of this argument that has been left unresolved is this: in 
my second lecture, I tried to generate a problem for mental 
causation from the doctrine of mind-body supervenience-this 
was the supervenience argument. The objection to this argu­
ment to which I need to respond, then, runs as follows: the 
supervenience argument seems to exploit only the fact or as­
sumption of mind-body supervenience, having nothing to do 
with any special characteristic of the mental or of the physical. 
Consider now special-science properties like biological and 
chemical properties: these too supervene on basic physical prop­
erties-in fact there is even stronger reason to believe in super­
venience for these properties than for mental properties (after 
all, there is still no consensus on whether qualia supervene on 
the physical). But there seems to be no particular problem about 
biological causation or chemical causation-causal relations in­
volving biological or chemical properties; hence the superven­
ience of X on physical properties cannot generate difficulties for 
the causal efficacy of X, and this clearly applies to mental 
properties. This is the core of the generalization argument, 
something that still needs to be dealt with. 
I will approach the issues somewhat obliquely. Let us begin 
by considering the idea of a physical property-what makes a 
property a physical property. In raising this question, I am not

--- Page 125 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 113 
seeking a definition or a general criterion. The question I am 
interested in is rather this: Assuming that the usual properties 
and magnitudes that figure in our basic physics are physical 
properties, what other properties are to be counted as belonging 
to the physical domain? When we speak of physical properties 
in discussing the mind-body problem, we standardly include 
chemical, biological, and neural properties among physical 
properties as part of the physical domain. Without invoking a 
general criterion of what counts as physical and what counts as 
nonphysical, can we give some principled ground for this prac­
tice? And when we speak of the causal closure of the physical 
domain, just what is being included in the physical domain, and 
why? We assume that the properties of basic physics are in this 
domain, but what else gets in there and why? 
There is a tendency among antireductionist philosophers, es­
pecially those who invoke the generalization argument to escape 
the problem of mental causation, to construe the physical do­
main excessively narrowly, without good reason. Perhaps the 
standard micro-macro hierarchical model encourages the idea 
that the causally closed physical domain includes only the basic 
particles and their properties and relations. But this is a ground­
less assumption. Plainly the physical domain must also include 
aggregates of basic particles, aggregates of these aggregates, and 
so on, without end; atoms, molecules, cells, tables, planets, com­
puters, biological organisms, and all the rest must be, without 
question, part of the physical domain. What then of properties? 
What properties, in addition to the properties and relations of 
basic particles, are to be allowed into the physical domain-that 
is, to be counted among physical properties? Obviously mass of 
one kilogram should be allowed in, although no basic particle 
has this property, aggregates of basic particles can have this 
property, and it clearly is a physical property. 
But why is having a mass of one kilogram a physical property? 
Perhaps it's silly to ask this question, but there is an answer that 
may be instructive: because it is a micro-based property whose 
constituents are physical properties and relations. We can think 
of this property as the property of being made up of proper

--- Page 126 ---

114 Chapter 4 
parts, a;, each with a mass of m;, where the ms sum to one 
kilogram. And it seems appropriate to assume that the physical 
domain is closed under formation of micro-based properties: if 
P is a micro-based property of having parts ai, ... , an, such that 
P1(a1), ... , Pn(an), and R(ai, ... , an), then Pis a physical property 
provided that P1, ... , P2, and R are physical properties (and 
relations), and each a; is a basic particle or an aggregate of basic 
particles. 
On this understanding, being a water molecule is a physical 
property, and being composed of water molecules (that is, being 
water) is also a physical property. It is important that these 
micro-based properties are counted as physical, for otherwise 
the physical domain won't be causally closed. Having a mass of 
one kilogram has causal powers that no smaller masses have, 
and water molecules, or the property of being water, have causal 
powers not had by individual hydrogen and oxygen atoms. 
Are there other properties to be allowed in? Consider second­
order properties. Given our discussion thus far of second-order 
properties and their realizers, it seems entirely proper to count 
as physical any second-order property defined over physical 
properties. Thus, if D is a set of physical properties, any property 
defined over D by existential quantification, in the manner of 
"the property of having some property Pin D such that H(P)," 
where "H" specifies a condition on members of D, is also a 
physical property. Something further perhaps needs to be said 
about the vocabulary in which the condition H is specified, but 
we may assume that causal and nomological concepts belong in 
the permissible vocabulary.29 If so, functional properties over 
physical properties count as physical. I earlier recommended 
that we give up talk of second-order properties in favor of sec­
ond-order property designators. If this recommendation is ac­
cepted, the closure condition on second-order properties may be 
appropriately rephrased so that it applies to property designa­
tors-what is to count as a physical property designator. 
We therefore have three closure conditions on the physical 
domain: first, any entity aggregated out of physical entities is 
physical; second, any property that is formed as micro-based

--- Page 127 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 115 
properties in terms of entities and properties in the physical 
domain is physical; third, any property defined as a second­
order property over physical properties is physical. Are there 
other closure conditions? I am not sure. Conjunctive properties, 
if we want to allow them, may be handled as a special case of 
micro-based properties (if we waive the condition that the con­
stituents of a micro-based property must be proper constituents): 
the property of having P & Q is the property of being composed 
of parts a1 and a2, where a1 = a2 such that a1 is P and a2 is Q.30 But 
disjunction and complementation (negation) are not in yet; as we 
saw with disjunctive properties, these operations give rise to 
some complicated considerations that we need not go into for 
the present purposes. 
What we have is enough to let in chemical properties. So­
called dispositional properties seem to get in either as second­
order properties or micro-based properties. If transparency is 
taken as the property of passing light beams through without 
altering them, it counts as a second-order functional property. If 
transparency is identified with some microstructure, it will qual­
ify as a micro-based property. The same can be said of such 
properties as water-solubility, ductility, thermal conductivity, 
inflammability, and the like. How about biological properties? 
Without going into details, I believe they behave like chemical 
properties: they qualify as physical in virtue of one or the other 
of two closure rules on physical properties. Being a cell may be 
a micro-based property; being a heart may be a second-order 
functional property (i.e., being a heart is plausibly viewed as 
being an organ/ device with powers to pump blood). But being 
the kind of physical/biological structure that a human heart 
is may be a micro-based property. Actually the distinction be­
tween micro-based and functional properties is probably not 
sharp or absolute; for example, there surely can be micro-based 
properties some of whose constituent properties are functional 
properties. 
As we saw earlier (chapter 2), functional properties, as second­
order properties, do not bring new causal powers into the world: 
they do not have causal powers that go beyond the causal

--- Page 128 ---

116 Chapter 4 
powers of their first-order realizers. According to the causal 
inheritance principle,31 the causal powers of an instance of a 
second-order property are identical with (or a subset of) the 
causal powers of the first-order realizer that is instantiated on 
that occasion. This means that second-order properties represent 
heterogeneous causal powers, but none that go beyond the 
causal powers of the first-order properties already in our domain 
over which they are defined. There are therefore no special prob­
lems about the causal powers of functional properties. And if 
any mental properties turn out to be functional properties, there 
are no special problems about their causal roles either. This fits 
nicely with the model of reduction we have urged: reduction is 
essentially functionalization, and if the mental is reduced to the 
physical, we should expect no special problem about its causal 
powers. As we just saw, the functionalization of mental prop­
erties enables them to escape the supervenience argument. 
According to the view being urged here, functional mental prop­
erties turn out, on account of their multiple realization, to be 
causally heterogeneous but not causally impotent. This solves 
the problem of causal efficacy for functionalizable mental prop­
erties. It is those mental properties that resist functionalization 
that present difficulties when we try to give an account of their 
causal powers. So long as we think there possibly are nonfunc­
tionalizable mental properties, for example, qualia, which none­
theless supervene on physical properties, we are faced with the 
problem of mental causation. 
What of the causal powers of micro-based physical properties? 
These properties are, by their construction, supervenient on 
configurations of more basic, lower-level physical properties and 
relations. And if we assume that properties are primarily indi­
viduated in terms of causal powers, we must also consider their 
causal powers to be supervenient in the same way. But 
mereological supervenience is not mereological reduction of 
causal powers to those of their parts: the causal powers of the 
supervening property P may be fixed, or determined, by the causal 
powers of the properties and relations, P1, •.• , P2, R, that figure

--- Page 129 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 117 
in P's construction as a micro-based property, but they need not 
be, and are not likely to be, identical with the causal powers of 
these constituent properties and relations. There is a world of 
difference between determination and identity.32 Moreover we 
must distinguish both determination and identity from explain­
ability. It may be that the causal powers of a micro-based prop­
erty may be determined by its microstructural details but we 
may not be able to explain-in fact there may be no explanation 
of-why a property so microconstituted should have just these 
causal powers. This would be another way in which a macro­
property may be emergent. Further the fact that we can micro­
structurally explain why a micro-based property has a certain 
set of causal powers does not mean that these causal powers are 
identical with the causal powers of its micro-constituents. Micro­
reductively explainable causal powers may be new causal pow­
ers, net additions to the causal structure of the world. None of 
this is in conflict with the basic commitments of physicalism. 
Physicalism need not be, and should not be, identified with 
micro-physicalism. 
This means that the case of micro-based properties is not at all 
parallel to the case of supervenient psychological properties. In 
the latter case the physical base properties, presumably certain 
neurobiological properties, are at the same level as the psycho­
logical properties: they are both had by human beings and other 
sentient creatures. This is part of what generates the problem 
about mental causation: the causal role of a mental property had 
by me is threatened with preemption by another property, a 
neural property, also had by me. My causal powers seem fully 
explicable not only in terms of but also as the causal powers of 
my neural/biological/ physical properties. 
Difficulties of this sort do not arise for micro-based properties 
in relation to their constituent properties because the former 
do not supervene on the latter taken individually or as a 
group. Rather, they supervene on specific mereological configura­
tions involving these microproperties-for a rather obvious 
and uninteresting reason: they are identical with these

--- Page 130 ---

118 Chapter 4 
micro-configurations. Now it is an interesting question whether 
or not the causal powers of a given micro-based property can be 
calculated, or predicted, on the basis of the causal powers of its 
micro-constituents and the way they are configured. This is an­
other side of the question of explainability alluded earlier, and 
it is closely tied to the debate on property emergence. There is 
more to be said about micro-based properties, their causal pow­
ers, and the status of scientific theories about them, but we must 
move on.33 
It follows then that we must grant novel causal powers to 
micro-based properties at higher levels-novel in the sense that 
these causal powers are not had by any lower-level properties 
that constitute them. And, as we saw, the supervenience argu­
ment does not apply to them, and their causal roles are not 
threatened by the supervenience argument. 
What all this means is that the supervenience argument would 
generalize only to those nonmental properties, if any, that are 
supervenient on other properties (at the same level) but that 
resist functionalization in terms of their base properties. And as 
noted, the argument does not apply to micro-based properties. 
If we think of functionalization as reduction, as I recommended, 
the problem of mental causation generalizes to supervenient 
properties that are not reducible to their base properties. 
The Options: Good News and Bad News 
This gives us stark choices. If we are prepared to go for a 
functionalization of all mental properties, we will be embracing 
an all-encompassing reductionism about the mental, and this 
will solve the problem of mental causation. That's the good 
news. On a reductionist position of this sort, however, the causal 
powers of mental properties turn out to be just those of their 
physical realizers, and there are no new causal powers brought 
into the world by mental properties. Many will consider that 
bad news. But the real bad news is that some mental properties, 
notably phenomenal properties of conscious experiences, seem 
to resist functionalization, and this means that there is no way

--- Page 131 ---

Reduction and Reductionism: A New Look 119 
to account for their causal efficacy within a physicalist scheme. 
These properties are not able to overcome the supervenience 
argument. 
If we hold out on functionalization for at least a selected group 
of mental properties, we come to a choice point with two 
branches: you take the first branch if you want to stay with 
physicalism (at least to the extent of respecting the physical 
causal closure), and take the second if you decide to abandon 
physicalism in favor of a serious form of dualism (you will need 
at least to abandon mind-body supervenience, and may have to 
consider substantival dualism as a serious option). Going back 
to the physicalist branch, if you stay with physicalism, you come 
to another choice point: either you retain supervenient and yet 
irreducible (that is, nonfunctionalizable) mental properties, say 
qualia, but accept their causal impotence, or you embrace mental 
eliminativism and deny the reality of these irreducible proper­
ties. Either way you lose-again, bad news. 
The bad news continues: there may really be not much differ­
ence between these two options, eliminativism and epipheno­
menalism. For a plausible criterion for distinguishing what is 
real from what is not real is the possession of causal power. As 
Samuel Alexander said, something that "has nothing to do, no 
purpose to serve" -that is, something with no causal power­
" might as well, and undoubtedly would in time, be abolished."34 
So on Alexander's criterion of what is real, eliminativism and 
epiphenomenalism both come to pretty much the same thing: 
mental irrealism. But one might ask: Is the reductionist option 
much better? Doesn't it lead to the conclusion that the mental 
has no distinctive role of its own, having been entirely absorbed 
into the physical domain? That again may seem to some as a 
form of mental irrealism, and one might think it makes no sense 
to save mental causation while relinquishing mentality as a dis­
tinctive reality.35 So the only piece of good news may turn into 
just more bad news. So all roads branching out of physicalism 
may in the end seem to converge at the same point, the irreality 
of the mental. This should come as no surprise: we should 
remember that physicalism, as an overarching metaphysical

--- Page 132 ---

120 Chapter 4 
doctrine about all of reality, exacts a steep price. I don't know 
how to convince you of this, but it seems clear to me that pre­
serving the mental as part of the physical world is far better than 
epiphenomenalism or outright eliminativism. 
At any rate, what is becoming increasingly clear from the 
continuing debate over the mind-body problem is that currently 
popular middle-of-the-road positions, like property dualism, 
anomalous monism, and nonreductive physicalism, are not eas­
ily tolerated by robust physicalism. To think that one can be a 
serious physicalist and at the same time enjoy the company of 
things and phenomena that are nonphysical, I believe, is an idle 
dream. Reductive physicalism saves the mental but only as a 
part of the physical. If what I have argued in these lectures is in 
the right ballpark, that is what we should expect from physical­
ism. And that is what we should have expected all along. Physi­
calism cannot be had on the cheap. 
It will be premature, however, to conclude that an all-out 
dualism offers a more realistic chance of saving the mental. For 
most of us, dualism is an uncharted territory, and we have little 
knowledge of what possibilities and dangers lurk in this dark 
cavern.36

--- Page 133 ---

Notes 
Chapter 1 
1. Herbert Feigl, "The 'Mental' and the 'Physical'," Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, vol. 2, ed. Herbert Feig!, Grover Maxwell, and Michael
Scriven (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958). J. J. C. Smart,
"Sensations and Brain Processes," Philosophical Review 68 (1959): 141-156.
2.U. T. Place, "ls Consciousness a Brain Process?" Part I, British Journal of 
Psychology 47 (1956): 44-50.
3.Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949). Ludwig
Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1953). C. D. Broad, The Mind and Its Place in Nature (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1925).
4.In "Psychological Predicates," first published in 1968 and later reprinted
under the title "The Nature of Mental States," in Hilary Putnam, Collected 
Papers II (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975). The argument,
briefly, is that mental states can, and do, have vastly diverse physical/
biological realizations in different species and structures (for example, the
neural realizer of pain in humans presumably is quite different from its
realizer in mollusks) and, in consequence, that no mental state can be
identified with any (single) physical/biological state. For more details, see
my "Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction," reprinted in
Supervenience and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
5. In "Mental Events," first published in 1970 and reprinted in Davidson,
Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980).
6.One of Davidson's early papers on anomalous monism carries the title
"Psychology as Philosophy" (reprinted in his Essays on Actions and Events).
This presumably was meant to contrast with "psychology as a science."
7.What some philosophers take to be token physicalism appears to differ from
Davidson's monism. Their token physicalism identifies mental property in­
stances with physical property instances, where an "instance" of property Fis
like a trope of F (or an f-exemplification as an event, a la the theory of
events as property exemplifications), rather than something (an event, ob­
ject) that has or instantiates F. This form of token physicalism is, in fact,

--- Page 134 ---

122 Notes to Pages 5-9 
rather like what I have called "multiple-type physicalism" in Supervenience 
and Mind, pp. 364ff. 
8. Essays on Actions and Events, p. 214. 
9. In fact there is a question whether the anomalism of the mental is consistent 
with mind-body supervenience. It is arguable that any supervenience rela­
tion that can support a claim of dependence of the supervenient on the 
subvenient must be some form of "strong supervenience" (see below), and 
that the strong supervenience of the mental on the physical is inconsistent 
with the denial of lawlike connections between the two domains. For further 
details, see my "Concepts of Supervenience" in Supervenience and Mind 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). Davidson himself later 
opted for "weak supervenience" (see his "Thinking Causes," in Mental 
Causation, ed. John Heil and Alfred Mele, Oxford: Clarendon, 1993, p. 4n.4). 
This makes his supervenience claim consistent with his anomalism; how­
ever, it throws in doubt his claim of mental-physical dependence. 
10. On the ambiguous metaphysical stance of functionalism concerning the 
mind-body problem, see Ned Block's "Introduction: What Is Functional­
ism?" in Readings in Philosophy of Psychology, vol. 1, ed. Block (Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1980). It is interesting to note that some function­
alists (such as David Armstrong and David Lewis) thought they were 
defending type physicalism, whereas others (such as Putnam and Fodor) 
thought they were refuting it. 
1 l. The first philosophical use of this term (roughly in its current sense) that I 
know of is in Hilary Putnam's "Minds and Machines," in Dimensions of Mind, 
ed. Sydney Hook (New York: New York University Press, 1960). 
12. In his "Anti-Reductionism Slaps Back," Philosophical Perspectives 11 (1997): 
107-132. 
13. I have argued elsewhere that classic emergentism is appropriately taken as 
the first articulation of nonreductive physicalism. See my "The Nonreduc­
tivist's Troubles with Mental Causation," in Supervenience and Mind (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
14. See, for example, John R. Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1992). Another sign of new interest in emergence is the recent 
volume of essays on emergence, Emergence or Reduction? ed. Ansgar Beck­
ermann, Hans Flohr, and Jaegwon Kim (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992). 
15. For example, Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch, The 
Embodied Mind (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993). See especially part IV entitled 
"Varieties of Emergence." At the time of this writing, I know of two new 
volumes of papers on emergence, mostly by scientists from various disci­
plines, that are being prepared for publication in Europe (in France and 
Denmark). The topic of the 1997 Oberlin Philosophy Colloquium was 
"Emergence and Reductionism." 
16. I give emergence fuller discussion in "Making Sense of Emergence," forth­
coming in Philosophical Studies.

--- Page 135 ---

Notes to Pages 10-16 123 
17.David Lewis, "New Work for a Theory of Universals," Australasian Journal
of Philosophy 61 (1983): 343-377.
18.Or, if you have qualms about their equivalence, it is safe enough to assume
that anyone who accepts one would also accept the other. For more details
on this issue, see my '"Strong' and 'Global' Supervenience Revisited," re­
printed in Supervenience and Mind, and Brian McLaughlin, "Varieties of
Supervenience," in Supervenience: New Essays, ed. E. Savellos and Umit D.
Yalcin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). McLaughlin's essay
is a comprehensive and useful survey and analysis of supervenience con­
cepts-an indispensable guide to supervenience.
19.See, for example, John Post, The Faces of Existence (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1987), and my "Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept" in Super­
venience and Mind.
20.Mind-body supervenience is not excluded even by substance dualism.
21.On the need for explaining supervenience relations, see Terence Horgan,
"Supervenience and Cosmic Hermeneutics," Southern Journal of Philosophy
22, suppl. (1984), 19-38, and Terence Horgan and Mark Timmons, "Troubles
on Moral Twin Earth: Moral Queerness Revisited," Synthese 92 (1992): 221-
260; Horgan, "From Supervenience to Superdupervenience," Mind 102
(1993): 555-586. As far as I know, Horgan was the first to stress why it is
important for the physicalist to give a physicalist account of mind-body
supervenience. Also it was Horgan 
who first suggested the functionalizabil­
ity of mental properties as a possible explanation of their supervenience; see
the paper by Horgan and Timmons cited above.
22.There are forms of dualism, for example, Spinozistic double-aspect theory
and Leibniz's doctrine of preestablished harmony, that are consistent with
supervenience as property covariation but not with full-fledged superven­
ience that includes asymmetric dependence. We may also note that although
emergentism appears to be committed to mind-body supervenience, it is by
no means clear that another of its basic tenets, namely the doctrine of
"downward causation," is consistent with the supervenience thesis. See my
'"Downward Causation' in Emergentism and Nonreductive Physicalism,"
in Emergence or Reduction?, ed. A. Beckermann, H. Flohr, and J. Kim (Berlin:
De Gruyter, 1992).
23.The layered model as such of course does not need to posit a bottom level;
it is consistent with an infinitely descending series of levels.
24.In his work on vision David Marr famously distinguishes three levels of
analysis: the computational, the algorithmic, and the implementational. See
his Vision (New York: Freeman Press, 1982). The emergentists, early in this
century, appear to have been first to give an explicit formulation of the
layered model; for example, see C. Lloyd Morgan, Emergent Evolution (Lon­
don: Williams and Norgate, 1923). For a particularly clear and useful state­
ment of the model, see Paul Oppenheim and Hilary Putnam, "Unity of

--- Page 136 ---

124 Notes to Pages 16-20 
Science as a Working Hypothesis," Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of 
Science, vol. 2 (1958). 
25.Although a bit too restrictive; see my "Supervenience for Multiple Do­
mains," reprinted in Supervenience and Mind.
26.If we assume that there is a bottom level, everything will have a unique
decomposition into bottom-level entities, and the following should be prov­
able: if x and y are micro-indiscernible with respect to their decompositions
into bottom-level entities, they are micro-indiscernible.
27.We will leave the modal force of this claim unspecified. Depending on the
modality one favors (nomological, metaphysical, conceptual, etc.), different
versions of physical realizationism will emerge. The discussion to follow is 
by and large independent of this issue.
28.Standard versions of functionalism would also include mental states in the
outputs; for example, in the case of pain such mental states as a sense of
distress and a desire to be rid of it. For expository simplicity we ignore this
complication here.
29.Hilary Putnam is responsible for both the functionalist conception of men­
tality and the general idea of a second-order property. On the latter see his
"On Properties," in Philosophical Papers, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1975). Given that the father of functionalism also introduced
the notion of second-order property, it is ironic that this notion did not enter
the discussion of functionalism until Ned Block began using it in, for
example, "Can the Mind Change the World?" in Meaning and Method, ed.
George Boolos (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). In "On
Properties," however, Putnam did not explicitly relate the notion of realiza­
tion to that of second-order property.
30.Of course one might develop a sort of foundationalist argument to show
that if there are second-order properties, there must be properties that are
first-order in some absolute sense.
31.Whether relational/historical properties are to be included can become an
issue if wide-content properties are to be construed as second-order func­
tional properties. Also we need not exclude nonphysical properties from the
base domain: if physical realizationism is correct, no nonphysical properties
will be realizers of mental properties.
32.Alternatively, having a primary color can be defined as follows: having some
P in the set of colors such that P is a member of a minimal set of colors such
that every color can be produced by adding members of this set. As it turns
out, the second-order property defined this way has the same realizers as
the property defined in the text. Does this mean that the two properties are
in fact one and the same? The discussion to follow has certain consequences
for this question.
33.More precisely speaking, all properties P such that P is the property of being
mineral M, for every mineral kind M. To avoid verbosity, we will often use
the simpler terminology.

--- Page 137 ---

Notes to Pages 20-26 125 
34. To borrow an example from Block, "Can the Mind Change the World?" 
35. Here we must skirt various complex issues about properties: what "intrin­
sic" and "extrinsic" mean for properties, whether the intrinsic/ extrinsic 
distinction is absolute or relative, whether realizers of a functional property 
can themselves be second-order (relative to another domain), and so on. The 
hope of course is that we don't need to resolve all these issues before we 
can use the concepts involved for our present purposes. 
36. See also my "Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction," 
reprinted in Supervenience and Mind. 
37. Unless we have in mind "total realizers" in something like Sydney Shoe­
maker's sense. See his helpful distinction between "core realization" and 
"total realization," in "Some Varieties of Functionalism," reprinted in Iden­
tity, Cause, and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984). See 
also Ronald Endicott, "Constructival Plasticity," Philosophical Studies 74 
(1994): 51-75. The discussion here assumes that input and output specifica­
tions are held constant for all systems, which is a highly idealized (in fact 
evidently false) assumption. Surely what counts as pain input or pain 
output, from a purely physical point of view, differs greatly for different 
species (say, humans and octopuses), and is likely to show significant dif­
ferences even among humans. 
38. This discussion assumes that individuation of properties is independent of 
the laws in which they figure. This assumption is at least debatable, but a 
proper discussion of the issues involved is likely to be highly complex and 
must be set aside. 
39. This therefore is in opposition to the claim associated with Saul Kripke that 
such reductive identities are metaphysically necessary; see his Naming and 
Necessity (Harvard: Cambridge University Press, 1980). The difference de­
rives from the fact that I construe "temperature" and the like as nonrigid 
designators (in Kripke's sense). These terms are referentially stable only 
across nomologically possible worlds; we may call them "semi-rigid" or 
"nomologically rigid." 
40. See The Structure of Science (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1961), ch. 
11. 
41. See J. A. Fodor, "Special Sciences, or the Disunity of Science as a Working 
Hypothesis," Synthese 28 (1974): 97-115. 
42. In particular, outside technical discussions in philosophy of science. 
43. There are procedures called "reduction" in the sciences that appear to consist 
simply, or chiefly, in derivations, for example, the "reduction" of Kepler's 
laws of planetary motion to Newtonian mechanics and law of gravitation, 
the "reduction" of Newtonian physics to relativistic physics by taking cer­
tain parameters to assume, or approach, certain extremal values. Note, 
however, that none of these cases involve Nagelian bridge laws in a non­
trivial sense.

--- Page 138 ---

126 Notes to Pages 29-34 
Notes to Chapter 2 
1. For Pierre Gassendi's vigorous challenge to Descartes, see Rene Descartes,
The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 2, ed. John Cottingham, Robert
Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1985), p. 238.
2."Making Mind Matter More," reprinted in A Theory of Content and Other
Essays (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990), p. 156.
3. Davidson, "Mental Events," reprinted in Essays on Actions and Events (Ox­
ford: Oxford University Press, 1980). For wholly different considerations in
favor of mental anomalism, see Norman Malcolm, Memory and Mind (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1977), and Bruce Goldberg, "The Correspondence
Hypothesis," Philosophical Review 77 (1968): 439-454.
4.This condition is not as widely accepted as it used to be. All known alter­
natives have their own difficulties, however, and it is fair to say that the
nomological conception of causation, in its many variants, is still "the re­
ceived view." 
5. To cite a few of the papers in which this issue has been raised, Frederick
Stoutland, "Oblique Causation and Reasons for Action," Synthese 43 (1980):
351-367; Ted Honderich, "The Argument for Anomalous Monism," Analysis
42 (1982): 59-64; Ernest Sosa, "Mind-Body Interaction and Supervenient
Causation," Midwest Studies in Philosophy 9 (1984): 271-281; Jaegwon Kim,
"Self-understanding and Rationalizing Explanations," Philosophia Natura/is
82 (1984): 309-320; Louise Antony, "Anomalous Monism and the Problem
of Explanatory Force," Philosophical Review 98 (1989): 153-187. Davidson
defends his position in "Thinking Causes," in Mental Causation, ed. John
Heil and Alfred Mele (Oxford: Clarendon, 1993). This volume also includes
rejoinders to Davidson by Kim, Sosa, and Brian McLaughlin.
6.This remains true even if Davidson's "strict law" requirement on causation
is weakened so that nonstrict laws (or ceteris paribus laws)-including non­
strict psychophysical laws-are allowed to support causal relations. For
suppose that m falls under mental kind M and that there is a nonstrict law
connecting M with P (or another physical kind P* under which p falls).
Might this show M to be efficacious in m's causation of p? Hardly, for given
that m's causation of p is covered by the strict law connecting N and P, what
further causal work is left for M, or the law connecting M and P? This is a
form of "the exclusion problem;" see below for further discussion.
7. Brian McLaughlin calls this "type epiphenomenalism" in "Type Epipheno­
menalism, Type Dualism, and the Causal Priority of the Physical," Philo­
sophical Perspectives 3 (1989): 109-135.
8. Jerry A. Fodor, "Making Mind Matter More," Philosophical Topics 17 (1989):
59-80. In his "Thinking Causes" (in Mental Causation, ed. Heil and Mele),
Davidson seems to buy into Fodor's proposal. To see why this won't work,
at least for Davidson, see note 6 above.

--- Page 139 ---

Notes to Pages 34--42 127 
9.Ernest LePore and Barry Loewer, "Mind Matters," Journal of Philosophy 93
(1987): 630-642.
10.Terence Horgan, "Mental Quausation," Philosophical Perspectives, 3 (1989):
47-76.
11. Davidson, "Thinking Causes," in Mental Causation, ed. Heil and Mele. For
an earlier attempt to make use of supervenience to explain mental causation,
see my "Epiphenomena! and Supervenient Causation," Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 9 (1984): 257-270; reprinted in Supervenience and Mind. I explain
why I now think this approach to be inadequate in Supervenience and Mind,
pp. 358-362.
12.See Stephen P. Stich, From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science (Cambridge:
MIT Press, 1983).
13.For a clear development of these issues, see Ned Block, "Can Mind Change
the World?" in Meaning and Method, ed. George Boolos (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1990).
14.For a more detailed statement of this argument, see Stephen P. Stich,
"Autonomous Psychology and the Belief-Desire Thesis," The Monist 61
(1978): 573-591.
15.There are well-known considerations supporting a view of this kind; see,
for example, Hilary Putnam, "The Meaning of 'Meaning'," in Philosophical
Papers, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975); Tyler Burge,
"Individualism and the Mental," Midwest Studies in Philosophy 4 (1979):
73-121; Stich," Autonomous Psychology and the Belief-Desire Thesis;" Kim,
"Psychophysical Supervenience," Philosophical Studies 41 (1982): 51-70.
16.Due to the works by Hilary Putnam, Saul Kripke, Tyler Burge, and others.
17.For instructive and helpful discussion of issues concerning the causal/
explanatory efficacy of contentful mental states, see Lynne Rudder Baker,
Explaining Attitudes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), and
Pierre Jacob, What Minds Can Do (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1997).
18.Psychosemantics (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987), p. 42.
19.Terence Horgan, "Supervenient Qualia," Philosophical Review 96 (1987): 491-
520.
20.On content externalism, wide-content states will not supervene on internal
physical properties of the subject, but physicalists will not deny that they
supervene on the subject's extrinsic/relational physical properties. For the
present paper, we will ignore the issues that arise from content externalism.
But see the works by Baker and Jacob cited in note 17.
21.On this issue see my "Postscripts on Mental 
Causation" in Supervenience and
Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
22.Strictly speaking, this doesn't go far enough: it must further be the case that
one instance causes another instance in virtue of the fact that the first is of an
F-instance and the second is a G-instance.

--- Page 140 ---

128 Notes to Pages 42-51 
23.This argument is based on what I have called "the principle of causal/
explanatory exclusion"; see, for example, my "Mechanism, Purpose, and
Explanatory 
Exclusion," reprinted in Supervenience and Mind.
24.We could have begun with (vi) as our initial premise of mental causation.
The point of starting with (iii) is to show that the argument applies to
mental-mental causation as well as to mental-physical causation. On the
assumption of mind-body supervenience, the former is as problematic, in
my view, as the latter.
25.This of course is not to assume transitivity for counterfactuals in general.
26.One philosopher who holds the unorthodox view that the base properties
"cause" the supervenient properties is John Searle, in his The Rediscovery of
the Mind (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992).
27.Note, however, that these regularities are likely to be restricted in generality.
The reason is that M's alternative supervenience bases cannot be counted
on to cause P* and hence M*.
28.On the distinction between "causal process" and "pseudo-process," see
Wesley Salmon, Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984).
29.Several philosophers have raised exactly these questions (though not nec­
essarily directed against our first argument); for example, Lynne Rudder
Baker, "Metaphysics and Mental Causation," in Mental Causation, ed. Heil
and Mele (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993); Robert Van Gulick, "Three Bad
Arguments for Intentional Property Epiphenomenalism," Erkenntnis 36
(1992); Louise M. Antony, "The Inadequacy of Anomalous Monism as a
Realist Theory of Mind," in Language, Mind, and Epistemology, ed. G. Preyer,
F.Siebelt, and A. Ulfig (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994).
30.John R. Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992).
31.The Rediscovery of the Mind, p. 107.
32.The Rediscovery of the Mind, p. 87.
33.In "Consciousness, the Brain and the Connection Principle: A Reply," Phi­
losophy and Phenomenological Research 55 (1995): 217-232. The quoted pas­
sages are from p. 219.
34.In the quotation Searle says "the same system," not "the same situation."
But it is clear that saying the former isn't enough; he must say the latter for
his reply to have the intended effect.
35."Making Mind Matter More"; the quoted passage occurs on p. 66.
36.On this point, however, see my discussion of "program explanation" in 
chapter 3.
37."Can the Mind Change the World?"
38.Well, sort of. As he points out in the paper, Block has been ambivalent about
functionalism for many years. Although he has done much to clarify the
functionalist doctrines and lend them coherence and plausibility, he is also
responsible for some of the most telling objections against functionalism. I
believe this isn't really a matter of ambivalence; it seems to me that Block

--- Page 141 ---

Notes to Pages 51-58 129 
is drawn to functionalism for cognitive mental states but has difficulty 
seeing how it can work for sensory/qualitative states ("qualia")-a position 
not unlike what I espouse in these lectures. 
39. "Can the Mind Change the World?" p. 159. 
40. Except possibly for the causal antecedents of the color itself. 
41. For similar reasons Elizabeth Prior, Robert Pargetter, and Frank Jackson 
argue for the causal impotence of dispositions, in their "Three Theses About 
Dispositions," American Philosophical Quarterly 19 (1982): 251-257. 
42. More exactly:" ... causes property K to be instantiated" or "causes events 
of kind K." For brevity, the simpler expression will often be used. 
43. Block credits Jerry Fodor with this suggestion. It would seem that this could 
happen only if sleep caused cancer, and this means that dormitivity is 
causally sufficient for cancer only because each of its realizer is. In a slightly 
different context (at the 1997 Oberlin Philosophy Colloquium) Louise An­
tony raised a point similar to Fodor's. 
44. In "Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction" reprinted in 
Supervenience and Mind. 
45. Whether the principle is to be stated in terms of identity or inclusion will 
depend on how "realizer" is understood. On a plausible construal if P is a 
realizer of F, then any stronger property P* (say, P & Q, for a nontrivial Q 
consistent with P) is also a realizer of F, and P* may have stronger causal 
powers than P, powers that we may not wish to attribute to the instance of 
F in question. This raises many interesting questions which we cannot 
pursue here. The main point, though, is that an instance of a second-order 
property cannot have causal powers beyond those of the realizing property 
involved. 
46. For example, see Sydney Shoemaker, "Causality and Properties," reprinted 
in his Identity, Cause, and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1984). Also see Fodor's Psychosemantics where he defends the principle that 
scientific kinds are individuated by causal powers. 
47. In "The Individuation of Events," reprinted in his Essays on Actions and 
Events, Davidson advocates an individuation principle for events according 
to which events with the same causal relations are one and the same event. 
48. I am indebted to Martin Jones and David Sosa for their probing comments 
on some points in this chapter that have helped me to improve it. 
Notes to Chapter 3 
1. But not entirely; see, for example, Richard Swinburne, The Evolution of the 
Soul (Oxford: Clarendon, 1986); W. D. Hart, The Engines of the Soul (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988); John Foster, The Immaterial Self 
(London: Routledge, 1991). 
2. I try to reconstruct this derivation in "Psychophysical Laws," reprinted in 
Supervenience and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

--- Page 142 ---

130 Notes to Pages 58-72 
3.See the beginning of chapter 2.
4. Tyler Burge, "Mind-Body Causation and Explanatory Practice," in Mental
Causation, ed. John Heil and Alfred Mele (Oxford: Clarendon, 1993), p. 97.
See also a shorter discussion in his "Philosophy of Language and Mind:
1950-1990," Philosophical Review 101 (1992): 3-51 (see pp. 36-39). 
5. Burge, "Mind-Body Causation and Explanatory Practice," p. 118. 
6. Lynne Rudder Baker, "Metaphysics and Mental Causation," in Mental Cau­
sation, ed. Heil and Mele, pp. 92-93. 
7. Although I think Burge goes too far when he says "Epiphenomenalism is
often taken as a serious metaphysical option," pp. 102-103, there have been
philosophers fitting his description: see, for example, Peter Bieri, "Trying
out Epiphenomenalism," Erkenntnis 36 (1992): 283-309, and Frank Jackson
and Philip Pettit's "program explanation" discussed below. 
8.Burge, p. 103. 
9. See, for example, A. I. Melden, Free Action (London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1961); A. R. Louch, Explanation and Human Action (Oxford: Blackwell,
1968); William H. Dray, Laws and Explanations in History (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1957).
10. See Donald Davidson, "Actions, Reasons, and Causes," Journal of Philosophy
60 (1963), reprinted in his Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Cleared
Press, 1980). More recently noncausalism has gained new advocates; in
particular, see George Wilson, The Intentionality of Human Action (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1989), and Carl Ginet, On Action (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990).
11.See the papers cited in 
chapter 2, note 5.
12. See for details my "Mechanism, Purpose, and Explanatory Exclusion," Philo­
sophical Perspectives 3 (1989): 77-108; reprinted in Supervenience and Mind
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
13. Burge, p. 116. 
14. Burge, p. 116. 
15. "Kim on Mental Causation and Causal Exclusion," Philosophical Perspectives
11 (1997).
16. Baker, p. 93.
17.Burge, p. 115.
18.Baker, p. 93.
19.David Lewis is an exception, but to eliminate such "back-tracking counter­
factuals," Lewis has to deploy some heavy-duty metaphysical armor. See 
Lewis, "Counterfactual Dependence and Time's Arrow" and "Causation,"
both reprinted in his Philosophical Papers II (New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1986).
20. For further discussion of the counterfactual approach, see my Philosophy of
Mind (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996), pp. 139-144.

--- Page 143 ---

Notes to Pages 72-91 131 
21. Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit, "Program Explanation: A General Perspec­
tive," Analysis 50 (1990): 107-117. See also their "Functionalism and Broad 
Content," Mind 97 (1988): 381-400. 
22. Jackson and Pettit, "Program Explanation: A General Perspective," p. 114. 
23. Ibid. 
24. Jackson and Pettit, pp. 115-116. 
25. David Lewis, "Causal Explanation," in his Philosophical Papers II (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1986), p. 217. 
26. Lewis of course works with his special notion of causal dependence defined 
in terms of counterfactuals. But we can make use of the broad ideas Lewis 
introduces, leaving open the specifics, such as an exact definition of causal 
dependence, to be settled to suit one's preferences in such matters. 
27. Burge, p. 102. 
28. Baker, p. 77. 
29. Robert Van Gulick, "Three Bad Arguments for Intentional Property Epiphe­
nomenalism," Erkcnntnis 36 (1992), p. 325. 
30. William G. Lycan, Consciousness (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987), p. 38 (em­
phasis in the original). 
31. Block, "Can the Mind Change the World?" 
32. Block, "Can the Mind Change the World?," p. 168, note 9. He says that this 
is a "real physical possibility," citing Hans Dehmelt, "Triton, ... electron, 
... cosmos, ... : An infinite regression?" Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 96 (1986): 8618; and "Experiments on the structure of an individ­
ual elementary particle," Science 247 (1990): 539-545. 
33. David Armstrong, A Theory of Universals, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1978), ch. 18. 
34. To make this more precise: the a;s, P;s, and R are implicitly existentially 
quantified in the definiens. 
35. My thanks to David Chalmers, Martin Jones, and David Sosa for helpful 
comments on the materials of this chapter. 
Notes to Chapter 4 
1. Two examples come to mind: Jerry Fodor's project of "naturalizing" content 
and Fred Dretske's externalist approach to consciousness. See Fodor's Psy­
chosemantics (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987) and Dretske's Naturalizing the 
Mind (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995). "Naturalization" doesn't offend, it 
seems, in the way "reduction" does. 
2. See Robert Causey, Unity of Science (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1977). 
3. An additional reason for wanting bridge laws to be biconditionals is to open 
the possibility of identifying properties of the theory being reduced with 
their coextensions in the base theory, for obviously unless F and G are at 
least coextensive, they cannot be identical.

--- Page 144 ---

132 Notes to Pages 92-99 
4. Notably Jerry Fodor, "Special Sciences, or the Disunity of Science as a 
Working Hypothesis," Synthese 28 (1974): 97-115. 
5. In particular, in his "Thinking Causes," in Mental Causation, ed. John Heil 
and Alfred Mele (Oxford: Clarendon, 1993). 
6. In this way, then, Davidson's antireductive argument generalizes to all the 
special sciences too. But this presumably is not an intended result. In fact, 
if we are allowed to begin with the nonexistence of strict laws outside basic 
physics as a premise, we can cut away all the complex and obscure argu­
ments Davidson marshalls in "Mental Events" and elsewhere for mental 
anomalism and reach the desired conclusion in a single step. For since strict 
laws can exist only in basic physics, there of course cannot be strict laws in 
psychology or between psychology and anything else! 
7. These are possible responses only to the availability question arising from 
considerations of multiple realization. Obviously they are not relevant to 
Davidsonian anomalism. 
8. For example, Terence Horgan, "Kim on Mental Causation and Causal Ex­
clusion," Philosophical Perspectives 11 (1997): 165-184. 
9. I believe that this is one real source of both the anomalousness of psychology 
and the existence of reasonably reliable psychological regularities. No hu­
mans are exactly alike physically, and there are always substantial anatomi­
cal-physiological differences as in members of any species. We have to 
expect-we in fact know-that these differences will show up in mental 
differences, and we cannot expect exceptionless, lawful psychological regu­
larities. This is consistent with each individual's psychology being wholly 
determined by his/her physiology and being entirely nomological taken in 
itself. Species-wide human psychology yields no exceptionless laws, only 
statistical regularities for the same reason that there are no universal laws 
applicable to, say, all automobiles, not even to all tokens of the 1992 Toyota 
Camry. 
10. This approach to reduction and reductive identification is implicit in David 
Armstrong's argument for central-state materialism in his A Materialist The­
ory of the Mind (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1968). See also Robert 
Van Gulick, "Nonreductive Materialism and the Nature of Intertheoretic 
Constraint," in Emergence or Reduction, ed. Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr 
and Jaegwon Kim (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992), and Joseph Levine, "On Leav­
ing out What It's Like," in Consciousness, ed. Martin Davies and Glyn W. 
Humphreys (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993). 
11. The following question would have occurred to astute readers at this point: 
If M is an extrinsic/relational property and P (presumably) isn't, how can 
they be one and the same property? A good question! In the terminology of 
"role" and "occupier," this question can be rephrased as follows: If Mis a 
causal role and P its occupant, how could M and P be the same property? 
How could roles be identical with their occupants? We will discuss this issue 
later.

--- Page 145 ---

Notes to Pages 99-111 133 
12. I am using "level" in its customary sense, not in my special sense in which
"level" is contrasted with "order." Thus, for example, purely derivational
reductions like the reduction of Kepler's laws to Newtonian laws do not fall
under the model being described here.
13.This apparently assumes that identity of properties is independent of the
laws (and causal relations) in which they figure, and there is a tension
between this assumption and the view, which will later come into play, that
scientific kinds and properties are fundamentally individuated in terms of
their causal powers. I believe that the two views can be reconciled but must
set this issue aside for another occasion.
14.Saul Kripke, Naming and Necessity (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1980).
15.Brian McLaughlin makes this point in his "The Rise and Fall of British
Emergentism," in Emergence or Reduction?.
16.For more details see my "Making Sense of Emergentism," forthcoming.
17.See Putnam, Representation and Reality (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988; John R.
Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind.
18.See, for example, David Chalmers, The Conscious Mind (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1996).
19.I believe that others (perhaps, Shoemaker and Block) have made a similar
observation.
20.This claim is disputed by qualia externalists; see Fred Dretske, Naturalizing
the Mind (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995), and Michael Tye, Ten Problems of
Consciousness (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995).
21.You may recall the logical jokes in Alice in Wonderland based on such errors.
22.See, for example, Jerry Fodor, Psychosemantics (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987).
23.Again I must set aside the problem of dealing with multiple realization in
the proposed scheme. A hint of how I would proceed is contained in my
"Postscripts to Mental Causation," in Supervenience and Mind.
24.See, for example, David Armstrong, A Theory of Universals, vol. 2 (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978), ch. 14.
25.This therefore is a hitherto unnoticed kind of counterexample to the D-N
model of explanation as it is standardly formulated, such as by Carl G.
Hempel and Paul Oppenheim in "Studies in the Logic of Explanation," in
Hempel, Aspects of Scientific Explanation (New York: Free Press, 1965).
26.For more details, see my "Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of
Reduction," reprinted in Supervenience and Mind.
27.For some interesting further considerations against the disjunctive approach,
see Louise Antony and Joseph Levine, "Reduction with Autonomy," Philo­
sophical Perspectives 11 (1977): 83-105.
28.The case for this is made stronger if we also assume that kinds and prop­
erties in science must be individuated in terms of causal powers, a principle
often assumed in discussions of the issues under discussion. See, for exam­
ple, Sydney Shoemaker, "Causality and Properties," in Identity, Cause, and

--- Page 146 ---

134 Notes to Pages 111-120 
Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984); Jerry Fodor, Psychose­
mantics; and my "Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction" 
in Supervenience and Mind. But this additional assumption is not needed. 
29. One could argue that the vocabulary in which H is to be specified is a 
conceptual issue not an issue about properties. 
30. 1 seem to remember David Armstrong making this point. 
31. See the end of chapter 2. 
32. Also between determination and explanation. As we saw in our discussion of 
reduction, emergentists would accept that emergent properties are deter­
mined by basal conditions but deny that the basal conditions can explain 
why just these emergent properties emerge from them. 
33. For some more details on these issues, see my "Making Sense of Emer­
gence," forthcoming. 
34. Samuel Alexander, Space, Time, and Deity (London: Macmillan, 1920), vol. 2, 
p. 8. 
35. The reductive physicalist would say that reductionism does retain mentality 
as a distinctive part of the physical domain, but its distinctiveness is physical 
distinctiveness, not some nonphysical distinctiveness. 
36. I benefited from questions and comments by David Chalmers and David 
Sosa.

--- Page 147 ---

References 
Alexander, Samuel. Space, Time, and Deity, vol. 2. London: Macmillan, 1920. 
Antony, Louise, M. "Anomalous Monism and the Problem of Explanatory 
Force." Philosophical Review 98 (1989): 153-187. 
Antony, Louise, M. "The Inadequacy of Anomalous Monism as a Realist Theory 
of Mind." In Language, Mind, and Epistemology, ed. G. Preyer, F. Siebelt, and 
A.Ulfig. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994.
Antony, Louise M., and Joseph Levine. "Reduction with Autonomy." Philosophi­
cal Perspectives 11 (1997): 83-105. 
Armstrong, David. A Materialist Theory of Mind. New York: Humanities Press, 
1968. 
Armstrong, David. A Theory of Universals, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1978. 
Baker, Lynne Rudder. "Metaphysics and Mental Causation." In Mental Causation, 
ed. Heil and Mele. 
Baker, Lynne Rudder. Explaining Attitudes. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995. 
Beckermann, Ansgar, Hans Flohr, and Jaegwon Kim, eds. Emergence or Reduc­
tion? Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992. 
Bieri, Peter. "Trying out Epiphenomenalism." Erkenntnis 36 (1992): 283-309. 
Block, Ned. "Can the Mind Change the World?" In Meaning and Method, ed. 
George Boolos. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
Block, Ned. "Introduction: What Is Functionalism?" In Readings in Philosophy of 
Psychology, vol. 1, ed. Block. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980. 
Block, Ned. "Anti-Reductionism Slaps Back." Philosophical Perspectives 11 (1997): 
107-132.
Broad, C. D. The Mind and Its Place in Nature. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1925. 
Burge, Tyler. "Mind-Body Causation and Explanatory Practice." In Mental Cau­
sation, ed. John Heil and Alfred Mele. 
Burge, Tyler. "Individualism and the Mental." Midwest Studies in Philosophy 4 
(1979): 73-121. 
Burge, Tyler. "Philosophy of Language and Mind: 1950-1990." Philosophical 
Review 101 (1992): 3-51. 
Causey, Robert. Unity of Science. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1977.

--- Page 148 ---

136 References 
Chalmers, David. The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 
Davidson, Donald. "Mental Events." 1970. Reprinted in Davidson, Essays on 
Actions and Events. 
Davidson, Donald. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. 
Davidson, Donald. "Actions, Reasons, and Causes." Journal of Philosophy 60 
(1963). Reprinted in Essays on Actions and Events. 
Davidson, Donald. "The Individuation of Events." Reprinted in Essays on Ac­
tions and Events. 
Davidson, Donald. "Psychology as Philosophy." Reprinted in Essays on Actions 
and Events. 
Davidson, Donald. "Thinking Causes." In Mental Causation, ed. John Heil and 
Alfred Mele. 
Descartes, Rene. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 2, ed. John Cotting­
ham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1985. 
Dray, William H. Laws and Explanations in History. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1957. 
Dretske, Fred. Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Endicott, Ronald. "Constructival Plasticity." Philosophical Studies 74 (1994): 51-75. 
Feig!, Herbert. "The 'Mental' and the 'Physical'." Minnesota Studies in the Phi-
losophy of Science, vol. 2, ed. Herbert Feig!, Grover Maxwell, and Michael 
Scriven. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958. 
Fodor, Jerry A. "Special Sciences, or the Disunity of Science as a Working 
Hypothesis." Synthese 28 (1974): 97-115. Reprinted in Representations. 
Fodor, Jerry A. "Making Mind Matter More." Philosophical Topics 17 (1989): 59-79. 
Reprinted in A Theory of Content and Other Essays. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1990. 
Fodor, Jerry A. Representations. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1981. 
Ginet, Ginet. On Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
Goldberg, Bruce. "The Correspondence Hypothesis." Philosophical Review 77 
(1968): 439-454. 
Heil, John. The Nature of True Minds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1992. 
Heil, John, and Alfred Mele, eds. Mental Causation. Oxford: Clarendon, 1993. 
Hempel, Carl G., and Paul Oppenheim. "Studies in the Logic of Explanation." 
Reprinted in Hempel, Aspects of Scientific Explanation. New York: Free Press, 
1965. 
Honderich, Ted. "The Argument for Anomalous Monism." Analysis 42 (1982): 
59-64. 
Horgan, Terence. "From Supervenience to Superdupervenience." Mind 102 
(1993): 555-586. 
Horgan, Terence. "Supervenience and Cosmic Hermeneutics." Southern Journal 
of Philosophy 22 (1984), suppl: 19-38.

--- Page 149 ---

References 137 
Horgan, Terence. "Mental Quausation." Philosophical Perspectives 3 (1989): 47-76. 
Horgan, Terence. "Supervenient Qualia." Philosophical Review 96 (1987): 491-520. 
Horgan, Terence. "Kim on Mental Causation and Causal Exclusion." Philosophical 
Perspectives 11 (1997): 165-184. 
Horgan, Terence, and Mark Timmons. "Troubles on Moral Twin Earth: Moral 
Queerness Revisited." Synthese 92 (1992): 221-260. 
Jackson, Frank, and Philip Pettit. "Functionalism and Broad Content." Mind 97 
(1988): 381-400. 
Jackson, Frank, and Philip Pettit. "Program Explanation: A General Perspective." 
Analysis 50 (1990): 107-117. 
Jacob, Pierre. What Minds Can Do. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Does the Problem of Mental Causation Generalize?" Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society 97 (1997): 281-297. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Psychophysical Laws." Reprinted in Supervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "What is the Problem of Mental Causation?" Norms and Structures 
in Science, ed. M. L. Dalla Chiara et al. (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997). 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Concepts of Supervenience." Reprinted in Supervenience and 
Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Mental Causation: What? Me Worry?" Philosophical Issues 6 
(1995): 123-151. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Epiphenomena! and Supervenient Causation." Midwest Studies 
in Philosophy 9 (1984): 257-270. Reprinted in Supervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Mechanism, Purpose, and Explanatory Exclusion." Philosophical 
Perspectives 3 (1989): 77-108. Reprinted in Supervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction." Re­
printed in Supervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Psychophysical Supervenience." Philosophical Studies 41 (1982): 
51-70. Reprinted in Supervenience and Mind.
Kim, Jaegwon. "Self-Understanding and Rationalizing Explanations." Philosophia 
Natura/is 82 (1984): 309-20. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "The Myth of Nonreductive Physicalism." Proceedings and Ad­
dresses of the American Philosophical Association 63 (1989): 31-47. Reprinted 
in Supervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "The Nonreductivist's Troubles with Mental Causation." In Su­
pervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. '"Downward Causation' in Emergentism and Nonreductive 
Physicalism." In Emergence or Reduction?, ed. A. Beckermann, H. Flohr, and 
J.Kim.
Kim, Jaegwon. '"Strong' and 'Global' Supervenience Revisited." Reprinted in 
Supervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept." Reprinted in Su­
pervenience and Mind. 
Kim, Jaegwon. Supervenience and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1993.

--- Page 150 ---

138 References 
Kim, Jaegwon. Philosophy of Mind. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "The Mind-Body Problem after 50 Years." Delivered at the Royal 
Institute of Philosophy, October, 1996. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "The Mind-Body Problem: Taking Stock after 40 Years," Philo­
sophical Perspectives, 11 (1997): 185-207. 
Kim, Jaegwon. "Making Sense of Emergence." Presented at the 1997 Oberlin 
Colloquium in Philosophy (forthcoming in Philosophical Studies). 
Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980. 
LePore, Ernest, and Barry Loewer. "Mind Matters." Journal of Philosophy 93 
(1987): 630-642. 
Levine, Joseph. "On Leaving out What It's Like." In Consciousness, ed. Martin 
Davies and Glyn W. Humphreys. Oxford: Blackwell, 1993. 
Lewis, David. "Counterfactual Dependence and Time's Arrow." Reprinted in 
Philosophical Papers II. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986. 
Lewis, David. "Causal Explanation." In Philosophical Papers II. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1986. 
Lewis, David. "Causation." Reprinted in Philosophical Papers II. 
Louch, A. R. Explanation and Human Action. Oxford: Blackwell, 1968. 
Lycan, William G. Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987. 
Malcolm, Norman. Memory and Mind. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977. 
Marr, David. Vision. New York: Freeman Press, 1982. 
McLaughlin, Brian. "Type Epiphenomenalism, Type Dualism, and the Causal 
Priority of the Physical." Philosophical Perspectives 3 (1989): 109-135. 
McLaughlin, Brian. "Varieties of Supervenience." In Supervenience: New Essays, 
ed. E. Savellos and Umit D. Yalcin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1995. 
McLauglin, Brian. "The Rise and Fall of British Emergentism." In Emergence or 
Reduction?, ed. Beckerman, Flohr, and Kim. 
Melden, A. I. Free Action. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961. 
Morgan, C. Lloyd. Emergent Evolution. London: Williams and Norgate, 1923. 
Nagel, Ernest. The Structure of Science. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1961. 
Oppenheim, Paul, and Hilary Putnam. "Unity of Science as a Working Hypothe-
sis." Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2, ed. H. Feig!, 
G. Maxwell, and M. Scriven. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1958. 
Place, U. T. "Is Consciousness a Brain Process?" British Journal of Psychology 47, 
Part I (1956): 44-50. 
Post, John. The Faces of Existence. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987. 
Prior, Elizabeth, Robert Pargetter, and Frank Jackson. "Three Theses About 
Dispositions." American Philosophical Quarterly 19 (1982): 251-257. 
Putnam, Hilary. "The Meaning of 'Meaning'." In Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 
Putnam, Hilary. "On Properties." In Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1975.

--- Page 151 ---

References 139 
Putnam, Hilary. "Psychological Predicates." First published in 1968 and later 
Reprinted under the title "The Nature of Mental States." In Putnam, Col­
lected Papers II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 
Putnam, Hilary. "Minds and Machines." In Dimensions of Mind, ed. Sydney 
Hook. New York: New York University Press, 1960. 
Putnam, Hilary. Representation and Reality. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988. 
Ryle, Gilbert. The Concept of Mind. London: Hutchinson and Company, Ltd., 
1949. 
Salmon, Wesley C. Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984. 
Savellos, Elias, and Umit Yalcin, eds. Supervenicnce: New Esays. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
Searle, John R. The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992. 
Searle, John R. "Consciousness, the Brain and the Connection Principle: A 
Reply." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55 (1995): 217-232. 
Shoemaker, Sydney. "Some Varieties of Functionalism." Reprinted in Identity, 
Cause, and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
Shoemaker, Sydney. "Causality and Properties." Reprinted in Identity, Cause, and 
Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
Smart, J. J. C. "Sensations and Brain Processes." Philosophical Review 68 (1959): 
141-156.
Sosa, Ernest. "Mind-Body Interaction and Supervenient Causation." Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy 9 (1984): 271-81. 
Stich, Stephen P. From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1983. 
Stich, Stephen P. "Autonomous Psychology and the Belief-Desire Thesis." The 
Monist 61 (1978): 573-591. 
Stoutland, Frederick. "Oblique Causation and Reasons for Action." Synthese 43 
(1980): 351-67. 
Tye, Michael. Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Van Gulick, Robert. "Three Bad Arguments for Intentional Property Epipheno­
menalism." Erkenntnis 36 (1992). 
Van Gulick, Robert. "Nonreductive Materialism and the Nature of Intertheoretic 
Constraint." In Emergence or Reduction, ed. Beckermann, Flohr, and Kim. 
Varela, Francisco, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. The Embodied Mind. 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993. 
von Wright, G. H. Explanation and Understanding. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1971. 
Wilson, George. The Intentionality of Human Action. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 1989.

--- Page 152 ---

Index
Alexande{, Samuel, 73, 779
Anomalous mental properties, prob-
lem of, 30, 32-35, 732n.9
and reductionism, 92-93
and supervenience, 722n.9
Anomalous monism, 3-7, 27, 33-34,
57-58, 726n.6
and metaphysics, 63
as middle-of-ro ad, 720
Antireductionism
and multiple realiz abrhty, 26
and supervenience, 4H7
Antireductionist consensus, 8
Armstrong, David, 84
Atomistic doctrine, 18
Availability questio n, 92-95
Cartesian dualism, 15, 37,39,40, 58.
See also Substance dualism
Causal compatibilism, 68
Causal exclusion, problem of , 30,
32, 37-38, 64-67
and anomalous monism, 726n.6
avoidance of, 69-70
Horgan on,68, 69
intralev el, 87
and program explanatrons, 72
and second-order properties, 53,
55
Causal explanation. See also Explana-
tion
actual causation as presupposition
of , 64,75,76
and Baker on counterfactuals, T0-
77
rival explanations, 65-66
Causal inheritance principle, 54-55,
777, 776
Causal overdetermination
and Block on second-order proper-
ties, 52-53
as multiple-causation alternative,
64-65
and Searle's biological naturalism,
4849
and supervenience argument, 44-
45
Causal relevance, vs. informational
relevance, T5
Causation, mental. See Mental causa-
tion
Baker, Lynne Rudder, 67, 62, 67 , 69-
77,79, g7
Belief-desire explanation, debate
over (1950s and 7960s), 63
Biological naturalism, 47-50
Block, Ned, 8, 51-55, 87, 84, 728-
729n.38
Brain state theory, 7, 2. See also
Rp" physicalism
Bridge laws, 2527, 90-92, 131n.3
availability question on/ 92-95
explanatory question on, 95*96,
777-772, 7L8
as identities, 97-98, 706
ontological question on, 96-97
Broad, C. D., 1
Burge, lylet 60-63, 65, 67,70, 87

--- Page 153 ---

Index 
Alexander, Samuel, 13, 119 
Anomalous mental properties, prob­
lem of, 30, 32-35, 132n.9 
and reductionism, 92-93 
and supervenience, 122n.9 
Anomalous monism, 3-7, 27, 33-34, 
57-58, 126n.6
and metaphysics, 63 
as middle-of-road, 120 
Antireductionism 
and multiple realizability, 26 
and supervenience, 46-47 
Antireductionist consensus, 8 
Armstrong, David, 84 
Atomistic doctrine, 18 
Availability question, 92-95 
Baker, Lynne Rudder, 61, 62, 67, 69-
71, 78, 81 
Belief-desire explanation, debate 
over (1950s and 1960s), 63 
Biological naturalism, 47-50 
Block, Ned, 8, 51-55, 81, 84, 128-
129n.38 
Brain state theory, 1, 2. See also 
Type physicalism 
Bridge laws, 25-27, 90-92, 131n.3 
availability question on, 92-95 
explanatory question on, 95-96, 
111-112, 118 
as identities, 97-98, 106 
ontological question on, 96-97 
Broad, C. D., 1 
Burge, Tyler, 60-o3, 65, 67, 70, 81 
Cartesian dualism, 15, 37, 39, 40, 58. 
See also Substance dualism 
Causal compatibilism, 68 
Causal exclusion, problem of, 30, 
32, 37-38, 64-67 
and anomalous monism, 126n.6 
avoidance of, 69-70 
Horgan on, 68, 69 
intralevel, 87 
and program explanations, 72 
and second-order properties, 53, 
55 
Causal explanation. See also Explana­
tion 
actual causation as presupposition 
of, 64, 75, 76 
and Baker on counterfactuals, 70-
71 
rival explanations, 65-06 
Causal inheritance principle, 54-55, 
111, 116 
Causal overdetermination 
and Block on second-order proper­
ties, 52-53 
as multiple-causation alternative, 
64-65
and Searle's biological naturalism, 
48--49 
and supervenience argument, 44-
45 
Causal relevance, vs. informational 
relevance, 75 
Causation, mental. See Mental causa­
tion

--- Page 154 ---

142 Index 
Central-state materialism, 1. See 
also Type physicalism 
Cognitive science, 3, 21-22 
and functionalism, 52 
Compatibilism, causal, 68 
Computational analogies 
as program explanation, 73 
and realization, 7 
Computationalism, 35 
Concept of Mind, The (Ryle), 1 
Consciousness 
as emergent property, 95 
Searle on, 47 
Content externalism, 127n.20 
Counterfactuals, and mental causa­
tion, 67-72 
Cross-classification, 68-69 
Davidson, Donald, 3, 4-7, 11, 27, 32-
35, 57-58, 63, 92-93 
Democritean doctrine, 18 
Descartes, Rene, 29, 57 
Cartesian dualism, 15, 37, 39, 40, 58 
and Davidson, 58 
revenge of, 46 
Disjunctive properties, 107-109 
D-N model of scientific explana­
tion, 26
counterexample to, 133n.25 
Double-aspect theory, 97 
Dualism, 120 
Cartesian, 15, 37, 39, 40, 58 
and exclusion problem, 65 
and functionalization, 119 
property, 58, 59, 60, 120 
substance (substantival), 29, 57, 59, 
60, 97, 119 
and supervenience, 123n.22 
Eliminativism, 119 
and problem of mental causation, 
:'i9 
Emergentism, 8-9, 95, 134n.32 
and functionalizability, 100 
and layered model, 15-19 
and micro-based property, 118 
and nonreductive physicalism, 
122n.13 
and qualia, 103 
and supervenience, 6, 12, 13, 38, 
123n.22 
Epiphenomenalism 
of Block, 54 
Burge on "worry" about, 60-61, 
61, 62 
and counterfactual explanation, 
70, 71 
and eliminativism, 119 
and functionalism, 52, 55 
Jackson-Pettit view as, 74 
and levels, 81 
and problem of mental causation, 59 
and supervenience, 12, 13, 46, 50, 
67, 74 
Exclusion problem. See Causal ex­
clusion, problem of 
Explanation, 76. See also Causal ex-
planation 
Hempel's D-N model of, 26 
Lewis on, 75-76 
program explanations, 72-77 
Externalism, content, 127n.20 
Extrinsic mental properties, prob-
lem of, 30, 32, 35-37 
Feig!, Herbert, 1, 2, 3 
Fodor, Jerry, 31-32, 40, 41, 50-51 
"Free lunch" solutions, 59-60 
Functionalism, 3-4, 7-8, 19, 124n.28 
and Block on second-order proper­
ties, 51-52 
physicalist, 19 
and reduction, 101 
Functionalizability, 27, 100 
Functionalization, 99, 101, 116, 118-
119 
Functional model of reduction, 97-
103, 116, 118-119

--- Page 155 ---

Functional properties, 20-21, 53, 55, 
115-116. See also Second-order
properties
vs. functional concepts, 103-106, 
110 
and physical realizationism, 24 
and realization, 83 
Functional reduction, 24-25, 98-103 
Gene, as functional-reduction exam­
ple, 25, 99 
Generalization argument, 77-80, 84, 
86, 112, 113 
Hare, R. M., 13 
Hempelian explanation, 26, 108 
Hierarchical structure. See Layered 
model 
Horgan, Terence, 34, 40, 41, 67-69, 
70, 77, 79 
Identity theory, 1, 2 
Informational relevance, vs. causal 
relevance, 75 
Intentionality, 101, 102 
Intralevel causal exclusion, 87 
Jackson, Frank, 
72-76, 79 
Kripke, Saul, 98, 99 
Layered model, 15-19, 79, 80-87, 
123nn.23, 24 
Leibniz, Gottfried, 29 
LePore, Ernest, 34 
Levels, 15-17, 79, 80-87, 123n.24. 
See also Layered model; Orders 
Lewis, David, 75-76 
Loewer, Barry, 34 
Lycan, William, 80-81, 82 
Macroproperties, 82, 85 
Malebranche, Nicolas de, 29 
Memory, and mental causation, 31 
Index 143 
Mental anomaly problem (mental 
anomalism). See Anomalous 
mental properties, problem of 
Mental causation, 29, 30-33, 57, 58-
60 
and Block on second-order proper-
ties, 51-55 
and counterfactuals, 67-72 
and Descarates, 29, 57 
and Fodor on causal laws, 50-51 
"free lunch" solutions for, 59-60 
and functionalization, 118 
generalization argument on, 77-80, 
84, 86, 112, 113 
and levels of properties, 80-87 
and metaphysics, 59, 60-67 
and problem of anomalous mental 
properties, 30, 32-35 
and problem of causal exclusion, 
30, 32, 37-38, 53, 55, 64-67 
and problem of extrinsic mental 
properties, 30, 32, 35-37 
program explanation of, 72-77 
and Searle's biological naturalism, 
47-50
and supervenience argument, 30, 
38--47, 55-56, 85-87, 112, 116, 
117, 127n.22 
Mental irrealism, 119 
Mereological (part-whole) relation, 
15 
Mereological supervenience, 18, 86, 
116 
Metaphysics, and mental causation, 
59, 60-67 
Micro-based (microstructural) prop­
erties, 82, 84 
and physical properties, 114-115, 
116-119
Microindiscernibility, 17, 124n.26 
Mind-body identity theory, 1-2, 2-
3.See also Type physicalism
Mind-body problem, 1-2, 9, 27, 120 
central question in, 101

--- Page 156 ---

144 Index 
Mind-body problem (cont.) 
and layered model, 16, 19 (see also 
Layered model) 
and mental causation, 57 (see also 
Mental causation) 
return of, 57 
and supervenience, 14 (see also Su­
pervenience, mind-body) 
Mind-body supervenience. See Su-
pervenience, mind-body 
Mind-brain identity theory, 58 
Modal operator formulation, 10 
Monism, anomalous. See Anoma-
lous monism 
Moore, G. E., 13 
Multilayered model, 15-19, 79, 80-
87, 123n.23 
Multiple realization argument, 2-3, 
121n.4 
and antireductionism, 26 
and availability question, 92-95 
and reduction, 106-112 
local, 94-95 
and supervenience, 7 
Nagel, Ernest, 25-26, 90-97 
Naturalism, biological, 47-50 
Nonreductive physicalism (nonre-
ductive materialism), 8, 14, 46, 
58, 68, 120, 122n.13 
Nomic properties, 108 
Normative superveniencve, 13 
Orders, 80-87. See also Levels 
Ordinary language philosophy, 63 
Overdetermination. See Causal over-
determination 
Pain, example of 
and disjunctive properties, 107-108 
and epiphenomenalism, 54, 74 
and explanatory question, 95 
and functionalism, 19, 51, 104 
and multiple realization, 93 
and program explanations, 75, 76-
77 
as realizer, 83 
Searle on, 48-49 
and supervenience, 9, 10 
Pettit, Philip, 72-76, 79 
Philosophical problems, 29-30. See 
also Metaphysics, and mental 
causation 
Physicalism, 2, 117, 119-120 
and anomalous monism or func-
tionalism, 3-4 
Descartes' revenge against, 46 
and exclusion problem, 30 
and explanatory question, 96 
and functionalization, 119 
and mental causation, 39 
minimal, 15, 38, 39 
nonreductive, 8, 14, 46, 58, 68, 120, 
122n.13 
reductive, 58, 120, 134n.35 
and supervenience, 8, 11-12, 14-
15 
token, 27, 37, 121-122n.7 
type, 1, 12, 13, 92 
Physicalist functionalism, 19 
Physical monism, 4, 5, 33 
Physical property, 112-115 
Physical realizationism, 19-23, 27, 38 
and cognitive science, 22 
and Horgan, 69 
and supervenience, 12, 13-14, 23-
24, 38, 69 
Place, U. T., 1 
Program explanation, 72-77 
Projectible nomic properties, 108 
Property dualism, 58, 59, 60, 120 
Propertyhood, sparse vs. abundant 
conception of, 105-106 
Psychology. See also Anomalous 
mental properties, problem of 
human, 132n.9 
and mental causation, 31 
Putnam, Hilary, 3, 92, 101, 124n.29

--- Page 157 ---

Qualia, 101-102, 112, 116, 119 
Realization, 7, 9, 80, 82. See also
Physical realizationism 
and mental causation, 51 
and micro-macro relation (hierar­
chy), 82-83, 86 
multiple, 2-3, 7, 26, 92-95, 106--
112, 121n.4 
Reasoning, and mental causation, 31 
Reduction and reductionism, 24-25, 
89, 90, 125n.43 
and double relativity, 25 
functional model of, 97-103 
functionalizability, 27 
functionalization, 116, 118-119 
Horgan on, 67-68 
and layered model, 16, 17 
local, 94-95 
and multiple realization, 94-95, 
106--112 
Nagel's model of (bridge laws), 25-
26, 90-98 (see also Bridge laws) 
pressure toward, 56 
and problem of mental causation, 
59 
and Searle's analysis, 49 
and second-order designators or 
concepts, 103-106 
and supervenience argument, 46-
47, 112-118 
Reductive physicalism, 58, 120, 
134n.35 
Relevance, causal vs. informational, 
75 
Ryle, Gilbert, 1 
Searle, John, 47-50, 101 
Second-order properties, 19-20, 
124n.32. See also Functional prop­
erties 
Block's worries about, 51-55, 81, 84 
as physical properties, 114 
and Putnam, 124n.29 
and realizers, 82 
Index 145 
and second-order designators, 103-
105, 106, 114 
and supervenience argument, 55-
56 
Smart, J. J. C., 1, 2, 3, 12 
Special sciences 
and generalization argument, 77-
80, 86, 112 
laws of, 50, 51 
and multiple realizability, 26 
and nonreductive physicalism, 8 
and program explanation, 73, 75, 
76 
Substance (substantival) dualism, 
29, 57, 59, 60, 97, 119. See also
Cartesian dualism 
Supervenience, mind-body, 6, 8, 9-
15, 27 
and anomalism of the mental, 
122n.9 
Burge and Baker on, 67 
and content externalism, 127n.20 
and Davidson, 5-7, 11, 35 
and dualism, 123n.22 
and emergentism, 6, 12, 13, 38, 
123n.22 
and epiphenomenalism, 12, 13, 46, 
50, 67, 74 
and exclusion problem, 30 
and functionalists, 7-8 
and generalization argument, 80 
and layered model, 17-18 
and mental causation, 30, 38---47, 
55-56, 85-87, 112, 116, 117,
127n.22
mereological, 18, 86, 116 
and Nagel reduction of psychol­
ogy, 96 
normative, 13 
and physical realizationism, 12, 13-
14, 23-24, 38, 69 
and reductionism, 46--47, 112-118 
and Searle, 48

--- Page 158 ---

146 Index 
Supervenience, mind-body (cont.) 
and second-order properties, 55-56 
strong, 9, 12, 67, 122n.9 
Supervenient causation, 74 
Syntacticalism, 35-37 
Temperature, as functional-reduc­
tion example, 25, 99 
Token physicalism, 27, 37, 121-
122n.7 
Type physicalism, 1, 12, 13, 92 
Van Gulick, Robert, 78, 81, 84 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1, 63
