--- Page 1 ---

Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 60 (2009), 1 
Newman’s Objection 
Peter M. Ainsworth 
ABSTRACT 
This paper is a review of work on Newman’s objection to epistemic structural realism 
(ESR). In Section 2, a brief statement of ESR is provided. In Section 3, Newman’s 
objection and its recent variants are outlined. In Section 4, two responses that argue 
that the objection can be evaded by abandoning the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR 
are considered. In Section 5, three responses that have been put forward specifically to 
rescue the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR from the modern versions of the objection 
are discussed. Finally, in Section 6, three responses are considered that are neutral with 
respect to one’s approach to ESR and all argue (in different ways) that the objection 
can be evaded by introducing the notion that some relations/structures are privileged 
over others. It is concluded that none of these suggestions is an adequate response to 
Newman’s objection, which therefore remains a serious problem for ESRists. 
Introduction 
Epistemic Structural Realism 
2.1 Ramsey-sentences and ESR 
2.2 WESR and SESR 
The Objection 
3.1 Newman's version 
3.2 Demopoulos and Friedman’s and Ketland’s versions 
Replies that Abandon the Ramsey-Sentence Approach to ESR 
4.1 Redhead’s reply 
4.2 French and Ladyman’s reply 
Replies Designed to Rescue the Ramsey-Sentence Approach 
5.1. Zahar’s reply 
5.2 Cruse’s reply 
5.3 Melia and Saatsi’s reply 
Replies that Argue that Some Structures/ Relations are Privileged 
6.1. A Carnapian reply 
6.2 Votsis’ reply 
6.3 The Merrill/ Lewis/ Psillos reply 
Summary 
The Author (2009). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British Society fer the Philosophy of Science. All rights reserved 
doi:10.1093/bjps/axn051 For permissions, please email: journals. permissions@oxfordjournals.org 
Advance Access published on January 19, 2009

--- Page 2 ---

Peter M. Ainsworth 
1 Introduction 
The first fully elaborated statement of epistemic structural realism (ESR) can 
be found in the work of Russell ({1912], [1927]) (although Worrall [1989], [1994] 
argues that the doctrine can also be found in the writings of Duhem [1906] 
and Poincaré [1903]); Russell himself abandoned the position in the face of 
Newman’s objection (Newman [1928]). The doctrine was revived four decades 
later by Maxwell ({1968], [1970a], [1970b]), who both coined the term ‘structural 
realism’ and introduced the Ramsey-sentence approach to the doctrine, which 
is adopted by most contemporary ESRists. 
Demopoulos and Friedman ([1985]) and Ketland ((2004]) have put forward 
variants of Newman’s objection aimed at the Ramsey-sentence approach to 
ESR and numerous authors (Cruse [2005]; French and Ladyman [2003]; Melia 
and Saatsi [2006]; Psillos [1999]; Redhead [2001]; Votsis [2003], [2004]; Zahar 
[2001], [2004]) have suggested a variety of ways in which one might attempt to 
evade the objection. 
This paper consists of five main sections. In Section 2, a brief statement 
of ESR is provided. In Section 3, Newman’s objection and its recent variants 
are outlined. In Section 4, two responses that argue that the objection can 
be evaded by abandoning the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR are con- 
sidered. In Section 5, three responses that have been put forward specifically 
to rescue the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR from the modern versions 
of the objection are discussed. Finally, in Section 6, three responses are con- 
sidered that are neutral with respect to one’s approach to ESR and all ar- 
gue (in different ways) that the objection can be evaded by introducing the 
notion that some relations/structures are privileged over others. It is con- 
cluded that none of these suggestions is an adequate response to Newman’s 
objection. 
2 Epistemic Structural Realism 
The ESRist upholds two main theses. On the one hand there is the ‘realist’ 
thesis: 
Mature scientific theories provide us with a substantial amount of knowl- 
edge about both the observable and the unobservable world.! 
' The qualification ‘mature’ is important: the ESRist, like the conventional realist, does not commit 
himself to realism with respect to all scientific theories. Moreover, the ‘knowledge’ that science is 
supposed to provide is taken to include claims that are not strictly true, but only approximately 
true. Spelling out what maturity and approximate truth are may not be easy (although Worrall 
[1989] has argued that it is straightforward to explicate maturity: he suggests that a theory 
is mature if and only if it correctly predicts an empirically confirmed result that it was not 
engineered to yield) but these issues will be held in abeyance throughout this paper.

--- Page 3 ---

Newman's Objection 137 
On the other hand there is the ‘structuralist’ thesis, which, as a very rough 
first approximation, we may state as follows: 
All we know of the unobservable world is its structure. 
2.1 Ramsey-sentences and ESR 
From a formal point of view, languages are built out of two types of term:* 
logical terms and non-logical terms. In a language of second-order logic these 
two groups consist of the following: 
[1] Logical terms: 
(i) logical connectives (*—’, *&’, etc.) 
(ii) quantifiers (“V’, “3”) 
(iii) individual and predicate variables (x;, x2,... and X;, X2,...) 
and possibly: 
(iv) the identity predicate (“= °) 
[2] Non-logical terms: 
(i) a number of names (a), a2, .. .) denoting objects 
(ii) a number of predicates (P;, P2, . . .) denoting properties and relations. 
The claim that ‘all we know of the external world is its structure’ might 
suggest that the ESRist thinks that our knowledge of the external world is 
purely structural (that it consists of only logical terms). Despite the way they 
sometimes talk, this is not a view held by any serious contemporary ESRist, 
but it is a view sometimes imputed to ESRists by their critics. 
The Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR was first proposed by Maxwell 
({1968]) and is adopted by most (but not all) modern ESRists. Let an ob- 
servational term be a non-logical term that refers to an observable object, 
property, or relation and a theoretical term be a non-logical term that refers to 
an unobservable object, property, or relation. The Ramsey-sentence of a theory 
is obtained from a sentence expressing the theory by first replacing the theo- 
retical terms (names and predicates) in the sentence with new variables (using 
the same variable for each occurrence of the same term, and different variables 
- Sometimes logicians use the word ‘term’ as a synonym for ‘name’. Throughout this paper it is 
used in a broader sense, as explicated here.

--- Page 4 ---

138 Peter M. Ainsworth 
for different terms). The resulting formula is then turned into a sentence (the 
theory’s Ramsey-sentence) by binding the variables with the appropriate exis- 
tential quantifiers (placed at the start of the formula, so that every occurrence 
of the same new variable is in the scope of the same quantifier). Note that, in 
general (as long as the original sentence contains at least one theoretical pred- 
icate) constructing the Ramsey-sentence of a theory will require a language of 
second-order logic.* 
Maxwell provides an example (Maxwell [1970a], p. 186). Consider the ‘the- 
ory’ expressed by the sentence: 
Y¥x([Ax&Dx] — JyCy), 
where ‘A’ and ‘D’ are ‘theoretical’ predicates such that ‘Ax’ means ‘x is a radium 
atom’ and ‘Dx’ means ‘x radioactively decays’, and ‘C’ is an ‘observational’ 
predicate such that ‘Cx’ means ‘x is a click in a suitably located Geiger counter’.4 
Its Ramsey-sentence is: 
IXSYVx([Xx&Yx] —> SyCy). 
The ESRist (if he takes the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR), elaborates 
his structuralist thesis as follows: 
A theory’s Ramsey-sentence is as much as a theory reliably tells us about 
the world. 
Notice that, when it is elaborated this way, the ESRist’s structuralist thesis 
has the following corollary: 
The knowledge provided by our mature scientific theories consists (in its 
ultimate form) of statements constructed using only logical and observa- 
tional terms. 
This corollary is a claim the instrumentalist would also endorse. ESR re- 
mains distinct from instrumentalism because the instrumentalist claims that 
our theories provide knowledge only about the observable world, whereas the 
ESRist maintains that the Ramsey-sentences of our theories provide knowledge 
about both the observable world and about the structure of the unobservable 
world. 
> Zahar ((2001], p. 236) points out that we can construct an equivalent sentence using a first-order 
language that contains the predicates ‘being a set’ and ‘e’. However, we would of course have to 
leave these unRamseyfied, and it is hard to see what justification there could be for that, unless 
one was prepared to take them as logical predicates, like * = °. 
Of course this doesn’t express any real ‘theory’ and is, moreover, false: if a radium atom decays 
on Mars, there will not be a click in a suitably located Geiger counter, because there will not be 
a suitably located Geiger counter, but it will suffice to give the general idea. 
4

--- Page 5 ---

Newman's Objection 139 
At first sight, it may seem that as Ramsey-sentences are constructions formed 
using only logical and observational terms, they could not tell us anything about 
the unobservable world. This is certainly not true. As van Fraassen ([{1980], 
p. 54) notes, the claim that ‘there are entities that are not O; and not O; 
and ...’, where each QO; is an observational predicate and the sentence ascribes 
to the entities it refers to the negation of every O; in the language, successfully 
makes the claim that there are unobservables (which is a claim about the un- 
observable world) using only logical and observational vocabulary. (However, 
the essential claim of Newman’s objection is that Ramsey-sentences can’t tell 
us anything substantial about the unobservable world.) 
Given that ESR has been explicated in terms of Ramsey-sentences, one may 
wonder if ESR is any more ‘structural’ than conventional scientific realism: 
after all, the Ramseyfied version of a sentence is no more closely linked to 
the structures that satisfy it than is the original sentence. However, although 
there isn’t any particularly intimate relation between structural realism and 
structures (in the set-theoretic sense) the term ‘structural’ is not totally inap- 
propriate: the ESRist maintains that theoretical predicates (and the sets that 
provide the extensional interpretation of these predicates) should not be given 
an intensional interpretation, but should be treated purely extensionally, i.e. 
treated in a purely mathematical or ‘structural’ way. 
2.2 WESR and SESR 
ESR can be subdivided into two doctrines: weak ESR (WESR) and strong ESR 
(SESR) (as they will be called in this paper). SESR presupposes a particular 
metaphysical and epistemological doctrine called ‘indirect realism’. This is the 
view that although the external world exists, we do not have direct access to 
it. It implies that there is a distinction between the ‘internal world’ of our 
own consciousnesses, to which we have direct access, and the external world, 
to which we do not (this internal/external distinction is sometimes called the 
phenomenal/noumenal distinction or the mental/physical distinction). 
It is important to separate the internal/external distinction from the ob- 
servable/unobservable distinction. Within the indirect realist framework the 
observable/unobservable distinction may be roughly characterized as a dis- 
tinction between those external objects, properties, and relations (e.g. tables, 
redness”) that have a direct counterpart in internal experience and those ex- 
ternal objects, properties and, relations (e.g. quarks, strangeness) that do not. 
Because the phrase ‘direct counterpart’ is so vague this characterization does 
In fact, the indirect realist might say that we need to distinguish two ‘redness’ predicates: one 
that refers to the redness of internal objects (sense-data) and another that refers to the redness 
of external (physical) objects.

--- Page 6 ---

140 Peter M. Ainsworth 
not succeed in unambiguously drawing the intended distinction, but hopefully 
the general idea is clear enough. 
The essential difference between WESR and SESR is that while the WESRist 
thinks that theoretical terms (i.e. terms referring to unobservable objects, 
properties, and relations) need to be Ramseyfied (leaving Ramsey-sentences 
containing only logical and observational terms), the SESRist thinks that ex- 
ternal terms (i.e. terms referring to external objects, properties, and relations) 
need to be Ramseyfied (leaving Ramsey-sentences containing only logical and 
internal terms). The version of ESR outlined in the previous section is thus 
WESR. The SESRist’s structuralist thesis can still be stated as: 
A theory’s Ramsey-sentence is as much as a theory reliably tells us about 
the world. 
But because of his different approach to Ramseyfication, the SESRist’s struc- 
turalist thesis has a somewhat different corollary, viz: 
The knowledge provided to us by our mature scientific theories consists (in 
its ultimate form) of statements constructed using only logical and internal 
terms. 
In fact, although the example of Ramseyfication that was given in the previ- 
ous section is Maxwell’s own and it suggests WESR, he himself was a SESRist. 
He makes this quite clear when he states that ‘My own view [. . .] is that all items 
should be considered theoretical [meaning that terms referring to them should 
be Ramseyfied] unless they occur in direct experience; since I reject any form of 
direct realism, this means that the observable [meaning the things referred to 
by terms that do not need to be Ramseyfied] is instantiated only in inner events 
of observers’ (Maxwell [1970a], p. 181). 
On the face of it, however, Ramseyfying all terms except those that refer 
to items of internal experience will result in the Ramsey-sentences of most 
(if not all) theories being purely formal, and thus entirely devoid of empiri- 
cal content, because, on the face of it, most (if not all) theories do not deal 
with items of internal experience at all. Take for example the toy theory given 
above. Clicks in suitably placed Geiger counters are not items of internal ex- 
perience, so (taking the SESRist line) the predicates referring to them should 
also be Ramseyfied away, leading to the following Ramsey-sentence for the 
theory: 
AXAYIAZVx([Xx&Yx] — dyZy), 
which is purely formal, and therefore has no empirical content. 
The proponent of SESR can avoid this unwelcome conclusion by arguing 
that although most theories, in themselves, are not directly about internal

--- Page 7 ---

Newman's Objection 141 
experience, they are nonetheless connected with internal experience by auxiliary 
theories, which are always implicitly held. For example, we implicitly hold that 
we will have an experience of a sense-data Geiger counter click only if, (i) there 
is a (real) Geiger counter click, (ii) we are hallucinating Geiger counter clicks, 
(iii) we are dreaming about Geiger counter clicks, (iv) somebody is playing a 
practical joke, ... alongside the theory: 
Vx([Ax&Dx] — dyCy); 
we would thus also hold: 
4x(C*x & Eax) — (Ay[Cy] v Ha...), 
where a is a constant referring to oneself, “C*x’ means ‘x is a sense-data Geiger 
counter click’, “Exy’ means ‘x experiences y’, ‘Cx’ means the same as before and 
‘Hx’ means ‘x is hallucinating Geiger counter clicks’. The combined theory we 
hold is thus expressed by the sentence: 
Vx([Ax & Dx] > dyCy) & (Ax[C*x & Eax] — [By(Cy) v Ha...]). 
Taking the SESRist approach to Ramseyfication, one obtains something like 
the following Ramsey-sentence of the combined theory: 
IW3AXIYIAZ...Wx((Wx & Xx] > SyYy) & (Ax[C*x & Eax]— [ByYy v Za...]), 
which does contain some non-logical terms (*C*’, ‘E’ and ‘a’) and thus does 
not fail to make an empirical claim for lack of them. 
3 The Objection 
3.1 Newman’s version 
Newman ({1928]) takes Russell’s ESR to imply that the most that we can 
know about the external world is its structure. He ascribes this view to Russell 
on the basis of passages like the following (which Newman quotes in [1928], 
p. 144): ‘Thus it would seem that wherever we infer from perceptions it is only 
structure that we can validly infer; and structure is what can be expressed by 
mathematical logic’ (Russell [1927], p. 254), ‘The only legitimate attitude about 
the physical world seems to be one of complete agnosticism as regards all but 
its mathematical properties’ (Russell [1927], p. 270). Newman then launches 
the following objection to this view: 
Any collection of things can be organised so as to have the structure W 
[where W is an arbitrary structure], provided there are the right number of 
them. Hence the doctrine that on/y structure is known involves the doctrine 
that nothing can be known that is not logically deducible from the mere 
fact of existence, except (‘theoretically’) the number of constituting objects. 
(Newman [1928], p. 144, original emphasis)

--- Page 8 ---

142 Peter M. Ainsworth 
For example, being told that a system has domain D = {a, b, c} (where 
a, b, and c are arbitrary names for three distinct but unspecified objects) and 
instantiates a relation R = {(a, b), (a,c), (b, c)} tells us no more than that the 
system consists of three objects, because some elementary set-theory reveals 
that any three objects instantiate seven non-empty one-place relations, 511 
non-empty two-place relations (of which R is one) and 134,217,727 non-empty 
three-place relations.° Being told that they instantiate R is both trivial (insofar 
as it follows from some elementary set-theory) and perversely specific (insofar 
as R is just one of the 134,218,245 non-empty relations they instantiate). Thus 
being told that the system has structure (D, R) is being told no more than 
that it contains three objects, because any system containing three objects can 
be taken to have this structure, along with a vast number of other structures 
(any tuple whose first member is D and whose other members are amongst the 
134,218,245 relations instantiated by the members of D is a structure that can 
be taken to be possessed by any system containing three objects). 
The objection arises because our purely structural knowledge gives us only 
extensional information about the structure of the system: if we had an inten- 
sional interpretation of R, we would not have this problem. For instance, if 
we knew that R was the ‘heavier than’ relation (restricted to the system) then 
we would have some more useful information: we would know that the three 
objects in the system were of unequal weights. However, the claim that we 
have any such intensional information about the external world is exactly what 
Newman thinks that Russell denies. 
Newman considers two possible responses to this objection. The first is to 
distinguish ‘real’ relations from ‘fictional’ relations and assume that when the 
Russellian tells us what relations hold in a system he is talking only about 
real relations. A fictional relation is defined as ‘one whose only property is 
that it holds between the objects that it does hold between’ (Newman [1927], 
p. 145). By this Newman does not mean to call real only those relations that 
have interesting formal properties (such as reflexivity, transitivity etc.) because 
the Russellian would presumably not wish to ignore all relations that lack in- 
teresting formal properties (for example, all one-place relations lack interesting 
formal properties, but the Russellian would presumably not wish to ignore all 
one-place relations). Rather he means that real relations are those that are 
the extensions of intensionally interpreted predicates. At first it seems that the 
problem here is that all relations are fictional for Russell, because, according to 
Newman, he denies that our knowledge claims about the external world involve 
any intensionally interpreted predicates (except perhaps equality). However, 
® Aset of n objects has 2" — 1 non-empty subsets. n objects can be arranged into a set of n.n distinct 
pairs, which has 2"" — 1 non-empty subsets. n objects can be arranged into a set of n.n.n triples, 
which has 2""" — | non-empty subsets.

--- Page 9 ---

Newman’s Objection 143 
Newman claims that the problem is just the opposite, i.e. that all relations are 
real, because, having named the objects in the domain, each relation will be 
the extension of some intensionally interpreted predicate. In the above case, for 
example, R is the extension of the relation that holds between x and y just in 
case (x = a and y = b) or (x = aand y = c) or (x = band y=c). 
This leads Newman to consider a second possible response, which is to 
distinguish between ‘important’ and ‘trivial’ relations and assume that when 
the Russellian tells us what relations hold in a system he is talking only about 
important relations. Newman dismisses this response as follows: 
we should have to compare the importance of relations of which nothing is 
known save their incidence (the same for all of them) in a certain aggregate. 
For this comparison there is no possible criterion, so that ‘importance’ 
would have to be reckoned among the prime unanalysable qualities of 
the constituents of the world, which is, I think, absurd. (Newman [1928], 
p. 147) 
Although Newman thought that this response was absurd, a number of 
philosophers have put forward variants of it. These will be discussed in 
Section 6. 
However, isn’t there a much more obvious response to Newman: hasn’t he 
misunderstood the position he attacks? Newman imputes to Russell something 
like the following claim: 
Our knowledge of the world is purely structural (i.e. it consists of claims 
constructed using only logical terms). 
However, it may be that Russell actually held only the following (weaker) 
view: 
Our knowledge of the world consists of claims constructed using only 
logical and internal terms. 
It is true that the passages of Russell that Newman quotes seem to suggest he 
would go along with the former (stronger) of these claims, but elsewhere Russell 
is quite explicitly committed to the view that we know how external objects 
are connected with internal experience, which he allows us to legitimately de- 
scribe with non-logical terms. For example, Russell says that ‘My knowledge of 
the table is of the kind which we shall call “knowledge by description”. The 
table is “the physical object which causes such-and-such sense-data”’. (Russell 
[1912], p. 26). This seems to imply that he held only the latter (weaker) claim. If 
we understand Russell this way then it seems that Newman has misunderstood 
his position.

--- Page 10 ---

144 Peter M. Ainsworth 
However, Russell did not respond to Newman this way (Russell’s response 
is discussed in passing in Section 5.2, as it relates to Cruse’s [2005] response). 
It is difficult to believe that Russell just missed such an obvious rejoinder. 
Perhaps the reason he did not offer it is that he could see that although 
Newman’s objection, as Newman states it, is not strictly speaking to the point, 
nonetheless Newman’s line of thinking does lead one to the conclusion that 
ESR is not significantly distinct from standard antirealism. This point has 
been made by Demopoulos and Friedman ([{1985]) and Ketland ((2004]) with 
respect to the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR and is discussed in the next 
subsection. 
3.2 Demopoulos and Friedman’s and Ketland’s versions 
Demopoulos and Friedman (anachronistically) impute to Russell a form of 
the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR (Demopoulos and Friedman [1985], 
p. 622) whereby the knowledge a scientific theory provides is expressed by the 
Ramsey-sentence of that theory, which will contain non-logical terms that refer 
to either internal objects, properties, and relations (for the SESRist) or observ- 
able objects, properties, and relations (for the WESRist) but will in either case 
not be purely structural. They claim (although without substantial argument) 
that if ‘our theory is consistent, and if all its purely observational consequences 
are true, then the truth of the Ramsey-sentence fo//ows as a theorem of set the- 
ory or second-order logic, provided our initial domain has the right cardinal- 
ity’ (Demopoulos and Friedman [1985], p. 635, original emphasis). Although 
Demopoulos and Friedman do not really back up this claim, Ketland ((2004]) 
does provide a strong argument for (a slight variant of) the claim. 
To understand Ketland’s argument we must distinguish between intended 
and arbitrary interpretations of a language. An intended interpretation is a 
function from the non-logical terms of the language to the objects, properties, 
and relations in a structure that respects the intended meanings of the non- 
logical terms. For example, under its intended interpretation, the name ‘Julius 
Caesar’ is assigned the person Julius Caesar. Similarly, under its intended 
interpretation, the predicate ‘larger than’ is assigned the set of pairs (x, y) such 
that x is larger than y. An arbitrary interpretation does not respect intended 
meanings in this way. In an arbitrary interpretation, the name ‘Julius Caesar’ 
might be assigned any arbitrary object and the predicate ‘larger than’ might be 
assigned any arbitrary set of pairs. 
Ketland assumes that we have a two-sorted second-order language. A two- 
sorted language (see, for example, Enderton [2001], pp. 295-6) has two types 
of individual variables that range over two different domains. Many-sorted 
languages are harmless in the sense that they can be reduced to standard one- 
sorted languages without loss (except of convenience) (see Enderton [2001],

--- Page 11 ---

Newman's Objection 145 
pp. 296-9). In this case the two domains (in the intended interpretation of the 
language) are observable objects and unobservable objects. 
The language is also assumed to have three types of predicates: observational 
predicates, which (in the intended interpretation of the language) refer to ob- 
servable properties and relations (which Ketland takes to be sets [of tuples] 
of observable objects), theoretical predicates, which (in the intended interpre- 
tation of the language) refer to unobservable properties and relations (which 
Ketland takes to be sets [of tuples] of unobservable objects) and mixed pred- 
icates, which (in the intended interpretation of the language) refer to mixed 
relations (which Ketland defines as sets of tuples such that each tuple contains 
at least one observable object and at least one unobservable object).’ 
Let (Do, O;, O2,...) be the structure associated with the intended inter- 
pretation of the observational part of the language, i.e. let Do be the set of 
observable objects in the world and let O;, O2 etc. be (the sets corresponding 
to) the observable properties and relations referred to by the observational 
predicates of the language. 
We can now define what it means for an arbitrary structure for the language, 
((D;, D2), Ria, Riz R31, R3.2,...) to be empirically correct 
((D;, D2) is an arbitrary two-sorted domain, each Rj; is an arbitrary interpre- 
tation of an observational predicate over D, (i.e. a subset of D; or a subset of 
D; x D, etc.), each R3j; is an arbitrary interpretation a theoretical predicate 
over D> (i.e. a subset of D> or a subset of D> x D> etc.) and each R3>j; is an 
arbitrary interpretation of a mixed predicate over D; U D> (i.e. a subset of D, 
x D> ora subset of D> x D, etc.)). We do this as follows: 
Definition 1: D,, Do), Riz, Ri2 >1, Roo, ‘np RRy Bea < 1S 
empirically correct if and only if its reduct (D;, Rj.;, Ri.2, . . .) is isomorphic 
to (Do, O}, O2,...). (cf. Ketland’s ‘Definition E’ [2004], p. 296) 
In other words, a structure is empirically correct if and only if the appropriate 
reduct of the structure is isomorphic to the structure of the observable world 
(relative to some choice of predicates). This definition of empirical correctness is 
in line with van Fraassen’s ([1980]) notion of empirical adequacy: van Fraassen 
says that ‘a theory is empirically adequate exactly if [...] [it] has at least one 
model that all the phenomena fit inside’ (van Fraassen [1980], p. 12). We will 
Ketland himself notes that the characterization of observable (etc.) properties and relations as 
sets (of tuples) of observable (etc.) objects has some counter-intuitive consequences. In particular 
he notes that ‘many scientifically significant relations and quantities (e.g. various space-time 
relations and quantities, various scientific quantities such as mass, length, duration, location, 
etc.) will “decompose” into three strangely distinct relations, depending on the observational 
status of their relata’ (Ketland [2004], p. 289, footnote 5). Cruse ({2005]) argues that the ESRist 
(or at least the WESRist) can respond to Ketland’s version of Newman’s objection by denying 
that this is an accurate characterization of the observable/unobservable distinction that he wishes 
to draw. This response is discussed in Section 5.2

--- Page 12 ---

146 Peter M. Ainsworth 
return to the issue of how this definition of empirical correctness compares with 
other notions of empirical correctness (or adequacy) later. Let’s assume that 
the Ramsey-sentence of a theory in this language is obtained by Ramseyfying 
away the mixed and theoretical predicates that appear in the theory (cf. Ketland 
[2004], p. 292). It follows that: 
Theorem 1: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if 
there is some sequence of relations R2, R22 R31, R32,... such that 
((Do, Dr), O1, O2 21, R22 , R32,...) F A (cf. Ketland’s 
‘Theorem 4 [2004], p. 293) 
where Dy is the set of unobservable objects in the world. (Ketland gives a 
proof of this result; this has been omitted, as the result itself seems intuitively 
obvious.) We need one more definition: 
Definition 2: (D;, D2), Ry, Ri2 21, K22 ee a= 
cardinality correct if and only if |D2| = |Dr|. (cf. Ketland’s ‘Definition G’ 
[2004], p. 298) 
and we can then prove: 
Theorem 2: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if A has 
a model that is empirically correct and T-cardinality correct. (cf. Ketland’s 
‘Theorem 6’ [2004], p. 298) 
The proof is in two steps: 
[1] Left-to-right: Suppose the Ramsey-sentence of A is true. Then, by The- 
orem 1, there is some sequence of relations R2;, R22 
such that (Do, Dr), O01, Or 2 R31, R32,...) F A, ice. 
(Do, Dr), 01, O2,..-, Roi, R22 R3;, R32,...) is a model of A. 
Clearly, (Do, O;, O2,...) is isomorphic to (Do, O;, O2,...), so (Do, Dr), 
QO), O> R31, R32,...) is empirically correct (by 
Definition 1). Equally clearly, |Dr| = |Dr|, so (Do, Dr), O1, O2 
R31, R32,...) is T-cardinality correct (by Definition 2). 
[2] Right-to-left: Suppose A has a model, ((D;, D2), Ri, Ri2 
22 R31, R32,...), that is empirically correct and T-cardinality cor- 
rect. As ((D;, D2), Ria, Ri2 > R31, R3.2,...) is empir- 
ically correct, (D;, Rj.;, Ri2,...) is isomorphic to (Do, O;, O2,...), ie. 
there is a bijection, f: D; ~ Do, such that, for every R; ; and every n-tuple, 
Xn), Of elements of D;: 
(x), X2,---,Xn) € Ry, if and only if (f(x;), f(x2) f(xn)) € Oj. 
As ((D;, D2), Rui, Ri2 21, R22 R31, R32,...) is T-cardinality 
correct, |D>| = |Dr|, i.e. there is a bijection, g: D2 — Dy. We can use fand g 
to define a new function, fg: (D,;, D2) —~ (Do, Dr), such that f* g(x) = f(x)

--- Page 13 ---

Newman’s Objection 
if x € D,; and f*g(x) = g(x) if x € D2 and we can use f*g to define new 
relations such that, for every R2; and every R3;: 
(i) Roi = ae {(f2(x1), fg(x2), 
(ii) = R3i = ar {(f 2x1), f g(x2) 
By the construction of the R> js and R3js, fg is an isomorphism between 
21, R22 3.1, R32,-.- and ((Do, Dy 
R31, R32,...). We know that ((D;, D2), Ry), 
3 F A,so ((Do, Dr), O;, O2,... , Ro, 
A. So by theorem 1, the Ramsey-sentence of A is 
How does Ketland’s result compare to Demopoulos and Friedman’s claim 
that if ‘our theory is consistent, and if all its purely observational consequences 
are true, then the truth of the Ramsey-sentence follows as a theorem of set the- 
ory or second-order logic, provided our initial domain has the right cardinality’ 
(Demopoulos and Friedman [1985], p. 635, original emphasis)? Ketland notes 
that his result is, strictly speaking, weaker, because it is in principle possible 
that all a theory’s purely observational consequences could be true whilst it 
might not have an empirically correct model but not vice versa. (An obser- 
vational consequence here is assumed to be any statement formed using only 
observational predicates and logical terms, excluding predicate variables. Ob- 
servational consequences in this sense are thus assumed to include empirical 
generalizations. Zahar’s reply to the modern version of the objection is based 
on the claim that this is inappropriate; this is discussed in Section 5.1). 
It is not easy to give an example that demonstrates how all a theory’s purely 
observational consequences could be true whilst it might not have an empiri- 
cally correct model, but Ketland gives an example that demonstrates how some- 
thing analogous can occur in number theory. Say that a model is ‘arithmetically 
correct’ if and only if it has a reduct isomorphic to the standard natural number 
structure. Say that a theory has true ‘arithmetical consequences’ if and only if 
all the consequences of the theory that are stated in the language of arithmetic 
are satisfied in the standard natural number structure. Let L be the language 
of arithmetic, and let Ly be the language of arithmetic extended by a monadic 
predicate symbol, T (which is intended to behave like a truth predicate). Now 
consider the theory FS*: this contains the axioms of Peano arithmetic and 
certain axioms concerning the predicate T (these are axioms that, intuitively 
As a referee pointed out, this proof assumes that we are dealing with a full (standard) second- 
order model (i.e. a model in which the second-order quantifiers range over all the relations 
on the domain{s]). If we were dealing with a non-full (Henkin) model then there would be no 
guarantee that the relations that are defined in the proof would be in the scope of the second-order 
quantifiers, so the proof would not go through.

--- Page 14 ---

148 Peter M. Ainsworth 
speaking, a truth predicate should satisfy) (see Halbach [1999], pp. 368-9). 
It can be shown that, (i) if M is a model of FS* then M does not have a reduct 
isomorphic to the standard natural number structure, so FS* does not have a 
model that is arithmetically correct, but nonetheless, (11) every consequence of 
FS* that does not involve T is true in the standard natural number structure, 
so FS* has only true arithmetical consequences. (For more on this see Ketland 
[2004], pp. 295-8). 
However, despite the fact that Ketland’s result is strictly speaking weaker 
than the one Demopoulos and Friedman claim, the difference appears to be 
immaterial: Ketland’s result still suggests that ESR is not significantly distinct 
from antirealism. As noted, Ketland’s notion of empirical correctness formal- 
izes van Fraassen’s notion of empirical adequacy. Since van Fraassen argues 
that it is rational to believe that our mature theories are empirically adequate 
(but not necessarily true) Ketland’s result shows that what the knowledge that 
a theory’s Ramsey-sentence is (approximately) true would amount to, beyond 
what van Fraassen’s antirealism allows, would be (at most) only knowledge of 
the cardinality of the unobservable world. Thus ESR (in its Ramsey-sentence 
form) is just van Fraassen’s antirealism, augmented by the peculiar claim that 
we can (perhaps) know the cardinality of the unobservable world.’ 
4 Replies that Abandon the Ramsey-Sentence Approach to ESR 
In this section, two arguments that claim that Newman’s objection can be 
evaded if one abandons the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR are discussed. 
On the face of it, this appears to be a strange line to take, because although 
Demopoulos and Friedman’s and Ketland’s versions of the objection are di- 
rected at the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR, Newman’s original version of 
the objection is not. This first impression remains on closer inspection of these 
arguments. 
4.1 Redhead’s reply 
Redhead ((2001]) argues that the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR is indeed 
undermined by Newman’s objection, commenting that ‘the Ramsey sentence 
AIR(S[R]), asserting the existence of a relation R which has structure S, is in 
fact a logical truth, modulo the specification of the cardinality of the domain 
over which the relation is defined’ (Redhead [2001], pp. 345-6). This is false: 
the Ramsey-sentence of a theory is not satisfied by every model of the right 
The qualifications ‘at most’ and ‘perhaps’ appear here because knowing that a theory’s Ramsey- 
sentence is true doesn’t guarantee that we know the cardinality of the unobservable world, it 
only guarantees that we know that the theory has some model with the right cardinality (and the 
theory might have models of different cardinalities).

--- Page 15 ---

Newman’s Objection 149 
cardinality, so the Ramsey-sentence is not, ‘a logical truth, modulo the speci- 
fication of the cardinality of the domain’ (on the most obvious reading of this 
expression). For example, consider the ‘theory’ expressed by the sentence Jw3x 
([w 4 x] & Vy [(y = w) Vv (y = x)]) & Vz(Pz) (which says that there are two things, 
and that everything is P). Its Ramsey-sentence is 3X[Sw3x ([w # x] & Vy [(y = 
w) V (y = x)]) & Vz(Xz)] (assuming P needs to be Ramseyfied). This is satisfied 
by the structure ({1, 2}, {1, 2}) but not by every structure with two elements in 
its domain. For example, it is not satisfied by the structure ({1, 2}, {1}). Hence 
it is not ‘a logical truth, modulo the specification of the cardinality of the do- 
main’. What (Ketland’s version of) Newman’s objection actually shows is that 
if the theory has an empirically correct model then the theory’s Ramsey-sentence 
is bound to be satisfied by some structure (instantiated by the world) as long as 
the world contains an appropriate number of (unobservable) things. 
Redhead puts forward an alternative approach to ESR, which, he claims, 
avoids Newman’s objection. He describes this alternative approach as 
follows: 
We need not deny that there are real physical relations posited by physical 
theories [...] Thus S(R), where R refers to a specific relation having the 
structure S, is of course logically stronger than the Ramsey sentence, and is 
by no means a logical truth. But this means [. . .] that the reference of R must 
be picked out in non-structural terms. But this is not denied in the above 
account. Our claim is merely that R is hypothesised in some explanatory 
theoretical context so it exists as an ontological posit, but all that we have 
epistemic warrant for is the second-order structure S. (Redhead [2001], 
p. 346). 
Redhead appears to suggest that the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR 
denies that there are real physical relations posited by physical theories. This is 
also false. The Ramsey-sentence approach does claim (roughly speaking) that 
all we know about (some of) these relations is structural, and this is (roughly 
speaking) why Newman’s objection operates against it. But this is a claim that 
Redhead apparently endorses. The point of Newman’s objection is (roughly 
speaking) that if all we know is that there is some (real) relation R (of which we 
have only structural knowledge) then we know nothing more than a cardinality 
constraint on the domain over which the relation is defined. 
On the other hand, in parts of the above quote Redhead seems to suggest 
that we can specify the relation R intensionally. If he does think this then he 
appears to have abandoned ESR, and it is hard to see how he can maintain the 
claim that we have only structural knowledge of R. 
Perhaps the most charitable reading of Redhead’s position would be to 
substitute the word ‘important’ or ‘natural’ for the words ‘real’ and ‘specific’ in 
the above quote. This would lead us back to Newman’s own ‘absurd’ response 
to his objection (variants of which are discussed in Section 6). However, it

--- Page 16 ---

150 Peter M. Ainsworth 
is doubtful that this is really what Redhead intended. Neither ‘natural’ nor 
‘important’ means the same as ‘real’, much less is either synonymous with 
‘specific’. Moreover, there seems to be no reason why taking this line forces one 
to abandon the Ramsey-sentence approach (as will be seen when this approach 
is discussed in Section 6). 
4.2 French and Ladyman’s reply 
French and Ladyman ([2003]) appear to suggest that Newman’s objection does 
not arise if one adopts the semantic view of theories (whereby a theory is taken 
to be a collection of structures) as opposed to the syntactic view (whereby a 
theory is taken to be a collection of sentences): 
Worrall’s approach is thoroughly embedded in the so-called syntactic view 
of theories that adopts first-order quantificational logic as the appropriate 
form for the representation of physical theories. [Footnote omitted] We 
will not rehearse our reasons here, but we consider this approach to be 
deeply flawed, not only because of its inadequacy in reflecting scientific 
practice, but also because of the pseudo-problems that arise once one has 
adopted it. So for example, the Newman problem is obviated if one does not 
think of structures and relations in first-order extensional terms. One of us 
(Ladyman [1998]) has suggested an alternative descriptive framework for 
SR [structural realism], namely the ‘semantic’ or model theoretic approach 
to theories. (French and Ladyman [2003], p. 33) 
On the face of it, it seems highly unlikely that moving to the semantic view 
would really allow the ESRist to evade Newman’s objection. In fact, Newman’s 
original version of the objection is posed against the view that scientific theories 
directly specify a structure that represents the world. It is true that Demopoulos 
and Friedman ([{1985]) and Ketland ((2004]) aim their objections at the Ramsey- 
sentence approach, which does assume that science presents us with a linguistic 
representation of the world. However, it is easy to show that an analogue of 
their objections applies to a version of ESR framed using the semantic view. 
Framed in terms of the semantic view, ESR would imply something like the 
following limitation on our knowledge: 
The most that we can know about the world is that some structure (pro- 
vided by our scientific theories) is empirically correct and isomorphic to a 
structure instantiated by the world. 
Let (Do, O;, O2,...) be the structure instantiated by the observable world 
(relative to some chosen observational predicates): i.e. let Do be the set of 
observable objects in the world and let O;, O> etc. be the intended extensions 
of observational predicates. Let a theory present us with a structure, ((D,, D>), 
Ry, Riz,.--, Roa, Ro2,..., R31, R32,..-), where D; is a domain that is to

--- Page 17 ---

Newman's Objection 151 
represent the set of observable objects, D> is a domain that is to represent the set 
of unobservable objects, each Rj ; is to represent an observable relation (where 
an observable relation is taken to be a set of [tuples of] observable objects), 
each R>j; is to represent a mixed relation (where a mixed relation is taken to 
be a set of tuples that each contain at least one observable object and at least 
one unobservable object) and each R3, is to represent an unobservable relation 
(where an unobservable relation is taken to be a set of (tuples of) unobservable 
objects). Define such a structure to be empirically correct as before: 
Definition 1: ((D;, D2), Ry1, Ri2,..., Ro, Ro2,..., Rai, Ra2,..-) is 
empirically correct if and only if its reduct (D;, Ry.;, Ry. is isomorphic 
to (Do, 01, O2,...). (cf. Ketland’s ‘Definition E’ [2004], p. 296) 
Let Dy be the set of unobservable objects in the world. Define ((D;, D>), 
Ri 1, 2 21, R22 3.1, R3.2,...) to be T-cardinality correct as 
oefore: 
Definition 2: D;, Dz), Ry, Ri2,.--, R21, R22 : » R31, R32,- -) 1S 
T-cardinality correct if and only if |D2| = |Dy|. (cf. Ketland’s ‘Definition 
G’ [2004], p. 298) 
We can now prove that: 
Theorem 3: ((D;, Dz), Ry, Ry2,..., Roi. Ro2,.... R31, R32, is em- 
pirically correct and isomorphic to a structure instantiated by the world if 
and only if it is empirically correct and T-cardinality correct 
The proof comes in two stages: 
[1] Left to right: Suppose ((D;, D2), Ry), Ri2,..., Roi, Ro2,.-., Rs 
R3.2,...) is empirically correct and isomorphic to a structure instantiated 
by the world. That is, ((D;, D2), Ry1,Ry2,...,R21,R22,..-,R31, R32, 
is isomorphic to a structure of the form, ((Do, Dr), O;, O2,..., Ro, 
R>> R31, R32,...), where O;, O> etc. are the intended extensions 
of observational predicates. By stipulation it is empirically correct. And 
clearly, |D2| = |Dr|, ie. (D;, Dz), Ry, Ri2 21, R22,.-.., R3 
R32,...) is T-cardinality correct. 
[2] Right to left: Suppose ((D;, Dz), Ry1, Ryi2..-. 21, R22, , R; 
R32,...) is empirically correct and T-cardinality correct. By stipulation 
it is empirically correct. As ((D;, D2), Ri). 2? 
R32,...) 1s empirically correct there is some isomorphism between (D), 
R) 1, Ryi2,...) and (Do, O;, Oo, . . .). That is, there is a bijection f: D;} + Do, 
such that, for every R;; and every n-tuple, (x; x2,..., Xn), of elements 
of D;: 
te 3.15 
(X1, X2,.--,Xn) € Ry, if and only if (f(x;), f(x2) f(x,)) € Oj.

--- Page 18 ---

Peter M. Ainsworth 
As ((D;, D2), Ria, Riz 21, R22 31, R32,...) is T-cardinality 
correct there is some bijection, g: D2 + Dry. We can use these functions to 
define a new function, fg: (D;, D2) —~ (Do, Dr) such that f* g(x) = f(x) if 
x € D, and f* g(x) = g(x) if x € D2 and we can use f*g to define new relations 
such that, for every Rp; and every R3j: 
(i) Roi =ar {(f (x1), fg(x2) Pete) ofp iKss os «5 Xn) € Roi}. 
(ii) Ri = ar {(f (x1), e(x2) 
By the construction of the R;s and R33 ;s, fg is an isomorphism between 
(D,, D>), Ruy, 2 R21, 72 R31, R32,...) and (Do, Dr), 
R31, R32,...). (Do, Dr), O1, Or 
R>> R3,,, R3.2,...) is a structure instantiated by the world: we know 
that O,, O> etc. are the intended extensions of observational predicates 
and each R; is an arbitrary mixed relation that is obviously instantiated 
by the world (all its tuples are built from objects in the set Do U Dr, 
i.e. the set of objects in the world) and similarly, each R33; is an arbitrary 
unobservable relation that is obviously instantiated by the world (all its 
tuples are built from objects in the set Dy, i.e. the set of unobservable 
objects in the world).'° @ 
Theorem 3 states that the semantic view formulation of ESR (i.e. the 
claim that the most that we can know about the world is that some 
structure—provided by our scientific theories—is empirically adequate and 
isomorphic to a structure instantiated by the world) is equivalent to the claim 
that the most that we can know about the world is that some structure (pro- 
vided by our scientific theories), ((D;, D2), Ri, Riz 3. 
R3.2,...), is empirically correct and T-cardinality correct, so Theorem 3 pro- 
vides a Newman-esque reductio of the semantic view formulation of ESR. It 
is true that there is a slight difference between the ESRist who works with the 
semantic view and the ESRist who works with the syntactic view/Ramsey- 
sentence approach (because the latter’s claim is equivalent to the even less 
optimistic view that the most we can know about the world is that one of 
the—possibly many—structures that satisfy a given theory is empirically cor- 
rect and T-cardinality correct) but this difference does not appear to be very sig- 
nificant. (The difference arises because the proponent of the semantic view—at 
least as he has been characterized here—thinks that the theory specifies a unique 
structure, whereas the proponent of the syntactic view thinks that a theory is 
a sentence that picks out only a family of structures, all of which satisfy the 
sentence). 
'0 Tt may be objected that the R2;s and the R'3,;s, presumably unlike the Os, may not correspond 
to any natural relations; this again leads to essentially Newman’s own ‘absurd’ response to his 
objection (variants of which are discussed in Section 6).

--- Page 19 ---

Newman’s Objection 
5 Replies Designed to Rescue the Ramsey-Sentence Approach 
In this section, three replies that are designed to save the Ramsey-sentence 
approach to ESR from the modern versions of Newman’s objection are con- 
sidered. 
5.1 Zahar’s reply 
Zahar ({2001], Appendix 4, co-written with John Worrall; [2004]) takes issue 
with Demopoulos and Friedman’s version of Newman’s objection, which he 
characterizes as the claim that it is ‘only what the Ramsey-sentence asserts 
over and above its observational content [that] is reducible to [. . .] a cardinality 
constraint’ (Zahar [2004], p. 10, original emphasis). Zahar goes on to say 
that: 
This ‘over and above’ however proves to be essentially indefinable; for 
on the one hand, the Ramsey-sentence does not normally follow from 
its empirical basis, i.e. from the set of true and empirically decid- 
able, hence singular sentences. If, on the other hand, all the—generally 
undecidable—empirical generalisations’ were included in the observa- 
tional content of a theory, then the Ramsey-sentence might well turn out 
to be one of them; in which case Demopoulos’s and Friedman’s thesis col- 
lapses into the trivial claim that the Ramsey-sentence follows from itself 
(Zahar [2004], p. 10, original emphasis). 
Zahar’s first ‘hand’ holds the proposition that only singular sentences form 
the observational content of a theory. He then demonstrates that Ramsey- 
sentences can go beyond such observational content. He asks us (Zahar [2004], 
p. 11) to consider a theory expressed by the sentence 
A: Wx(Fx — Tx) & Vy(Ty — Ky), 
where F and K are observational predicates and T is a theoretical predicate. 
The Ramsey-sentence of this theory is 
A* : 3X(Wx[Fx — Xx] & Vy[Xy — Ky]), 
which is equivalent to 
Vx(Fx — Kx) 
and this last sentence (and hence the equivalent A*) goes beyond any number 
of singular statements of the form 
Fa; > Ka; 
in the sense that no matter how many statements of this form we have, there 
is always a model in which they are all true but in which the generalization

--- Page 20 ---

154 Peter M. Ainsworth 
Vx(Fx — Kx) (and hence the equivalent A*) is false. So there is a clear sense in 
which the Ramsey-sentence of the theory goes beyond (Zahar’s understanding 
of) the observational content of the theory. 
However, given Zahar’s understanding of the observational content of a 
theory as consisting of the singular sentences (containing only observational 
terms) entailed by the theory, then not only do Ramsey-sentences typically go 
beyond observational content but, as Zahar’s example clearly illustrates, uni- 
versal generalizations that involve only observational predicates (i.e. “empirical 
generalisations’) also go beyond observational content. Even the antirealist 
would typically agree that we can know such generalizations to be true, so 
even the antirealist would agree that we can know more than the observational 
content of a theory, in Zahar’s sense of observational content.'' Unless the 
ESRist can demonstrate that Ramsey-sentences also go beyond empirical gen- 
eralizations, he has failed to distinguish his position from antirealism. In fact, 
Zahar clearly states (in the above quote) that the Ramsey-sentence of a theory 
might often be (equivalent to) an empirical generalization. At this point he 
seems to concede to Demopoulos and Friedman even more than they ask for: 
they claim that ESR is antirealism plus a cardinality constraint, while Zahar 
seems to concede that ESR is (often) plain antirealism (because he claims that 
Ramsey-sentences are [often] equivalent to empirical generalizations, so the 
ESRists’ claim that we can have knowledge of at most Ramsey-sentences is 
[often] equivalent to the antirealists’ claim that we can have knowledge of at 
most empirical generalizations). 
Nonetheless, Zahar denies that ESR is just antirealism. This denial seems 
to rest on an equivocation over the meaning of ‘observational content’. Zahar 
claims that the difference between realists and antirealists is that the latter deny 
that we can have knowledge that goes beyond the observational content of a 
theory, which is true, but only if the observational content of a theory is taken 
to include empirical generalizations. He then demonstrates that the Ramsey- 
sentence of a theory goes beyond the observational content of a theory, where 
this is now taken to exclude empirical generalizations. Thus his conclusion that 
to know the Ramsey-sentence of a theory is to know more than the antirealist 
would allow does not follow. 
'! Typically, the antirealist would say that we can have knowledge of singular empirical state- 
ments and empirical generalizations (i.e. generalizations that do not involve theoretical terms or 
second-order variables) but would deny that we generally have knowledge of a theory’s Ramsey- 
sentence (since, notwithstanding Zahar’s example, a theory’s Ramsey-sentence is not typically 
equivalent to an empirical generalization). (Although what Newman’s objection purports to show 
is—roughly speaking—that knowing a theory’s Ramsey-sentence to be true is knowing very little 
beyond knowing that the singular empirical statements and empirical generalizations that fol- 
low from the theory are true, so ESR collapses into a position not significantly distinct from 
antirealism.)

--- Page 21 ---

Newman's Objection 
5.2 Cruse’s reply 
Cruse’s ((2005]) reply is directed at Ketland’s version of the objection. In 
particular, Cruse objects that not all ESRists need draw the observational 
term/theoretical term distinction in the way that Ketland suggests (and given 
a suitably different construal of the distinction, Ketland’s proof of Theorem 2 
would not go through). Recall that Ketland takes observational predicates 
to refer exclusively to sets of (tuples of) observable objects, theoretical predi- 
cates to refer exclusively to sets of (tuples of) unobservables objects and mixed 
predicates to refer to sets of tuples that each contain at least one observable 
and one unobservable object. As noted, Ketland acknowledges that this has 
some rather counter-intuitive consequences. Cruse emphasizes this point: 
consider the relation denoted by the predicate ‘larger than’. On Ketland’s 
taxonomy, there is no such single relation; there are three. First, there is the 
relation we might call observably larger than, which ranges entirely over ob- 
servable objects. Second[,] there is the relation we might call unobservabl 
larger than, which ranges entirely over unobservable objects. Third, there is 
the relation we might call miscellaneously larger than, which applies to all 
and only pairs of objects such that the first is observable, the second unob- 
servable, and the first larger than the second.'? On Ketland’s terminology, 
only the first class of relations—those which range entirely over observable 
objects—count as observable [. . .] I will call this the strong version of the 
observational-theoretical (O/T) distinction. (Cruse [2005], p. 561, original 
emphasis, footnote added) 
Cruse’s reply is based on rejecting the strong observational term/theoretical 
term distinction. 
Cruse notes that some ESRists do appear to be committed to this form of the 
observational term/theoretical term distinction or rather (as he puts it) ‘some- 
thing isomorphic to it’ (Cruse [2005], p. 563). Translated into the terminology 
of this paper, he suggests that the internal term/external term distinction em- 
ployed by SESRists (such as Russell) must take this form because ‘the mental 
and physical domains are entirely disjoint, so no (non-mathematical) property 
which applies to a mental event applies to a physical event or vice versa. Sim- 
ilarly, no (non-mathematical) predicate which applies to a mental event will 
apply to a physical event’ (Cruse [2005], p. 563). 
In fact, in the face of Newman’s objection, Russell decided that he was not 
committed to this form of the distinction. In a letter to Newman (reprinted in 
his autobiography [1968] and by Demopoulos and Friedman [1985]) he wrote: 
\2 This is splitting hairs, but it seems that we could also have an unobservable object that was larger 
than an observable object if, for example, ‘the universe’ or ‘the nearest black hole’ qualifies as 
unobservable object

--- Page 22 ---

Peter M. Ainsworth 
It was quite clear to me, as I read your article, that I had not really intended 
to say what in fact I did say, that nothing is known about the physical world 
except its structure. I had always assumed spacio-temporal continuity with 
the world of percepts, that is to say, I had assumed that there might be co- 
punctuality between percepts and non-percepts [...] And co-punctuality 
I regarded as a relation which might exist among percepts and is itself 
perceptible. (Russell [1968], p. 176) 
Russell is here putting forward the view that there is at least one non-logical 
predicate (‘co-punctuality’) that refers to a relation that can hold between 
(i) pairs of external objects, (ii) pairs consisting of one external object and one 
internal object (in either order), and (iii) pairs of internal objects. Russell’s own 
reply to Newman is actually essentially the same as Cruse’s reply to Ketland, 
which is perhaps surprising, as Cruse cites Russell as the sort of ESRist for 
whom this reply is not available. 
There are good reasons to think that this sort of reply isn’t available to 
Russell. As Demopoulos and Friedman ({1985]) point out, Russell’s move is 
completely ad hoc: 
in the earlier theory [i.e. Russell’s [1927] theory] we could not assume ac- 
quaintance with a cross category notion such as spacio-temporal contiguity 
or causality; but in the light of the difficulties of that theory we now find 
that we can assume this! [Footnote omitted] We are not saying that one 
cannot resolve the issue in this way. But it seems quite clear that without 
a considerable advance in the theoretical articulation of this rather elusive 
Russellian concept [i.e. acquaintance], no such resolution of the difficulty 
can be very compelling. (Demopoulos and Friedman [1985], p. 632, original 
emphasis) 
I would go further: it seems that, given the supposedly radical difference 
between external and internal objects, it is very unlikely that the issue could be 
satisfactorily resolved this way. Moreover, if Russell makes this concession then 
he seems to be left at the top of a slippery slope: if we can assume that external 
objects can be ‘co-punctual’ with one another in the same way that internal 
objects sometimes are, why can’t we assume that they can be ‘bigger than’ one 
another in the same way? It thus does seem (as Cruse suggests) that SESRists 
(such as Russell) are committed to an internal term/external term distinction 
of the form Ketland suggests (so they cannot evade the Newman/Ketland 
objection this way). 
However, Cruse’s main point (translated into the current idiom) is that the 
WESRist is not committed to anything like Ketland’s form of the observa- 
tional term/theoretical term distinction. He proposes an alternative form of 
the distinction according to which:

--- Page 23 ---

Newman’s Objection 
observational predicates refer to, broadly speaking, perceptible, or observ- 
able properties such as redness or squareness. A natural understanding 
of this would be that these observable properties are unproblematic not 
because they are a/ways observable, but simply because we can in at least 
some cases observe them (Cruse [2005], p. 565, original emphasis) 
This is supposed to capture the intuition that ‘we can meaningfully (and for 
a realist, truly) assert the existence of red blood cells, or microscopic square 
grids, for example’ (Cruse [2005], p. 564); i.e. that observational predicates can 
be applied to unobservable objects. A natural interpretation of this suggestion 
(natural in the light of the foregoing discussion, at any rate) is that rather than 
taking an observational predicate to be one whose intended extension is a set 
consisting only of (tuples of) observable objects (as Ketland suggests), we are 
to take an observational predicate to be one whose intended extension is a set 
consisting of at least some (tuples of) observable objects. Theoretical predicates 
would then be those whose intended extension is a set consisting entirely of (tu- 
ples of) unobservable objects. However, interpreted this way, Cruse’s suggestion 
is also deeply counter-intuitive, because it classes as observational a number 
of predicates that are, intuitively speaking, theoretical. It is true that ‘being a 
superstring’ is on this account a theoretical predicate, because no superstring is 
observable, but ‘being a collection of superstrings’ is observational, because it 
applies to some (in fact, if the theory is correct, all) observable objects. And it is 
(to say the least) counter-intuitive to classify “being a collection of superstrings’ 
as observational. 
However, this is not the only possible interpretation of Cruse’s suggestion. 
Like Ketland’s original proposal, this interpretation of Cruse’s proposal makes 
the assumption that either a predicate is observational if and only if its extension 
contains only (tuples of) observable objects or that a predicate is theoretical 
if and only if its extension contains only (tuples of) unobservable objects. But 
why make this assumption? 
The assumption seems to rest on the idea that we can determine whether an 
object is observable or unobservable, but that we cannot (directly) determine 
whether a property or relation is observable or unobservable, so whether or 
not a property or relation is unobservable must be defined in terms of whether 
or not the objects to which it applies are. But this idea is surely wrong. Surely 
we know that red is an observable property as surely and directly as we know 
that Jeff Ketland is an observable object. And surely we know that being a 
collection of superstrings is an unobservable property as surely and directly as 
we know that the nearest black hole is an unobservable object. It is true that 
there are some properties and relations that we might hesitate to class either 
way. But it is equally true that there are some objects that we might hesitate to 
class either way (small particles of dust, for example). So the idea that we must

--- Page 24 ---

158 Peter M. Ainsworth 
define the observability or unobservability of properties and relations in terms 
of the observability or unobservability of the objects to which they apply is at 
least questionable. 
This suggests that the extensions of observational predicates can contain 
both observable and unobservable objects, and that the extensions of theoretical 
predicates can contain both observable and unobservable objects, depending on 
what the criteria of observability are. If the WESRist adopts an observational 
term/theoretical term distinction along these lines then it is true that Ketland’s 
proof of Theorem 2 does not go through (Ketland’s proof crucially assumes 
that observational predicates apply only to sets of [tuples of] observables, which 
is not the case with this characterization of the observational term/theoretical 
term distinction). The WESRist can thereby evade the conclusion that: 
Theorem 2: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if A has a 
model which is empirically correct and T-cardinality correct. (cf. Ketland’s 
‘Theorem 6’ [2004], p. 298) 
However, the WESRist would be well advised to leave the champagne on 
ice, if not in the cellar. Even using this more liberal characterization of the 
observational term/theoretical term distinction, we can still prove a theorem 
that casts doubt on the view that knowledge of a theory’s Ramsey-sentence is 
the sort of knowledge that the WESRist wants to claim that we have. 
We assume that we have a language containing a number of observational 
predicates (construed as above, so that they may apply to observable and unob- 
servable objects) and a number of theoretical predicates (construed as above, so 
that they too may apply to observable and unobservable objects). The structure 
associated with the intended interpretation of the observational predicates is: 
(Da, O;, O>, cay 
where Da is the domain of (observable and unobservable) objects in the world 
that instantiate some observable property or relation that is referred to by one 
of the observational predicates of the language and each Oj is the intended 
extension of an observational predicate of the language. Now, given a theory, 
A, the Ramsey-sentence of A is obtained by Ramseyfying away the theoretical 
predicates. As before, it is obvious that: 
Theorem 4: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if there is 
some sequence of relations, R2), R22,... such that ((Da, Dg), O;, O2 
R21, R22,...)F A 
where Dg is the domain of objects in the world that do not instantiate any 
observable property or relation that is referred to by one of the observational 
predicates of the language (depending on the choice of these predicates, Dg

--- Page 25 ---

Newman's Objection 159 
may well be the empty set, e.g. if one of the observational predicates is ‘larger 
than’, Dg will presumably be empty as every object is surely on at least one side 
of this relation to at least one other object). We will say of an arbitrary structure 
for the language, ((D;, D2), Ri, Ri2,..-, Ro, R22....), (where (D;, D>) is 
an arbitrary two-sorted domain, each R,; is an arbitrary interpretation of an 
observational predicate over D;, and each R2; is an arbitrary interpretation of 
a theoretical predicate over D; U D>) that: 
Definition 3: ((D;, D2), Ry... Ri2,....R21, Ro2,...) gets the extensions of 
the observational predicates right if and only if its reduct (D,, Ry, R 
is isomorphic to (Da, O;, Oo, 
We will also say that: 
Definition 4: (( D), D>), R, ls Ry Do 0+ «BRD Fy 2822,---7 18 B-cardinality correct 
if and only if |D>| = |Dg}. 
It is easy to prove: 
Theorem 5: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if A 
has a model which gets the extensions of the observational predicates right 
and which is B-cardinality correct. 
The proof is in two steps: 
[1] Left-to-right: Suppose the Ramsey-sentence of A is true. Then, by 
Theorem 3, there is some sequence of relations R2;, R22,... such that 
((Da, Dg), O1, Oo, ..., R21, R22,...) F A, ie. (Da, Dg), O;, Or, ..., Roi, 
R>>,...) isa model of A. Clearly, (Da, O;, Or, ...) is isomorphic to (Da, 
O;, O2,...), so (Da, Dg), O1, O2,..., Rai, Ro2,...) gets the extensions 
of the observational predicates right (by Definition 3). Equally clearly, 
|Dg| = |Dgl, 1-e. (Da, Dg), O1, O2 21, R22,...) is B-cardinality 
correct (by Definition 4). 
[2] Right-to-left: Suppose A has a model, ((D;, Dz), Rit, Ri2,..-,R2i, 
22 ), which gets the extensions of the observational predicates right 
and which is B-cardinality correct. As ((D,;, Dz), Ri, Riz R>| 
R22,...) gets the extensions of the observational predicates right, (D;, 
R,1, Ry.2,...) is isomorphic to (Da, O;, Oo,...), i.e. there is a bijection 
f: D; — Da, such that, for every R;; and every n-tuple, (x), X2,...Xn), 
of elements of D;: 
(X1,X2,.-.,Xn) € Rj, jif and only if (f(x;), f(x2) f(x,)) € Oj. 
As ((D;, D2), Rut, Riz 21, R22,...) is B-cardinality correct, there 
is a bijection g: D. — Dg. We can use f and g to define a new function, 
f*g: (D;, D2) — (Da, Dg) such that f* g(x) = f(x) ifx € D; and f* g(x) = g(x)

--- Page 26 ---

Peter M. Ainsworth 
if x € D2 and we can use f*g to define new relations such that, for every 
R3;: 
R3; =ar {(f* 2(x1), f g(x) X,)) 2(X1, Xo 
By the construction of the R2;’s, fg is an isomorphism between ((D;, D2), 
Ri, Rj2 R>1, R22,...) and (Da, Dg), O;, O2 R31, Ro5,...). 
We know that ((D;, D2), Ri, Ri2 ...) F A, so (Da, Dg), 
R>;, R22,...) F A. So by Theorem 3, the Ramsey-sentence of 
A is true. £ 
Theorem 5 implies that the Ramsey-sentence of a theory can tell us something 
substantial about the world, beyond what the antirealist typically allows: it tells 
us about the ‘observable’ properties and relations of the unobservable world. So 
ESR, construed on these lines, does represent a halfway house between realism 
and antirealism. However, it doesn’t look like the house the ESRist claims to 
inhabit: the position implies that we have no non-trivial knowledge of unob- 
servable properties and relations (and, in particular, no interesting ‘structural’ 
knowledge of such properties and relations). This implies that predicates such 
as ‘strangeness’ or ‘being a collection of superstrings’ serve only an instrumen- 
talist function in our theories, which seems to be at odds with the traditional 
ESRist’s claims. !* 
5.3 Melia and Saatsi’s reply 
Melia and Saatsi’s ({2006]) response to Newman’s objection is based on the 
observation that: 
The properties postulated in scientific theories are typically taken to stand 
in certain intensional relations to various other properties. Some properties 
counterfactually depend on others, some are correlated in a law-like manner 
with others, some are independent of others, and some are explanatory of 
others. (Melia and Saatsi [2006], pp. 579-80, original emphasis) 
Melia and Saatsi point out that such relations between properties (i.e. second- 
order relations) cannot be expressed in standard second-order logic.'* More- 
over, they claim that if we formulate scientific theories and their Ramsey- 
sentences in a language that is capable of expressing such relations then 
Newman’s objection will be blocked. 
'3 Discussing whether or not this position was actually plausible would be tangential to the aims of 
this paper. It would also be a highly scholastic exercise, because it is not a position that anyone 
holds. 
The terminology could become confusing here. I call properties and relations of properties and 
relations second-order properties and relations. It is important to note that second-order logic is 
so called because it allows for quantification over sets of (tuples of) objects as well as objects and 
not because it accommodates second-order properties and relations in this sense. 
14

--- Page 27 ---

Newman's Objection 161 
As Melia and Saatsi note ({2006], p. 580) the obvious way to formulate such 
relations would be to introduce higher-order predicates into one’s language. 
This is not the approach they ultimately favour, but let’s consider this approach 
first. Consider a ‘theory’ that states that there is a click on a Geiger counter if 
and only if there is an atom in the vicinity of the Geiger counter that radioac- 
tively decays. We might attempt to formalize this theory as follows: 
IxCx — dy(Ay & Dy), 
where ‘A’ and ‘D’ are ‘theoretical’ predicates such that ‘Ax’ means ‘x is an atom 
in the vicinity of a Geiger counter’ and ‘Dx’ means ‘x radioactively decays’ and 
‘C’ is an ‘observational’ predicate such that ‘Cx’ means ‘x is a click in a Geiger 
counter’. Melia and Saatsi would say that implicit in the theory is the claim 
that the correlation between Geiger counter clicks and radioactive decay is a 
lawful (as opposed to accidental) correlation. Consequently, they would argue 
that a more faithful formalization of the theory would be as follows: 
(AxCx — dy[Ay & Dy]) & LDC, 
where L is a second-order predicate such that LX Y means ‘X is lawfully corre- 
lated with Y’. Consequently the Ramsey-sentence of the theory is not 
AXSY (SxCx — dy[Xy & Yy)), 
s 
which would be contentless!> but is rather: 
AX3SY[(AxCx <— Sy[Xy & Yy]) & LXC], 
which is not so trivial: it states that some property has a lawful correlation with 
clicks on Geiger counters. 
However, this assumes that the second-order predicate L does not need to be 
‘Ramseyfied’. If it does then we would obtain the following ‘Ramsey-sentence’: 
IXSX3Y[(4xCx <— Jy[Xy & Yy]) & XXC], 
which is, again, effectively contentless: it states that there is a click on a Geiger 
counter if and only if there is something that has two (not necessarily distinct) 
properties and that there is some (second-order) relation between one of these 
properties and clicks on Geiger counters. This is contentless because there is 
always some second-order relation between any two properties: given any two 
properties P and Q we can construct the second-order relation {(P, Q)} between 
them. 
So this response is only viable if it is reasonable to suppose that second-order 
relations between properties like ‘is lawfully correlated with’ do not themselves 
'5 The Ramsey-sentence of this ‘theory’ (formalized this way) is completely contentless: it states that 
there is a click on a Geiger counter if and only if there is something that has two (not necessarily 
distinct) properties. This is utterly trivial since a click on a Geiger counter is something that has 
at least one and hence two (not necessarily distinct) properties.

--- Page 28 ---

162 Peter M. Ainsworth 
need to be Ramseyfied. But this is surely not something the ESRist could 
consistently accept: ‘lawful correlations’ and their ilk are surely not observable, 
much less internal, relations. 
As noted, Melia and Saatsi do not advocate the use of higher-order predi- 
cates to formalize the relations between properties. They suggest that we should 
instead augment the language with a number of modal operators that express 
the pertinent relations: ‘So, for instance, let Lp express “it is physically necessary 
that. ..”. Then JXLpVx(Xx <Gx) says that there is a property that is /awfully 
coextensive with G.’ (Melia and Saatsi [2006], p. 581). The claim is that scien- 
tific theories, and their Ramsey-sentences, would typically (perhaps invariably) 
include such modal operators. This sidesteps the problem that undermines the 
previous approach, because there can be no question of ‘Ramseyfying’ modal 
operators. This approach is, however, open to the objection that it requires us 
to take these modal operators as logical primitives and we surely cannot accept 
that modal operators expressing things like ‘it is physically necessary that...’ 
can be taken as /ogical primitives, since whether or not something happens as 
a matter of physical necessity is an issue that must be decided empirically, not 
as a matter of logic. 
6 Replies that Argue that Some Structures/ Relations are Privileged 
In this section, three variants of Newman’s own ‘absurd’ response to his objec- 
tion are considered. This response is founded on the claim that some relations 
are more important than others. Newman took this response to be absurd be- 
cause, as the ESRist believes, we have only structural knowledge of the relations 
in question, we lack a criterion to distinguish the important relations from the 
unimportant relations, so ‘importance’ must be left as an unanalyzed primitive, 
a mysterious quality that attaches to some relations but not to others. How- 
ever, the idea of a primitive important/unimportant distinction (or something 
similar) has not appeared absurd to everyone. The proposal most similar to 
Newman’s own was put forward by Carnap ([1967]) to resolve an analogue of 
Newman’s problem that faces the theory he puts forward in the Aufbau. The 
adaptation of this proposal to resolve Newman’s objection to ESR is discussed 
in Section 6.1. The other two variants of this approach discussed here both 
in some sense deny that ‘importance’ needs to be taken as primitive. Votsis’ 
({2003}; [2004], Chapter 4) proposal (discussed in Section 6.2) grounds the im- 
portance of a relation on the means by which it is discovered. Psillos’ ({1999], 
Chapter 3) proposal (discussed in Section 6.3) takes the importance ofa relation 
to be a contingent physical property of the relation. Psillos himself argues that 
taking the approach ultimately amounts to abandoning ESR. (Both Merrill 
[1980] and Lewis [1983] make suggestions similar to Psillos’ in response to

--- Page 29 ---

Newman's Objection 163 
Putnam’s [1977] ‘model-theoretic’ argument against realism: an argument that 
is very closely related to Newman’s objection to ESR). 
6.1 A Carnapian reply 
This reply has some similarities to Melia and Saatsi’s ({2006]) reply (discussed 
in Section 5.3). The essence of the proposal is the suggestion that we should 
take importance (or as Carnap [1967] calls it, ‘foundedness’) as a primitive 
(second-order) logical property that attaches to some relations (in the way that 
identity is sometimes taken as a primitive logical relation that holds between 
some pairs). With a little adaptation of the Ramsey-sentence approach, this 
enables the proponent of ESR to evade Ketland’s variant of the Newman 
objection. Let the symbol for the foundedness property be ‘Found’. Instead 
of advocating belief in a theory’s Ramsey-sentence, the ESRist who takes this 
approach should advocate belief in the theory’s Ramsey-sentence*, where the 
latter is just like a normal Ramsey sentence, except that, for each predicate 
variable, X, we add (in the scope of the quantifier 3X) the phrase ‘&Found(X)’. 
For example, consider the toy theory: 
¥x(O,x — Tx) & Vy(T2y > Ory), 
where O; and O> are observational predicates and T,; and T> are theoretical 
predicates. This theory yields the Ramsey-sentence 
AXISY(Vx[O,x > Xx] & Vy[Yy > O>y]) 
and the Ramsey-sentence* 
3X3Y(Vx[O,x > Xx] & Vy[Yy > Ory] & Found[X] & Found[Y]). 
As ‘Found’ is taken as a logical primitive the Ramsey-sentence* contains only 
logical and observational terms. It is thus hygienic, by the WESRist’s standards 
(in that the WESRist’s claim does not imply that it is impossible to know the 
Ramsey-sentence*). However, if Ramsey-sentences are swapped for Ramsey- 
sentence*s then Ketland’s argument no longer goes through. In particular, the 
relevant analogue of: 
Theorem 1: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if there 
>,... such that ((Do, 
Theorem |’: The Ramsey-sentence* of a theory A is true if and only if 
there is some sequence of relations, R2;,R 3.1, R3.2,... such that 
((Do, Dr), O1, Or 21, R22 R31, R32,...) = A and such that 
each member of the sequence is a founded relation.

--- Page 30 ---

164 Peter M. Ainsworth 
This blocks Ketland’s proof of Theorem 2 at the last step: although, given 
that a theory has some model ((D;, Dz), Ri, 
R3.2,...) that is empirically correct and T-cardinality correct, we can construct 
a model of the theory of the form ((Do, Dr), O1, O2 R51, Ro2 
R32,...), this does not guarantee that the theory’s Ramsey-sentence* is true, 
as there is no guarantee that the relations R;, R22,... we have constructed 
will be founded. 
However, even Carnap does not have licence to invent logical predicates at 
whim; if we are to accept ‘Found’ as a new logical term we surely must be given 
reasons to do so. Here is what Carnap says: 
[Found] does not belong to any definite extralogical domain, as all other 
nonlogical objects do. Our considerations concerning the characterisation 
of the basic relations of a constructional system as founded relation exten- 
sions of a certain kind hold for every constructional system of any domain 
whatever. It is perhaps permissible, because of this generality, to envisage 
the concept of foundedness as a concept of logic and to introduce it, since 
it is undefinable, as a basic concept of logic. (Carnap [1967], p. 237, original 
emphasis) 
We might, just possibly, think that the following was plausible: 
If a property or relation is instantiated in every possible system then it is a 
logical property or relation. 
However, if I understand him correctly, Carnap seems to assume something 
like the following: 
If a property or relation is instantiated in every possible constructional 
system then it is a logical property or relation. 
The notion of a constructional system is central to Carnap’s theory in the Auf- 
bau, but it is not the case that every possible system is a possible constructional 
system, so it is hard to see why we should accept this assumption. Compare 
Carnap’s assumption with the following assumption: 
If a property or relation is instantiated in every possible system whose 
domain contains human beings then it is a logical property or relation. 
No one would accept this: it would lead to the conclusion that properties like 
‘being a human being’ and ‘being a mammal’ are logical properties. So it seems 
we at least need an argument that shows that constructional systems are more 
important (founded, as it were) than systems whose domain contains human 
beings.

--- Page 31 ---

Newman's Objection 165 
It is instructive to contrast foundedness with identity, a relation we might 
sensibly take to be logical. In the first place we can see that the identity relation 
will be instantiated by some pairs of objects from any possible non-empty 
domain; by contrast the foundedness property need not be instantiated by any 
relations from a given set of relations. In the second place, given a domain, we 
can determine the extension of the identity relation over that domain a priori; 
by contrast we cannot determine the extension of the foundedness relation over 
a set of (extensionally specified) relations a priori. 
It seems that it is fair to say that taking the notion of the importance of a 
relation as a primitive logical notion is absurd and cannot form the basis of a 
reasonable response to Newman’s objection. 
6.2 Votsis’ reply 
Votsis claims that Newman’s objection purports to show that ‘the knowledge 
claims of SR [structural realism] [are] of littlke worth or importance’ (Votsis 
[2003], p. 886) by showing that ‘the information they offer can also be de- 
rived a priori from set theory modulo a cardinality constraint, hence the only 
important information contained in the structural realist claims concerns the 
cardinality of the domain’ (Votsis [2003], p. 886).'° He also claims that the 
inference from the latter to the former rests on the assumption that ‘any infor- 
mation contained in a statement that is also derivable a priori lacks importance’ 
(Votsis [2003], p. 886). Votsis takes issue with this assumption. There is a sense 
in which everyone will surely agree that this assumption is false. The statement 
that there is no largest prime is surely of some importance, at least in some 
contexts, but the claim is derivable a priori. 
However, Votsis does not dispute the assumption that ‘any information con- 
tained in a statement that is also derivable a priori lacks importance’ by pointing 
out that there is a sense in which some results that are obtained a priori are 
important. Rather, he seems to make the extraordinary suggestion that how a 
claim is arrived at affects its importance. In particular, he seems to suggest that 
a claim is more important if it is arrived at empirically than if it is arrived at 
a priori. He claims that ‘The method of arriving at the abstract structures is at 
least partly empirical [. . .] The fact that set theory also allows me to derive the 
same structure a priori does not mean that the information I have reached is 
'6 This isn’t strictly true, at least if we take the modern version of Newman’s objection that is 
directed at the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR. In this form, what Newman’s objection shows 
is that knowing that a theory’s Ramsey-sentence is true is only knowing that the theory has a 
model that is T-cardinality correct and empirically correct. Moreover, it seems that the essence of 
Newman’s objection is not so much that ESR implies that scientific theories are of little worth 
but rather that it implies that all they tell us about the unobservable world is its cardinality, so 
ESR is not significantly distinct from antirealism. So it seems that Votsis fails to address the right 
issue in his reply to Newman’s objection. However, this is not too important: it will be argued 
that he does not satisfactorily address the wrong issue.

--- Page 32 ---

166 Peter M. Ainsworth 
devoid of importance’ (Votsis [2003], p. 887, original emphasis). But if some 
fact is of no importance when it is acquired by set-theoretical reasoning, that 
surely does mean that it is of no importance when it is acquired empirically. A 
fact that is unimportant, insofar as it can be easily discovered, does not become 
more important because it can also be discovered by an unnecessarily difficult 
route. For example, suppose someone claims to have made the important dis- 
covery that ‘eggs is eggs’. We might well reply that their discovery is not in fact 
important, insofar as it is easy to show (a priori) that ‘eggs is eggs’: the claim 
follows directly from the a priori principle that everything is self-identical. It 
would be ridiculous if they were to reply that the discovery was important 
because they arrived at it by an empirical study of eggs. Indeed, it seems that 
Votsis’ contention comes down to the claim that ‘two’ results can be the same 
but of different importance, a claim that violates the law of the indiscernibility 
of identicals. 
Votsis attempts to support his contention with a thought experiment: 
Take the numbers 133 and 123. I can, restricting myself solely to arithmetic, 
perform various operations on these numbers. One such operation is ad- 
dition. Similarly, if I had two collections of 133 and 123 physical objects 
respectively, I could count them one by one, and would reach the same 
result. Despite the similarities, there is an important difference between 
the two cases. The latter case is one in which the result is a property that 
is then ascribed to the physical world, in particular to the physical objects 
under consideration, and not merely an exercise of arithmetic. This claim is 
warranted by the employment of an empirical method to arrive at the given 
number. The main point is quite simple: The fact that arithmetic allows 
me to do this a priori does not mean that the information I have reached 
counting objects is of little or no importance. One need only consider the 
consequences if I had made an error in counting. (Votsis [2003], p. 886, 
original emphasis) 
This case does not at all support Votsis’ contention. In this case the two 
procedures, the a priori arithmetical procedure of adding 133 and 123 and 
the empirical procedure of counting the objects in two collections, do not 
achieve the same results. The former enables us to determine that 133 + 123 = 
256, whereas, as Votsis notes, the latter enables us to determine that there are 
256 objects in a particular collection. These results may well be of different 
importance but we cannot infer from this, as Votsis does, that two procedures 
yielding the same result can yield results of different importance, as the results 
in this case are not the same: the former is a theorem of arithmetic, the latter is 
a contingent fact about the world. 
Votsis goes on to note that ‘Using the [. . .] a priori method, set theory allows 
us to set up any structure we like [...] No structure is privileged in this sense. 
The structural realist’s a posteriori method guarantees that some structures are 
privileged over others.’ (Votsis [2003], p. 887, original emphasis). There is a

--- Page 33 ---

Newman’s Objection 167 
trivial sense in which the structures that have been arrived at a posteriori are 
privileged compared with those that have not been arrived at a posteriori, but 
it is not clear that there is an important sense: it is not obvious why the fact 
that some structures have been arrived at a posteriori guarantees that these 
structures are more important than those structures that have been arrived at 
‘merely’ a priori. Simply being arrived at via an a posteriori method does not 
seem to be sufficient to make a result important, especially if that result could 
have been arrived at a priori. After all, if the claim ‘eggs is eggs’ had been 
discovered to be true a posteriori, it would not thereby be more important than 
those identity claims that had been arrived at ‘merely’ a priori. 
Newman argued (in effect) that the ESRist (unlike the conventional realist) 
does not have the resources to distinguish the important structures instantiated 
by a system from the unimportant structures, or even to say in what sense one 
structure could be more important than another. Votsis seems to be suggesting 
that the ESRist can make the distinction, because a structure is made important 
simply in virtue of the fact that it has been arrived at via an a posteriori method. 
This is surely untenable. 
6.3 The Merrill/ Lewis/ Psillos reply 
This proposal was first suggested as a possible response to Putnam’s model 
theoretic argument against realism by Merrill ({1980]). It was adopted by Lewis 
([1983]) and has been discussed in connection with Newman’s objection by 
Psillos ({1999]). The key to the proposal is the suggestion that it is a contingent 
fact that some relations instantiated by the world are more important than 
others. The importance, or as proponents of this approach usually put it, 
‘naturalness’, ofa relation is not a logical property of the relation, nor a property 
the relation somehow acquires via the method by which it is discovered, but a 
physical property. Proponents of this view would not, presumably, deny that 
there is a perfectly good sense in which objects in the domain of the world, Dw, 
instantiate every relation compatible with the cardinality of Dw. However, they 
would add that only some of these relations are natural relations. The idea is 
that the world isn’t just a collection of objects that can be grouped howsoever 
we please; rather, it is a collection of objects that also have preferred natural 
groupings. The world itself determines that some relations are more important 
than others and in this way comes pre-structured. 
This is just the ‘natural kinds’ doctrine (or something very similar) and so 
this response is only open to those ESRists who are prepared to buy into this 
doctrine (or something very similar).'’ However, if one does accept it then 
'7 Worrall (personal communication) says that he takes natural kinds to be, by definition, the 
properties and relations that we refer to with the predicates of our best theories. This response 
to Newman’s objection is also not open to the ESRist who accepts only this form of the natural 
kinds doctrine: saying that the predicates of our best theories refer to natural kinds does not limit

--- Page 34 ---

168 Peter M. Ainsworth 
Newman’s objection misses the point. Let’s call a structure a structure of the 
world if its domain is Dw (the set of objects in the world). Let’s call a structure 
a natural structure of the world if in addition the relations in it are (the sets 
corresponding to) natural relations. It is true that any structure whose domain 
has the same cardinality as Dw is isomorphic to some structure of the world, 
but it is certainly not true that any such structure is isomorphic to some natural 
structure of the world (and presumably science aims to discover not just any 
old structures of the world but only the natural structures). 
In terms of the Ramsey-sentence approach to ESR, the claim would be 
that the relations over which the quantifiers in the Ramsey-sentence range are 
restricted to the natural relations. It follows that Theorem | 
Theorem |: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if there 
is some sequence of relations, R2;, R22 R31, R3.2,... such that ((Do, 
Dr), O;, O2 2.15 K2 31, R32,...) FA 
must be replaced by 
Theorem 1’: The Ramsey-sentence of a theory A is true if and only if there 
is some sequence of natural relations, R2,, 
that ((Do, Dr), 01, O2 
because the relations R2;, R2> R31, R32,... are now only in the scope 
of the existential quantifiers if they are natural. This blocks Ketland’s proof 
of Theorem 2 at the last step: although given a theory has some model ((D,, 
D2), Ria, Riz 21, R22 31, R32,..-) that is empirically correct 
and T-cardinality correct we can construct a model of the theory of the form 
((Do, Dr), O1, O2 51, R’ R31, R3.2,...), it does not guarantee that 
the theory’s Ramsey-sentence is true, as there is no guarantee that the relations 
R31, R22,... we have constructed are natural. As Merrill puts it: 
So long as we ignore any intrinsic structuring of the world, there is nothing 
to forbid us imposing a structure along any lines we chose. But if, as the 
realist surely must hold, the real world is a structured domain, then we are 
not free to ignore its intrinsic structuring in playing our model-theoretic 
tricks. (Merrill [1980], p. 74, original emphasis) 
It might be objected that the ESRist could have no warrant for the claim 
that the second-order variables in the Ramsey-sentence range over only natural 
properties and relations, because we can have no idea what the natural kinds 
are independently of our theories. However, the ESRist needn’t claim that we 
do know what natural kinds are independently of our theories. He will claim 
that whatever reason we have to believe that our theories are true is also a 
the properties and relations to which these predicates can refer if any property or relation that is 
referred to by these predicates is, by definition, a natural kind.

--- Page 35 ---

Newman's Objection 169 
good reason to think that the terms in our theories refer to natural kinds and 
that the second-order variables in the Ramsey-sentence range over only natural 
properties and relations. '* 
As noted, Psillos ([1999]) considers this response to Newman’s objection but 
argues that it is not available to the ESRist: 
in order for them [i.e. ESRists] to distinguish between natural and non- 
natural classes they have to admit that some non-structural knowledge is 
possible, viz. that some classes are natural, while others are not. (Psillos 
[1999], p. 66) 
As long as we do not go down Carnap’s route and take naturalness to be a 
logical property of properties and relations then it is true that the knowledge 
that some property or relation is natural is not purely structural. However, 
neither the WESRist nor the SESRist claims that we have only purely struc- 
tural knowledge (WESRists claim that our knowledge is restricted to claims 
constructed using logical and observational terms, SESRists claim that our 
knowledge is restricted to claims constructed using logical and internal terms). 
However, Psillos’ point is essentially unaffected by this consideration, because 
the ‘naturalness’ of a property or relation is surely not an observable (or in- 
ternal) property, so neither the WESRist nor the SESRist can consistently 
treat ‘naturalness’ as a primitive second-order non-logical predicate, and if the 
predicate ‘naturalness’ must itself be ‘Ramseyfied’, this response will not work; 
cf. Section 5.3. 
7 Summary 
It has been argued that none of the attempts that have been made to evade 
Newman’s objection is successful. Consequently, Newman’s objection remains 
a very serious problem for the ESRist. Of course, one cannot rule out the 
possibility that ESRist may in the future come up with a satisfactory reply, but 
in the absence of such a reply it seems that the sensible attitude towards his 
position is one of considerable scepticism. 
'8 He might also suggest, as Lewis does, that, ‘It takes two to make a reference, and we will not 
find the constraint [on what properties and relations we refer to] if we look for it always on the 
wrong side of the relationship. Reference consists in part of what we do in language or thought 
when we refer, but in part it consists in eligibility of the referent.’ (Lewis [1983], p. 371). Lewis’ 
suggestion is that there is some feature of the world that restricts the range of our variables for 
us. So it doesn’t matter whether we know that our terms refer to natural kinds or not. It is just 
a fact that only certain properties and relations are eligible referents of terms, so, like it or not, 
our (second-order) variables can only range over certain properties and relations. However, this 
response is incoherent. It amounts to the claim that ‘there are some properties and relations 
(the unnatural ones) that lie outside the scope of our quantifiers’ and this claim is obviously 
self-defeating. Suppose (for reductio) that it is true. Then there is something in the scope of the 
‘some properties and relations’ that lies outside the scope of the ‘some properties and relations’. 
So the claim is false. Or, to put it in another way, we clearly can refer to unnatural relations, even 
if we don’t typically do so.

--- Page 36 ---

Peter M. Ainsworth 
Acknowledgements 
I’m grateful to Roman Frigg and John Worrall for their comments on this 
paper. 
Department of Philosophy, Logic and Scientific Method 
London School of Economics and Political Science 
Houghton Street, London, WC2A 2AE, UK 
P.M. Ainsworth@lse.ac.uk 
References 
Carnap, R. [1967]: The Logical Structure of the World: Pseudoproblems in Philosophy, 
translated by R. A. George, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Cruse, P. [2005]: ‘Ramsey Sentences, Structural Realism and Trivial Realization’, Studies 
in the History and Philosophy of Science, 36, pp. 557-76. 
Demopoulos, W. and Friedman, M. [1985]: ‘Bertrand Russell’s The Analysis of Mat- 
ter: Its Historical Context and Contemporary Interest’, Philosophy of Science, 52, 
pp. 621-39. 
Duhem, P. [1906]: The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, translated by P. P. Wiener, 
reprinted 1991, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Enderton, H. B. [2001]: A Mathematical Introduction to Logic, 2nd edition, San Diego, 
CA: Harcourt. 
French, S. and Ladyman, J. [2003]: ‘Remodelling Structural Realism: Quantum Physics 
and the Metaphysics of Structure’, Synthese, 136, pp. 31—S6. 
Halbach, V. [1999]: ‘Conservative Theories of Classical Truth’, Studia Logica, 62, 
pp. 353-70. 
Ketland, J. [2004]: ‘Empirical Adequacy and Ramsification’, British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, 55, pp. 287-300. 
Ladyman, J. [1998]: ‘What Is Structural Realism?’, Studies in the History and Philosophy 
of Science, 29, pp. 409-24. 
Lewis, D. [1983]: “New Work for a Theory of Universals’, Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy, 61, pp. 343-77. 
Maxwell, G. [1968]: ‘Scientific Methodology and the Causal Theory of Perception’, in 
I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (eds), Problems in the Philosophy of Science: Proceedings 
of the International Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science, London, 1965, Vol. 3, 
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, pp. 148-60. 
Maxwell, G. [1970a]: ‘Structural Realism and the Meaning of Theoretical Terms’, in 
S. Winokur and M. Radner (eds), Analyses of Theories and Methods of Physics and 
Psychology, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 181-92. 
Maxwell, G. [1970b]: ‘Theories, Perception, and Structural Realism’, in R. Colodny (ed.), 
Nature and Function of Scientific Theories, Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh 
Press, pp. 3-34. 
Melia, J. and Saatsi, J. [2006]: ‘Ramseyfication and Theoretical Content’, British Journal 
for the Philosophy of Science, 57, pp. 561-85.

--- Page 37 ---

Newman’s Objection 171 
Merrill, G. H. [1980]: ‘The Model-Theoretic Argument Against Realism’, Philosophy of 
Science, 47, pp. 69-81. 
Newman, M. H. A. [1928]: “Mr. Russell’s “Causal Theory of Perception” Mind, 37, 
pp. 137-48. 
Poincaré, H. [1903]: Science and Hypothesis, reprinted in S. J. Gould (ed.), The Value of 
Science: Essential Writings of Henri Poincaré, New York: Random House. 
Psillos, S. [1999]: Scientific Realism. How Science Tracks Truth, London: Routledge. 
Putnam, H. [1977]: ‘Realism and Reason’, Proceedings and Addresses of the American 
Philosophical Association, 50, pp. 483-98. 
Redhead, M. [2001]: ‘Quests of a Realist’, Metascience, 10, pp. 341-7 
Russell, B. [1912]: The Problems of Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Russell, B. [1927]: The Analysis of Matter, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 
Russell, B. [1968]: The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, IT, London: Allen & Unwin. 
van Fraassen, B. C. [1980]: The Scientific Image, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
otsis, I. [2003]: ‘Is Structure Not Enough?’, Philosophy of Science, 70, pp. 879-90. 
Votsis, I. [2004]: The Epistemological Statue of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the 
Structural Realist Account, PhD thesis, London School of Economics and Political 
Science. 
Worrall, J. [1989]: ‘Structural Realism: The Best of Both Worlds?’, Dialectica, 43, 
pp. 99-124. 
Worrall, J. [1994]: ‘How to Remain (Reasonably) Optimistic: Scientific Realism and the 
“Luminiferous Ether”, PSA 1994, 1, pp. 334-42. 
Zahar, E. G. [2001]: Poincaré’s Philosophy: From Conventionalism to Phenomenology, 
Chicago: Open Court. 
Zahar, E. G. [2004]: ‘Ramseyfication and Structural Realism’, Theoria: Revista de Teoria, 
Historia y Fundamentos de la Ciencia, 19, pp. 5—30.
