--- Page 2 ---

PHYSICALISM, 
OR SOMETHING NEAR ENOUGH
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page i

--- Page 3 ---

PRINCETON MONOGRAPHS 
IN PHILOSOPHY
Harry Frankfurt, Series Editor
The Princeton Monographs in Philosophy series 
offers short historical and systematic studies 
on a wide variety of philosophical topics.
Justice Is Conﬂict by STUARTH AMPSHIRE
Liberty Worth the Name by GIDEON YAFFE
Self-Deception Unmasked by ALFRED R. MELE
Public Goods, Private Goods by RAYMONDG EUSS
Welfare and Rational Care by STEPHEN D ARWALL
A Defense of Hume on Miracles by ROBERTJ. FOGELIN
Kierkegaard’s Concept of Despair by MICHAEL THEUNISSEN
Physicalism, or Something Near Enough by JAEGWON KIM
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page ii

--- Page 4 ---

PHYSICALISM, 
OR SOMETHING NEAR
ENOUGH
R
/Jswashaegwon /Kswashim
R
princeton university press
princeton and oxford
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page iii

--- Page 5 ---

Copyright © 2005 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press,
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
3 Market Place, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1SY
All Rights Reserved
Third printing, and ﬁrst paperback printing, 2008
Paperback ISBN: 978-0-691-13385-0
The Library of Congress has cataloged the cloth edition of this 
book as follows
Kim, Jaegwon.
Physicalism, or something near enough / Jaegwon Kim.
p. cm.—(Princeton monographs in philosophy) 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-691-11375-0 (hardcover: alk. paper)
1. Philosophy of mind. 2. Mind and body. I. Title. II. Series.
BD418.3.K55  2005
128/H11032.2—dc22
2004053451
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Janson
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
press.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
35791 0864

--- Page 6 ---

R
/Fswashor 
Nam Kyun, Y eong Min (IN MEMORIAM), 
Yung Chul,
and Jae Won—the gang of four
R
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page v

--- Page 7 ---

70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page vi

--- Page 8 ---

/Cswashontents
R
Preface
xi
Synopsis of the Arguments
1
CHAPTER1 
Mental Causation and Consciousness: 
OurTwo Mind-Body Problems
7
Mental Causation and Consciousness
8
The Supervenience/Exclusion Argument
13
Can We Reduce Qualia?
22
The Two World-Knots
29
70572 FM GGS  1/13/05  1:31 PM  Page vii

--- Page 9 ---

viii contents
CHAPTER 2 
The Supervenience Argument Motivated, 
Clariﬁed, and Defended
32
Nonreductive Physicalism
33
The Fundamental Idea
36
The Supervenience Argument Reﬁned and Clariﬁed
39
Is Overdetermination an Option?
46
The Generalization Argument
52
Block’s Causal Drainage Argument
57
CHAPTER 3 
The Rejection of Immaterial Minds: 
A Causal Argument
70
Cartesian Dualism and Mental Causation
72
Causation and the “Pairing” Problem
78
Causality and Space
85
Why Not Locate Souls in Space?
88
Concluding Remarks
91
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page viii

--- Page 10 ---

CHAPTER 4 
Reduction, Reductive Explanation, 
and Closing the “Gap” 
93
Reduction and Reductive Explanation
95
Bridge-Law Reduction and Functional Reduction
98
Explanatory Ascent and Constraint (R)
103
Functional Reduction and Reductive Explanation
108
Kripkean Identities and Reductive Explanation
113
Remarks about Block and Stalnaker’s Proposal
117
CHAPTER 5
Explanatory Arguments for Type Physicalism 
and Why They Don’t Work 
121
Are There PositiveArguments for Type Physicalism?
123
Hill’s and McLaughlin’s Explanatory Argument
126
Do Psychoneural Identities Explain Psychoneural Correlations?
131
Block and Stalnaker’s Explanatory Argument
139
Another Way of Looking at the Two Explanatory Arguments
146
contents i x
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page ix

--- Page 11 ---

x contents
CHAPTER 6 
Physicalism, or Something Near Enough
149
Taking Stock
150
Physicalism at a Crossroads
156
Reducing Minds
161
Living with the Mental Residue
170
Where We Are at Last with the Mind-Body Problem
173
References
175
Index
181
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page x

--- Page 12 ---

/Pswashreface
R
I offer here no startlingly new views about the mind-body
problem beyond what can be found in my earlier book Mind in
a Physical World(MIT Press, 1998). Apart from some new ma-
terial, on topics like substance dualism, the idea of reductive
explanation, and the explanatory arguments for type physical-
ism, what the book does offer, I hope, is better focused and
motivated arguments and a more clearly articulated overall
view of the philosophical terrain involved. By and large I feel
comfortable with the outcome, as it is presented here, of my
toils and travails over the years; it is the kind of picture I feel 
I can live with, although there still are murky nooks and cran-
nies that might harbor hidden difﬁculties and dangers.
As detailed below, all the chapters save chapter 2 originated
as stand-alone lectures, and this meant that each had to be
made largely intelligible on its own, with minimal references
to outside sources. I have decided to preserve this character for
each chapter. The six chapters of this book, therefore, are in-
tended to be readable as independent essays as well as serve as
links in the overall argument of the book. This, I believe, has
both advantages and disadvantages. One advantage is that the
reader can go over the book pretty much in any order he or
she pleases, or pick the chapters that look interesting or
promising. But there is also the disadvantage that, although I
have tried to minimize this, there inevitably remains some
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page xi

--- Page 13 ---

x i i preface
overlap of material from chapter to chapter (for example,
similar material on reduction will be found in chapters 1, 4,
and 6). I hope, though, that this does not obscure the overall
structure of the book’s arguments. (In this regard the reader
might ﬁnd the “Synopsis of the Arguments” helpful.)
The material presented in chapters 1, 3, 4, and 6 derives in
part from a series of ﬁve lectures given as the Daewoo Lec-
tures, in Seoul, Korea, in the fall of 2000, under the auspices
of the Korea Academic Research Council with the support of
the Chosun Ilbo. I am grateful to the director of KARC, Dr.
Yong Joon Kim, for the invitation and to its staff for cordial
and efﬁcient support. I also want to thank the many dozen
philosophers in Seoul who participated in the events as com-
mentators, discussants, translators, and chairs.
Chapters 2 and 5 are based on the Taft Lectures delivered
at the University of Cincinnati in the spring of 2003. I am
grateful to Tom Polger, John Bickle, Bob Richardson, Don
Gustafson, and other members of the U.C. philosophy depart-
ment for their hospitality and stimulating discussion.
An early version of chapter 1 appeared as “Mental Causa-
tion and Consciousness: the Two Mind-Body Problems for the
Physicalist” in Physicalism and Its Discontents, edited by Carl
Gillett and Barry Loewer (Cambridge University Press, 2001;
used here with permission). Chapter 2 was originally prepared
as a reply to Ned Block’s “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?”
and appeared under the title “Blocking Causal Drainage and
Other Maintenance Chores with Mental Causation” in Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Researchin July, 2003 (used with per-
mission). An earlier version of chapter 3, with the title “Lonely
Souls: Causality and Substance Dualism”, was included in
Soul, Body, and Survival, edited by Kevin Corcoran (Cornell
University Press, 2001). A version of chapter 6 was given at
the 2002 Wittgenstein Symposium in Kirchberg, Austria, and
appears in the conference proceedings for that year. A similar
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page xii

--- Page 14 ---

version will appear as part of my contribution, “The Mind-
Body Problem at Century’s Turn,” to The Future of Philosophy,
edited by Brian Leiter, forthcoming from Oxford University
Press.
I am indebted to Chris Hill, Terry Horgan, and Brian
McLaughlin for valuable comments on chapter 5. My research
assistant, Maura Geisser, has given me her usual dependable
and efﬁcient help. I am particularly grateful to Ian Malcolm,
my editor at Princeton University Press, who has provided me
with unfailingly friendly encouragement and capable support.
preface xiii
70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page xiii

--- Page 15 ---

70572 FM GGS  1/10/05  1:35 PM  Page xiv

--- Page 16 ---

Synopsis of the Arguments
R
A strong physicalist outlook has shaped contemporary dis-
cussions of the mind-body problem. The aim of this book is to
assess, after half a century of debate, just what kind of physi-
calism, or “how much” physicalism, we can lay claim to. My
conclusion is that although we cannot have physicalism tout
court, we can have something nearly as good.
Chapter 1 introduces the two principal challenges confronting
contemporary physicalism. They are mental causation and con-
sciousness. The problem of mental causation is to explain how
mentality can have a causal role in a world that is fundamen-
tallyphysical. The supervenience/exclusion argument shows that
within a physicalist scheme, mental causation is possible only if
mental phenomena are physically reducible. But is the mental
reducible to the physical? In particular, can we give a reductive
physicalist account of consciousness? This is the problem of con-
sciousness. There are well-known, though by no means un-
contested, reasons for thinking that phenomenal, or qualitative,
consciousness cannot be physically reduced. In this way the two
issues, mental causation and consciousness, become interlocked:
the problem of mental causation is solvable only if mentality is
physically reducible; however, phenomenal consciousness resists
physical reduction, putting its causal efﬁcacy in peril. 
Chapter 2 presents a more detailed and improved formula-
tion of the supervenience/exclusion argument, including an
70572 SYNOPSIS GGS  1/10/05  1:11 PM  Page 1

--- Page 17 ---

2 synopsis of the arguments
explanation of its fundamental motivating idea. The argument
is divided into two stages, each with a philosophical moral of
its own, and I show that there are two materially different
ways of completing the second stage. Two of the more impor-
tant objections raised against the argument are discussed. The
ﬁrst concerns the overdetermination option. The proposal is
that we accept any purported physical effect of a mental event
as overdetermined by two sufﬁcient causes, one mental and
one physical. I reject this suggestion. The second objection
claims that the supervenience argument proves too much—
speciﬁcally that, if correct, it would show that either all causa-
tion drains down to the bottom level of microphysics, depriving
all special sciences of causality, or, if there is no bottom mi-
crolevel, there can be no causation anywhere. This is the
“causal drainage” argument. I offer a two-pronged reply. First,
the supervenience argument, I remind the reader, has been
designed as a reductio against antireductionism; its point is
that antireductionism, in conjunction with certain plausible
principles and propositions, entails mental epiphenomenalism,
a conclusion most of us are strongly inclined to reject. If the
drainage objection works, it only adds to the force of the re-
ductio. Second, the drainage argument is shown to depend on
some questionable assumptions. Thus, chapters 1 and 2 lay out
mental causation and consciousness as the two central prob-
lems for the contemporary physicalist, and then motivate and
strengthen the supervenience argument. This prepares the
starting point of the overall dialectic of the book. 
Ontological dualism positing immaterial minds has not been
taken seriously in contemporary philosophy of mind. Possibly
as a response to the difﬁculties posed by mental causation and
consciousness, however, the dualist approach is now showing
signs of a revival. In chapter 3, I take a backward look at the idea
of minds as immaterial substances, to argue that the dualism of
material bodies and immaterial minds is not a workable option
for anyone. For this purpose I formulate a causal argument.
70572 SYNOPSIS GGS  1/10/05  1:11 PM  Page 2

--- Page 18 ---

This argument shows that immaterial minds, if they existed,
would be incapable of entering into any causal relations,
whether with material things or with other immaterial minds.
This makes them gratuitous posits with no explanatory pur-
pose to serve. The discussion provides concrete content to the
oft-expressed complaint that, on account of their “diverse” na-
tures, it is difﬁcult to conceive how immaterial minds and ma-
terial things could causally affect each other. By eliminating
immaterial substances, chapter 3 establishes ontological physi-
calism, the thesis that bits of matter and their aggregates ex-
haust the content of the world.
Immaterial minds having been banished, the main remain-
ing question concerns the status of mental properties. In chap-
ter 2, it was argued that if mental properties are to retain their
causal efﬁcacy, they must be reducible to physical properties.
The saving of minds’ causal efﬁcacy is widely considered 
a presumptive (some would say, nonnegotiable) desideratum.
However, it is not proper simply to assume the reality of men-
tal causation as a premise and then derive from it the physical
reducibility of the mental. The reducibility of mentality must
be assessed on its own merit. 
Some writers have claimed that although mind-body reduc-
tion cannot be carried through, this does not preclude the pos-
sibility of reductive explanationof the mental in terms of the
physical/biological. In chapter 4, I examine reduction, reduc-
tive explanation, and their relationship, in general terms as
well as in relation to the mind-body case. Reductive explana-
tion of mentality apparently requires the derivation of psycho-
logical statements from statements about neural/physical
states and processes. How can this be accomplished? There
appear to be three presumptive possibilities: (i) via psycho-
neural correlation laws as auxiliary premises (Nagelian bridge-
law reduction); (ii) via conceptual connections between mental
properties and physical/behavioral properties (functional re-
duction); (iii) via a posteriori necessary psychoneural identities
synopsis of the arguments 3
70572 SYNOPSIS GGS  1/10/05  1:11 PM  Page 3

--- Page 19 ---

4 synopsis of the arguments
as additional premises (identity reduction). It is easily shown
that bridge-law reduction does not yield genuine reduction or
reductive explanation, and I discuss how (ii) and (iii) might
generate reductive explanations, or help close the “explanatory
gap.” Making use of (ii) requires the functional deﬁnability of
mental properties in terms of physical/behavioral properties,
and (iii) presupposes the availability of psychoneural identities.
One side result of this discussion is that reduction and reduc-
tive explanation are more intimately tied to each other than
sometimes supposed.
In chapter 5, I raise doubts about the availability of psy-
choneural identities by undermining a currently popular argu-
ment for psychoneural type identities, namely the explanatory
argument. The claim is that these identities are warranted
because of the indispensable role they play in generating ex-
planations of phenomena that would otherwise remain unex-
plained. The argument comes in two forms. The ﬁrst begins
with the observation that psychoneural correlations are per-
vasively observed, and that they require explanations. It is then
claimed that psychoneural identities (for example, “Pain/H11005
C-ﬁber stimulation”) provide the “best” explanation of the
correlations (“Pain occurs if and only if C-ﬁbers are stimu-
lated”), and therefore must be accepted. I show that this argu-
ment is seriously ﬂawed. The second form of the explanatory
argument forgoes the claim that psychoneural identities ex-
plain psychoneural correlations; on the contrary, the identities
render the demand for explanations of the correlations inco-
herent and wrongheaded. Rather, we need these identities if
we want to bring neurobiological theory to bear on the expla-
nation of psychological facts. Pain causes distress. Why? Be-
cause pain is identical with neural state N
1, distress is identical
with neural state N2, and neurophysiologytells us a detailed
story about how neural state N1 causes neural state N2. The
general point is that psychoneural identities can generate
neural/physical explanations of psychological regularities, and
70572 SYNOPSIS GGS  1/10/05  1:11 PM  Page 4

--- Page 20 ---

that this is sufﬁcient warrant for their acceptance. This argu-
ment, too, can be seen to be critically ﬂawed. The fundamen-
tal problem with both forms of the explanatory arguments
concerns the role of identities in explanations. I argue that in
explanatory derivations the essential function of identities is to
serve as “rewrite” rules (by putting “equals for equals”), and
that they are not capable of generating explanatory connec-
tions on their own. Thus, both explanatory arguments fail.
Moreover, type physicalism has yet to overcome more than a
few familiar objections, such as the multiple realization argu-
ment and various well-known epistemic arguments. It is plau-
sible to conclude that psychoneural type identities are not
going to be available to underwrite an identity reduction of
the mind, or to close the explanatory gap.
Chapter 6 begins with a recapitulation of the arguments of
the previous chapters, with a view to determining the progress
of the overall argument of the book up to this point. The posi-
tion we have arrived at may be called conditional physical reduc-
tionism, the thesis that if mental properties are to be causally
efﬁcacious, they must be physically reducible. That is, to save
mental causation we must reduce mentality. This is the chal-
lenge faced by physicalism. With reduction via psychoneural
laws and via psychoneural identities having been ruled out, the
only remaining reductive option is functional reduction. Con-
siderations are offered in support of the view that cognitive/
intentional properties, such as belief, desire, and perception,
are functionally characterizable and hence reducible, but that
qualia are not so reducible. (A position like this has been advo-
cated by others as well.) According to conditional reductionism,
therefore, the causal efﬁcacy of cognitive/intentional states can
be vindicated (this saves agency and cognition from epiphe-
nomenalism), but epiphenomenalism still threatens qualia.
The battle, however, is not entirely lost for qualia, for some
crucial relational properties of qualia—in particular, their sim-
ilarities and differences—are behaviorally manifest, making
synopsis of the arguments 5
70572 SYNOPSIS GGS  1/10/05  1:11 PM  Page 5

--- Page 21 ---

6 synopsis of the arguments
their functional characterization possible. Moreover, it is qualia
similarities and differences, not their intrinsic qualities, that
make a difference to cognition and behavior. The intrinsic
qualities of qualia cannot be captured within the physical do-
main, but that is no great loss. The ﬁnal conclusion, therefore,
is this: Physicalism is not the whole truth, but it is the truth
near enough.
70572 SYNOPSIS GGS  1/10/05  1:11 PM  Page 6

--- Page 22 ---

1
R
Mental Causation 
and Consciousness 
OUR TWO MIND-BODY PROBLEMS
SCHOPENHAUER famously called the mind-body problem a
“Weltknoten,” or “world-knot,” and he was surely right. The
problem, however, is not really a single problem; it is a cluster
of connected problems about the relationship between mind
and matter. What these problems are depends on a broader
framework of philosophical and scientiﬁc assumptions and
presumptions within which the questions are posed and pos-
sible answers formulated. For the contemporary physicalist,
there are two problems that truly make the mind-body prob-
lem a Weltknoten, an intractable and perhaps ultimately insolu-
ble puzzle. They concern mental causation and consciousness.
The problem of mental causation is to answer this question:
How can the mind exert its causal powers in a world that is
fundamentally physical? The problem of consciousness is to
answer the following question: How can there be such a thing
as consciousness in a physical world, a world consisting ulti-
mately of nothing but bits of matter distributed over space-
time behaving in accordance with physical law? As it turns out,
the two problems are interconnected—the two knots are inter-
twined, and this makes it all the more difﬁcult to unsnarl
either of them. 
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 7

--- Page 23 ---

8 chapter 1
Mental Causation and Consciousness
Devising an account of mental causation has been, for the past
three decades, one of the main preoccupations of philosophers
of mind who are committed to physicalism in one form or an-
other. The problem of course is not new: as every student of
western philosophy knows, Descartes, who arguably invented
the mind-body problem, was forcefully confronted by his
contemporaries on this issue.
1 But this does not mean that
Descartes’s problem is our problem. His problem, as his con-
temporaries saw it, was to show how his all-too-commonsensical
thesis of mind-body interaction was tenable within an ontol-
ogy of two radically diverse substances, minds and bodies. In
his replies, Descartes hemmed and hawed, but in the end was
unable to produce an effective response. (In a later chapter we
will discuss in some detail the difﬁculties that mental causation
presents to the substance dualist.) It is noteworthy that many
of Descartes’s peers chose to abandon mental causation rather
than the dualism of two substances. Malebranche’s occasional-
ism denies outright that mental causation ever takes place, and
Spinoza’s double-aspect theory seems to leave no room for
genuine causal transactions between mind and matter. Leibniz
is well known for having denied causal relations between indi-
vidual substances altogether, arguing that an illusion of causal-
ity arises out of preestablished harmony among the monads. 
In retrospect, it is more than a little amazing to realize that
Descartes was an exception rather than the rule, among the
great Rationalists of his day, in defending mental causation as
an integral element of his view of the mind. Perhaps most
philosophers of this time were perfectly comfortable with the
idea that God is the sole causal agent in the entire world, and,
1. For Gassendi’s vigorous challenge to Descartes, see The Philosophical
Writings of Descartes, vol. 2, ed. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and
Dugald Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), p. 238. 
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 8

--- Page 24 ---

with God monopolizing the world’s causal power, the epiphe-
nomenalism of human minds just was not something to worry
about. In any case, it is interesting to note that mental causa-
tion is regarded with much greater seriousness by us today than
it apparently was by most philosophers in Descartes’ time. 
In any case, substance dualism is not the source of our cur-
rent worries about mental causation; substantival minds are no
longer a live option for most of us. What is new and surprising
about the current problem of mental causation is the fact that
it has arisen out of the very heart of physicalism. This means
that giving up the Cartesian conception of minds as immater-
ial substances in favor of a materialist ontology does not make
the problem go away. On the contrary, our basic physicalist
commitments, as I will argue, can be seen as the source of our
current difﬁculties.
Let us ﬁrst review some of the reasons for wanting to save
mental causation—why it is important to us that mental causa-
tion is real. First and foremost, the possibility of human agency,
and hence our moral practice, evidently requires that our men-
tal states have causal effects in the physical world. In voluntary
actions our beliefs and desires, or intentions and decisions,
must somehow cause our limbs to move in appropriate ways,
thereby causing the objects around us to be rearranged. That is
how we manage to navigate around the objects in our sur-
roundings, ﬁnd food and shelter, build bridges and cities, and
destroy the rain forests. Second, the possibility of human
knowledge presupposes the reality of mental causation: percep-
tion, our sole window on the world, requires the causation of
perceptual experiences and beliefs by objects and events around
us. Reasoning, by which we acquire new knowledge and belief
from the existing fund of what we already know or believe, in-
volves the causation of new belief by old belief. Memory is a
causal process involving experiences, physical storage of the in-
formation contained therein, and its retrieval. If you take away
perception, memory, and reasoning, you pretty much take away
causation and consciousness 9
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 9

--- Page 25 ---

1 0 chapter 1
all of human knowledge. Even more broadly, there seem to be
compelling reasons for thinking that our capacity to think about
and refer to things and phenomena of the world—that is, our
capacity for intentionality and speech—depends on our being,
or having been, in appropriate cognitive relations with things
outside us, and that these cognitive relations essentially involve
causal relations. T o move on, it seems plain that the possibility
of psychology as a science capable of generating law-based ex-
planations of human behavior depends on the reality of mental
causation: mental phenomena must be capable of functioning as
indispensable links in causal chains leading to physical behavior,
like movements of the limbs and vibrations of the vocal cord. 
A science that invokes mental phenomena in its explanations is
presumptively committed to their causal efﬁcacy; if a phenome-
non is to have an explanatory role, its presence or absence must
make a difference—a causaldifference. Determinism threatens
human agency and skepticism puts human knowledge in peril.
The stakes are higher with mental causation, for this problem
threatens to take away both agency and cognition.
Let us now brieﬂy turn to consciousness, an aspect of men-
tality that was oddly absent from both philosophy and scien-
tiﬁc psychology for much of the century that has just passed.
As everyone knows, consciousness has returned as a major
problematic in both philosophy and science, and the last two
decades has seen a phenomenal growth and proliferation of
research programs and publications on consciousness, not to
mention symposia and conferences all over the world. 
For most of us, there is no need to belabor the centrality of
consciousness to our conception of ourselves as creatures with
minds. But I want to point to the ambivalent, almost para-
doxical, attitude that philosophers have displayed toward con-
sciousness. As just noted, consciousness had been virtually
banished from the philosophical and scientiﬁc scene for much
of the last century, and consciousness-bashing still goes on in
some quarters, with some reputable philosophers arguing that
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 10

--- Page 26 ---

phenomenal consciousness, or “qualia,” is a ﬁction of bad phi-
losophy.2 And there are philosophers and psychologists who,
while they recognize phenomenal consciousness as something
real, do not believe that a complete science of human behavior,
including cognitive psychology and neuroscience, has a place
for consciousness, or that there is a need to invoke conscious-
ness in an explanatory/predictive theory of cognition and be-
havior. Although consciousness research is thriving, much of
cognitive science seems still in the grip of what may be called
methodological epiphenomenalism. 
Contrast this lowly status of consciousness in science and
metaphysics with its lofty standing in moral philosophy and
value theory. When philosophers discuss the nature of the 
intrinsic good, or what is worthy of our desire and volition 
for its own sake, the most prominently mentioned candidates 
are things like pleasure, absence of pain, enjoyment, and
happiness—states that are either states of conscious experience
or states that presuppose a capacity for conscious experience.
Our attitude toward sentient creatures, with a capacity for pain
and pleasure, is crucially different in moral terms from our at-
titude toward insentient objects. T o most of us, a fulﬁlling life,
a life worth living, is one that is rich and full in qualitative con-
sciousness. We would regard a life as impoverished and not
fully satisfying if it never included experiences of things like
the smell of the sea in a cool morning breeze, the lambent play
of sunlight on brilliant autumn foliage, the fragrance of a ﬁeld
of lavender in bloom, and the vibrant, layered soundscape pro-
jected by a string quartet. Conversely, a life ﬁlled with intense
causation and consciousness 1 1
2. A frequently cited source of consciousness eliminativism is Daniel C.
Dennett, “Quining Qualia,” in Consciousness in Contemporary Science, ed. 
A. J. Marcel and E. Bisiach (Oxford: Clarendon, 1988). See also Georges Rey,
“A Question about Consciousness,” in Perspectives on Mind, ed. Herbert Otto
and James T uedio (Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1988). Both are reprinted in 
The Nature of Consciousness, ed. Ned Block, Owen Flanagan, and Güven
Güzeldere (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997).
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 11

--- Page 27 ---

1 2 chapter 1
chronic pains, paralyzing fears and anxieties, an unremitting
sense of despair and hopelessness, or a constant monotone
depression would strike us as terrible and intolerable, and per-
haps not even worth living. In his speech accepting the Nobel
Prize in 1904, Ivan Pavlov, whose experiments on animal be-
havior conditioning probably gave a critical impetus to the
behaviorist movement, had this to say: “In point of fact, only one
thing in life is of actual interest for us—our psychical experi-
ence.”
3 It is an ironic fact that the felt qualities of conscious expe-
rience, perhaps the only things that ultimately matter to us, are
often relegated in the rest of philosophy to the status of “sec-
ondary qualities,” in the shadowy zone between the real and the
unreal, or even jettisoned outright as artifacts of confused minds. 
What then is the philosophical problem of consciousness? In
The Principles of Psychology, published in 1890, William James
wrote:
According to the assumptions of this book, thoughts accompany
the brain’s workings, and those thoughts are cognitive of reali-
ties. The whole relation is one which we can only write down
empirically, confessing that no glimmer of explanation of it is yet
in sight. That brains should give rise to a knowing consciousness
at all, this is the one mystery which returns, no matter of what
sort the consciousness and of what sort the knowledge may be.
Sensations, aware of mere qualities, involve the mystery as much
as thoughts, aware of complex systems, involve it.
4
In this passage, James is recognizing, ﬁrst of all, that thoughts
and sensations, that is, various modes of mentality and con-
sciousness, arise out of neural processes in the brain. But we 
can only make a list of, or “write down empirically” as he says,
the observed de facto correlations that connect thoughts and
3. Ivan Pavlov, Experimental Psychology and Other Essays(New Y ork: Philo-
sophical Library, 1957), p. 148.
4. The Principles of Psychology(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1981), p. 647; ﬁrst published in 1890.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 12

--- Page 28 ---

sensations to types of neural processes. Making a running list of
psychoneural correlations does not come anywhere near gaining
an explanatory insight into why there are such correlations;
according to James, “no glimmer of explanation” is “yet in sight”
as to why these particular correlations hold, or why indeed the
brain should give rise to thoughts and consciousness at all.
Why does pain arise when the C-ﬁbers are activated (ac-
cording to philosophers’ ﬁctional neurophysiology), and not
under another neural condition? Why doesn’t the sensation of
itch or tickle arise from C-ﬁber activation? Why should any
conscious experience arise when C-ﬁbers ﬁre? Why should
there be something like consciousness in a world that is
ultimately nothing but bits of matter scattered over spacetime
regions? These questions are precisely the explanatory/
predictive challenges posed by the classic emergentists, like
Samuel Alexander, C. Lloyd Morgan, and C. D. Broad—
challenges that they despaired of meeting. 
These, then, are the problems of mental causation and con-
sciousness. Each of them poses a fundamental challenge to the
physicalist worldview. How can the mind exercise its causal
powers in a causally closed physical world? Why is there, and
how can there be, such a thing as the mind, or consciousness,
in a physical world? We will see that these two problems,
mental causation and consciousness, are intertwined, and that,
in a sense, they make each other insoluble.
I now want to set out in some detail how the problem of
mental causation arises within a physicalist setting.
T he Supervenience/Exclusion Argument
Mind-body supervenience can usefully be thought of as deﬁn-
ing minimal physicalism—that is, it is a shared minimum com-
mitment of all positions that are properly called physicalist,
though it may not be all that physicalism requires. As is well
causation and consciousness 1 3
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 13

--- Page 29 ---

1 4 chapter 1
known, there are many different ways of formulating a super-
venience thesis.5 For present purposes we will not need an
elaborate statement of exactly what mind-body supervenience
amounts to. It will sufﬁce to understand it as the claim that
what happens in our mental life is wholly dependent on, and
determined by, what happens with our bodily processes. In this
sense, mind-body supervenience is a commitment of all forms
of reductionist physicalism (or type physicalism), such as the
classic Smart-Feigl mind-brain identity thesis.
6 Moreover, it is
also a commitment of functionalism about mentality, arguably
still the orthodoxy on the mind-body problem. Functionalism
views mental properties as deﬁned in terms of their causal roles
in behavioral and physical contexts, and it is evidently commit-
ted to the thesis that systems that are alike in intrinsic physical
properties must be alike in respect of their mental or psycho-
logical character. The reason is simple: we expect identically
constituted physical systems to be causally indistinguishable in
all physical and behavioral contexts. It is noteworthy that emer-
gentism, too, appears to be committed to supervenience: If two
systems are wholly alike physically, we should expect the same
mental properties to emerge, or fail to emerge, in each; physi-
cally indiscernible systems cannot differ in respect of their
emergent properties. Supervenience of emergents in this sense
was explicitly noted and endorsed by C. D. Broad.
7
5. See Brian McLaughlin, “Varieties of Supervenience,” in Supervenience:
New Essays, ed. Elias Savellos and Ümit Yalçin (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1995).
6. Herbert Feigl, “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’,” in Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1958); J.J.C. Smart, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” Philosophical Review68
(1959): 141–56.
7. C. D. Broad, The Mind and Its Place in Nature(London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1925), p. 64. For more details on why supervenience must be an
ingredient of emergence, see my “Being Realistic about Emergence,” in The
Emergence of Emergence, ed. Paul Davies and Philip Clayton (forthcoming).
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 14

--- Page 30 ---

Mind-body supervenience has been embraced by some
philosophers as an attractive option because it has seemed to
them a possible way of protecting the autonomy of the mental
domain without lapsing back into antiphysicalist dualism. Just
as normative/moral properties are thought to supervene on
descriptive/nonmoral properties without being reducible to
them, the psychological character of a creature may supervene
on and yet remain distinct and autonomous from its physical
nature. In many ways, this is an appealing picture: while ac-
knowledging the primacy and priority of the physical domain,
it highlights the distinctiveness of creatures with mentality—
creatures with consciousness, purposiveness, and rationality. 
It reafﬁrms our commonsense belief in our own specialness as
beings endowed with intelligent and creative capacities of the
kind unseen in the rest of nature. Further, this view provides
the burgeoning science of psychology and cognition with a
philosophical rationale as an autonomous science in its own
right: it investigates these irreducible psychological properties,
functions, and capacities, discovering laws and regularities gov-
erning them and generating law-based explanations and pre-
dictions. It is a science with its own proper domain untouched
by other sciences, especially those at the lower levels, like biol-
ogy, chemistry, and physics.
This seductive picture, however, turns out to be a piece of
wishful thinking, when we consider the problem of mental
causation—how it is possible, on such a picture, for mentality
to have causal powers, powers to inﬂuence the course of nat-
ural events. Several principles, all of which seem unexception-
able, especially for the physicalist, conspire to make trouble
for mental causation. The ﬁrst of these is the principle that the
physical world constitutes a causally closed domain. For our
purposes we may state it as follows:
The causal closure of the physical domain.If a physical event has a
cause at t, then it has a physical cause at t.
causation and consciousness 1 5
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 15

--- Page 31 ---

1 6 chapter 1
There is also an explanatory analogue of this principle (but we
will make no explicit use of it here): If a physical event has a
causal explanation (in terms of an event occurring at t), it has a
physical causal explanation (in terms of a physical event at t).
8
According to this principle, physics is causally and explanato-
rily self-sufﬁcient: there is no need to go outside the physical
domain to ﬁnd a cause, or a causal explanation, of a physical
event. It is plain that physical causal closure is entirely consis-
tent with mind-body dualism and does not beg the question
against dualism as such; it does not say that physical events and
entities are all that there are in this world, or that physical cau-
sation is all the causation that there is. As far as physical causal
closure goes, there may well be entities and events outside the
physical domain, and causal relations might hold between
these nonphysical items. There could even be sciences that in-
vestigate these nonphysical things and events. Physical causal
closure, therefore, does not rule out mind-body dualism—in
fact, not even substance dualism; for all it cares, there might be
immaterial souls outside the spacetime physical world. If there
were such things, the only constraint that the closure principle
lays down is that they not causally meddle with physical
events—that is, there can be no causal inﬂuences injected into
the physical domain from outside. Descartes’s interactionist
dualism, therefore, is precluded by physical causal closure;
however, Leibniz’s doctrine of preestablished harmony and
mind-body parallelism, like Spinoza’s double-aspect theory,
9
are perfectly consistent with it. Notice that neither the mental
nor the biological domain is causally closed; there are mental
8. The closure principle should be distinguished from the thesis of physical
determinism to the effect that every physical event has a physical cause. Physical
causal closure should make sense even if some physical events don’t have causes. 
9. Here I am referring to the bare mind-body ontologies associated with
Leibniz and Spinoza; I rather doubt that Leibniz’s metaphysics of monads or
Spinoza’s metaphysics with God as the only substance would allow real causal
relations even within the physical domain. 
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 16

--- Page 32 ---

and biological events whose causes are not themselves mental
or biological events. A trauma to the head can cause the loss of
consciousness and exposure to intense radiation can cause cells
to mutate.
Moreover, physical causal closure does not by itself exclude
nonphysical causes, or causal explanations, of physical events.
As we will see, however, such causes and explanations could be
ruled out when an exclusion principle like the following is
adopted:
Principle of causal exclusion.If an event ehas a sufﬁcient cause c
at t, no event at tdistinct from ccan be a cause of e(unless this
is a genuine case of causal overdetermination).
There is also a companion principle regarding causal explana-
tion, that is, the principle of explanatory exclusion, but we will
not need it for present purposes. Note that the exclusion prin-
ciple as stated is a general metaphysical principle and does not
refer speciﬁcally to mental or physical causes; in particular, it
does not favor physical causes over mental causes. It is entirely
neutral as between the mental and the physical. For our pur-
poses, it will be convenient to have on hand a generalized ver-
sion of the exclusion principle.
Principle of determinative/generative exclusion.If the occurrence of
an event e, or an instantiation of a property P , is determined/
generated by an event c—causally or otherwise—then e’s occur-
rence is not determined/generated by any event wholly distinct
from or independent of c—unless this is a genuine case of
overdetermination.10
The second principle broadens causation, or causal determina-
tion, to generation/determination simpliciter, whether causal
or of another kind. The intuitive idea is the idea of an event or
causation and consciousness 1 7
10. In chapter 2 this broader principle will be dispensed with in formulat-
ing the supervenience argument.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 17

--- Page 33 ---

1 8 chapter 1
state, or a property instantiation, owing its existence to an-
other event or state—or, to put another way, the idea that one
thing is generated out of, or derives its existence from, another.
What I have in mind is very close to the fundamental notion of
causation, or determination, that I believe Elizabeth Anscombe
was after in her Causality and Determination.
11Causation as
generation, or effective production and determination, is in
many ways a stronger relation than mere counterfactual de-
pendence,
12and it is causation in this sense that is fundamen-
tally involved in the problem of mental causation. Another
way in which a state, or property instance, is generated is
supervenience; the aesthetic properties of a work of art are
generated in the sense I have in mind by its physical proper-
ties. So are moral properties of acts and persons generated by
their nonmoral, descriptive properties. It is the relation that
sanctions the assertion that something has a certain property
because, or in virtue ofthe fact that, it has certain other proper-
ties that generate it. I have argued elsewhere for the causal/
explanatory exclusion principle;
13I believe that the fundamen-
tal rationale for the broader principle is essentially the same,
and that anyone who ﬁnds the former plausible should ﬁnd the
latter equally plausible. 
It is quick and easy to see how these principles create trou-
bles for mental causation for anyone who accepts mind-body
11. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971. Reprinted in Causation,
ed. Ernest Sosa and Michael T ooley (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
12. It is in some respects weaker than counterfactual dependence; in cases
of preemption and overdetermination, generative causation may hold without
counterfactual dependence. The two notions are not strictly comparable, and
that is why the counterfactual accounts of causation continue to have difﬁcul-
ties with preemption and overdetermination, showing, in my opinion, that our
core idea of causation is more intimately tied to generative/productive causa-
tion than to counterfactual dependence.
13. See, e.g., “Mechanism, Purpose, and Explanatory Exclusion,” reprinted
in my Supervenience and Mind(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1993); ﬁrst published in 1989.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 18

--- Page 34 ---

supervenience—that is, for anyone who is a minimal physical-
ist. I have called the line of considerations to be presented
below “the supervenience argument”; in the literature, it is also
known as “the exclusion argument.” (For usage uniformity,it is
best to think of the supervenience argument as a special form
of the exclusion argument, and take the latter as a generic
form of argument with the conclusion that mental cause is
always excluded by physical cause.) Brieﬂy, the argument goes
like this.
14Suppose that an instantiation of mental property M
causes another mental property, M*, to instantiate. (We take
property instantiations as events; instantiations of a mental
property are mental events, and similarly for physical proper-
ties and physical events.) This is perfectly consistent with
physical causal closure. But mind-body supervenience says
that this instantiation of mental property M* occurs in virtue
of the fact that one of the physical properties on which M*
supervenes is instantiated at that time; call this physical base
property P*. This means that given that P* is instantiated on
this occasion, M* must of necessity be instantiated on this oc-
casion. That is, the M*-instance is wholly dependent on, and is
generated by, the P*-instance. At this point, the exclusion
principle kicks in: Is the occurrence of the M*-instance due to
its supposed cause, the M-instance, or its supervenience base
event, P*-instance? It must be one or the other, but which
one? Given that its physical supervenience base P* is instanti-
ated on this occasion, M* must be instantiated as well on this
occasion, regardless of what might have preceded this M*-
instance. In what sense, then, can the M-instance be said to be
a “cause,” or a generative source, of the M*-instance?
causation and consciousness 1 9
14. This argument will be discussed in greater detail in chapter 2, including
responses to some of the objections and criticisms that have been raised
against it. I ﬁrst presented this argument in an explicit form in “‘Downward
Causation’ in Emergentism and Nonreductive Materialism,” in Emergence or
Reduction?, ed. Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr, and Jaegwon Kim (Berlin: 
De Gruyter, 1992). 
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 19

--- Page 35 ---

2 0 chapter 1
I believe that the only acceptable way of reconciling the two
causal/generative claims and achieving a consistent picture of
the situation is this: the M-instance caused the M*-instance by
causingthe P*-instance. More generally, the following princi-
ple seems highly plausible: In order to cause a supervenient prop-
erty to be instantiated, you must cause one of its base properties to be
instantiated. In order to alter the aesthetic properties of a 
work of art, you must alter the physical properties on which
the aesthetic properties supervene; in order to do something
about your headache you must causally intervene in the brain
state on which the headache, supervenes. There is no other
way; this is what makes the idea of telepathy (for example, a
thought of mine directly causing a thought in you) not credi-
ble if not incoherent—unless of course one could telepathi-
cally inﬂuence another person’s brain processes. (In fact, 
for present purposes, this principle concerning the causa-
tion of supervenient properties, which I believe is indepen-
dently plausible, can replace the principle of determinative/
generative exclusion, which some might ﬁnd too broad.)
So M causes M* to instantiate by causing P* to instantiate,
from which it trivially follows that the M-instance causes a P*-
instance. But this is a case of mental-to-physical causation. T urn-
ing our attention now to the supposed mental cause M, we see
that, by mind-body supervenience, M must have its own physical
supervenience base; call it P . When we consider the total picture,
there seems every reason to consider P to be a cause of P*. If we
think of causation in terms of sufﬁciency, P is clearly sufﬁcient
for P*, since it is sufﬁcient for M and M is sufﬁcient for P*. If we
think of causation in terms of counterfactuals, we may assume
that if P had not been there, the supervening M wouldn’t have
been there either, and that since M is what brought about P*, P*
wouldn’t be there either. So at this point we have the following
two causal claims: M causes P*, and P causes P*.
Now, given psychophysical property dualism espoused by
the nonreductive physicalist, M and P are distinct properties.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 20

--- Page 36 ---

This means that P* has two causes each sufﬁcient for it and oc-
curring at the same time (a supervenient property and its base
properties are always instantiated at the same time). At this
point the causal exclusion principle applies: either M or P
must be disqualiﬁed as P*’s cause. A moment’s reﬂection shows
that it is M that must be disqualiﬁed. The reason is that if P is
disqualiﬁed, the causal closure principle kicks in again, saying
that since a physical event, P*, has a cause (namely M), it must
have a physical cause (occurring at the same time as M)—the
disqualiﬁed P will do—and we are back in the same situation, a
situation in which we again have to choose between a physical
and a mental cause. Unless mental cause M is jettisoned in
favor of P , we would be off to an inﬁnite regress—or be for-
ever treading water in the same place.
The ﬁnal picture that has emerged is this: P is a cause of P*,
with M and M* supervening respectively on P and P*. There 
is a single underlying causal process in this picture, and this
process connects two physical properties, P and P*. The cor-
relations between M and M* and between M and P* are 
by no means accidental or coincidental; they are lawful and
counterfactual-sustaining regularities arising out of M’s and
M*’s supervenience on the causally linked P and P*. These
observed correlations give us an impression of causation; how-
ever, that is only an appearance, and there is no more causa-
tion here than between two successive shadows cast by a
moving car, or two successive symptoms of a developing
pathology. This is a simple and elegant picture, metaphysically
speaking, but it will prompt howls of protest from those who
think that it has given away something very special and pre-
cious, namely the causal efﬁcacy of our minds. Thus is born
the problem of mental causation. 
The problem of mental causation.Causal efﬁcacy of mental prop-
erties is inconsistent with the joint acceptance of the following
four claims: (i) physical causal closure, (ii) causal exclusion, 
causation and consciousness 2 1
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 21

--- Page 37 ---

2 2 chapter 1
(iii) mind-body supervenience, and (iv) mental/physical prop-
erty dualism—the view that mental properties are irreducible
to physical properties.
Physical causal closure and mind-body supervenience are, or
should be, among the shared commitments of all physicalists.
The exclusion principles are general metaphysical constraints,
and I don’t see how they can be successfully challenged. This
leaves mind-body property dualism as the only negotiable
item. But to negotiate it away is to embrace reductionism.
This will cause a chill in those physicalists who want to eat the
cake and have it too—that is, those who want both the irre-
ducibility and causal efﬁcacy of the mental. I believe that the
question no longer is whether or not those of us who want 
to protect mental causation ﬁnd mind-body reductionism
palatable. What has become increasingly clear after three
decades of debate is that if we want robust mental causation,
we had better be prepared to take reductionism seriously,
whether we like it or not. But even if you are ready for reduc-
tionism, it doesn’t necessarily mean that you can have it. For
reductionism may not be true. This is the point to which we
now turn.
Can We Reduce Qualia?
Before reduction and reductionism can be usefully discussed,
we need to be tolerably clear about the model of reduction ap-
propriate to the issues on hand. I believe much of the philo-
sophical debate during the past few decades concerning the
reducibility of the mental has turned out to be a futile exercise
because it was predicated on the wrong model of reduction. This
is the derivational model of intertheoretic reduction developed
by Ernest Nagel in the 1950s and ’60s. As is widely known, the
heart of Nagel reduction is bridge laws, the empirical lawlike
principles that are supposed to connect the properties of the
domain to be reduced with the properties of the base domain.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 22

--- Page 38 ---

Speciﬁcally, the requirement, as standardly understood, is that
each property up for reduction be connected by a bridge law
with a nomologically coextensive property in the base domain.
Most of the inﬂuential antireductionist arguments—notably,
Davidson’s anomalist argument and the Putnam-Fodor multi-
ple realization argument
15—have focused on showing that the
bridge law requirement cannot be met for mental properties in
relation to physical/biological properties.
All this is by now a familiar story, and there is no need here
to rehearse the arguments, counterarguments, and so forth.
But the philosophical emptiness of Nagel reduction is quickly
seen when we notice that a Nagel reduction of the mental to
the physical is consistent with, and even in some cases entailed
by, many all-out dualisms, such as the double-aspect theory,
the doctrine of preestablished harmony, epiphenomenalism,
and even emergentism. The reason of course is that these du-
alisms are consistent with the mind-body bridge law require-
ment; in fact, some of them, like the double-aspect theory,
entail the satisfaction of this requirement. This objection can be
circumvented by strengthening the bridge laws into identities—
that is, by requiring the bridging principles connecting the
reducing and reduced theories to take the form of an identity
(“pain /H11005C-ﬁber activation”) rather than a biconditional law
(“pain occurs to an organism at a time just in case its 
C-ﬁbers are activated at that time”)—that is, by moving from
bridge-law reduction to identity reduction.
16 It has recently
causation and consciousness 2 3
15. Donald Davidson, “Mental Events,” reprinted in his Essays on Actions
and Events(Oxford and New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1980); ﬁrst pub-
lished in 1970. Hilary Putnam, “The Nature of Mental States,” in his Philo-
sophical Papers, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975); ﬁrst
published in 1967. Jerry A. Fodor, “Special Sciences—or the Disunity of Sci-
ence as a Working Hypothesis,” Synthese27 (1974): 97–115.
16. As early as the 1970s Robert L. Causey argued that microreduction re-
quires cross-level identities of properties, and that genuine reductions cannot be
based merely on bridge laws afﬁrming property correlations; see his “Attribute-
Identities in Microreductions,” Journal of Philosophy69 (1972): 407–422.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 23

--- Page 39 ---

2 4 chapter 1
been suggested that an identity reduction of consciousness is
just what is needed to close the much-discussed “explanatory
gap” between the brain and conscious experience. We will
look at the feasibility of identity reduction for consciousness in
later chapters (chapters 4 and 5). The main problem with this
proposal, as we will see, concerns the availability of mind-body
identities for reductive purposes. I will argue that the principal
arguments advanced for psychoneural identities, namely that
they serve certain essential explanatory purposes, do not work,
and that there is no visible reason to think that such identities
are true or that we will ever be entitled to them. 
What then is required to reduce a mental property, say
pain? I believe that what has to be done is, ﬁrst, to functionalize
pain (or, more precisely, the property of being in pain):
namely, to show that being in pain is deﬁnable as being in a
state (or instantiating a property) that is caused by certain in-
puts (i.e., tissue damage, trauma) and that in turn causes cer-
tain behavioral and other outputs (i.e., characteristic pain
behaviors, a sense of distress, a desire to be rid of it). More
generally, instantiating a mental property M, upon M’s func-
tionalization, will turn out to be being in some state or other
that is typically caused by a certain speciﬁed set of stimulus
conditions and that in turn typically causes a certain speciﬁed
set of outputs. Next, once a mental property has been func-
tionalized, we can look for its “realizers”—that is, states or
properties that satisfy the causal speciﬁcation deﬁning that
mental property. Thus, for pain, we look for an internal state
in an organism that is caused to instantiate by tissue damage
and trauma and whose instantiation in turn causes characteris-
tic pain behaviors (and possibly outputs of other kinds). In the
case of humans and perhaps mammals in general, the state
turns out to be, let us say, electrical activity in a certain cortical
zone—call it Q. That is, neural state Q is the realizer of pain
for humans and mammals. Conventional wisdom has it that
pain and other mental states have multiple diverse realizers
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 24

--- Page 40 ---

across different species and structures, and perhaps even
among members of the same species (or even in the same indi-
vidual over time). This means that this second step of ﬁnding
realizers of a mental property is likely to be an ongoing affair
with no clear end. Obviously, we are not going to ﬁnd, nor
would we necessarily be interested in identifying, all actual 
and possible realizers of pain for all actual and possible pain-
capable organisms and systems. Functional reduction, as I call
it, can focus on the reduction of a mental property, or a group
of them, for a speciﬁc population—that is, neural research on
pain will aim at localreductions, not a one-shot globalreduc-
tion (as suggested by the Nagel bridge-law model). We may be
interested in ﬁnding the neural basis of human pain, or canine
pain, or Martian pain. We may be interested in identifying the
neural basis of your pain now or my pain yesterday. Neural
bases may differ for different instances of pain, but individual
pains must nonetheless reduce to their respective neural/
physical realizers. Unlike in the case of Nagelian bridge-law
reduction, the multiple realizability of pain is no barrier to
local reduction by functionalization. Suppose that pain has
physical realizers, P
1, P2, . . . . Then, any given instance of pain
is an instance of either P1or of P 2 o r....  I f  you are in pain in
virtue of being in state Pk, there is nothing more, or less, to
your being in pain than your being in state Pk. This particular
pain is the very same state as this instance of Pk. Each pain 
instance is a P1-instance, or P2-instance, or . . . ; that is, all pain
instances reduce to the instances of its realizers.17
If pain can be functionalized in this sense, its instances
will have the causal powers of pain’s realizers. Thus, if a given
causation and consciousness 2 5
17. See my “Making Sense of Emergence,” Philosophical Studies95 (1999):
3–36, and Mind in a Physical World(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998) for
more details, in particular concerning how reductions conforming to this
model meet the basic methodological and metaphysical requirements of reduc-
tion. More details on functional reduction can be found in chapter 4 below.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 25

--- Page 41 ---

2 6 chapter 1
instance of pain occurs in virtue of the instantiation of physical
realizer Pk, that pain instance has the causal powers of this in-
stance of Pk. This will solve the problem of the causal efﬁcacy
of pains—that is, provided that pain can be functionalized. It is
important to see that this result cannot be achieved by simply
assuming that P
k is a neural correlate, or substrate, of pain. It
might be that pain and P k correlate with each other because
they are both the effects of a common cause; if such is the case
there obviously is no reason for thinking that a given occur-
rence of pain and the corresponding instance of P
k have the
same causal powers, or that they are one and the same event.
Pain and its realizers are much more intimately related: to be
in pain is to be in a state meeting causal speciﬁcation C—that
is, to be in pain isto instantiate one of its realizers—and if you
are in pain in virtue of instantiating pain-realizer P
k, there is
no pain event over and above this instantiation of Pk. 
So if pain is functionalized, the problem of mental causation
has a simple solution for all pain instances. But what of the
causal efﬁcacy of pain itself? What should we say about the
causal powers of pain as a mental kind? The answer is that as a
kind pain will be causally heterogeneous, as heterogeneous as
the heterogeneity of its diverse realizers. Pain, as a kind, will
lack the kind of causal/nomological unity we expect of true
natural kinds, kinds in terms of which scientiﬁc theorizing is
conducted. This is what we must expect given that pain is a
functional property with multiple diverse physical realizers. If
the term “multiple” in “multiple realizations” means anything,
it must mean causal/nomological multiplicity; if two realizers
of pain are not causally or nomologically diverse, there is no
reason to count them as two, not one. On this reductive ac-
count, pain will not be causally impotent or epiphenomenal; it
is only that pain is causally heterogeneous.
The key question then is this: Is pain functionally reducible?
Are mental properties in general functionalizable and hence
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 26

--- Page 42 ---

functionally reducible? Or are they “emergent” and irre-
ducible? I believe that there is reason to think that intentional/
cognitive properties are functionalizable. However, I am with
those who believe that phenomenal properties of consciousness
are not functional properties. T o argue for this view of phe-
nomenal properties, or qualia, we do not need anything as
esoteric and controversial as the “zombie” hypothesis much
discussed recently
18—that is, the claim that zombies, creatures
that are indiscernible from us physically and behaviorally but
who lack consciousness, are metaphysically possible. All we
need is something considerably more modest, namely the
metaphysical possibility of qualia inversion. Perhaps the prob-
lem is still open, but I believe there are substantial and weighty
reasons, and a sufﬁciently broad consensus among the philoso-
phers who work in this area,
19to believe that qualia are func-
tionally irreducible.
Moreover, it is easily seen that if qualia are functionally
reducible, the problem posed by James and others about
consciousness can be solved. Suppose that pain has been func-
tionalized and its realizer identiﬁed for humans. Consider a
functional characterization of pain like this: T o be in pain is to
be in a state that is caused by tissue damage and that in turn
causes winces and groans. And assume that the venerable C-ﬁber
stimulation is the neural realizer of pain in humans. Consider
now the question: Why is Jones in pain at t? Can we derive the
statement “Jones is in pain at t” from information exclusively
about Jones’s physical/behavioral properties (along with other
strictly physical/behavioral information)? Given the functional
causation and consciousness 2 7
18. See David Chalmers, The Conscious Mind(Oxford and New Y ork: 
Oxford University Press, 1996).
19. T o mention a few: Ned Block, Christopher Hill, Frank Jackson, Joseph
Levine, Colin McGinn, and Brian McLaughlin. Issues mentioned in this para-
graph will be discussed in greater detail in the chapters to follow. 
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 27

--- Page 43 ---

2 8 chapter 1
reduction, the answer is yes, as is shown by the following
deduction: 
Jones’s C-ﬁbers are stimulated at t.
C-ﬁber stimulation (in humans) is caused by tissue damage and
it in turn causes winces and groans.
T o be in pain, by deﬁnition, is to be in a state which is caused by
tissue damage and which in turn causes winces and groans.
Therefore, Jones is in pain at t.
Notice that the third line, a functional deﬁnition of pain, does
not represent empirical/factual information about pain; if any-
thing, it gives us information about the concept pain, or the
meaning of “pain.” Formally, deﬁnitions do not count as
premises of a proof; they come free. Notice, moreover, that
the displayed derivation could also serve as a prediction of
Jones’s pain from physical/behavioral information alone. And
we could easily convert it into an explanation of why (in hu-
mans) pain correlates with C-ﬁber stimulation, not with an-
other neural state.
20 This derivation would, therefore, answer
William James’s question why sensations “accompany the
brain’s workings,” a question for which he saw “no glimmer of
an explanation.” Functional reduction of pain and other sensa-
tions would deliver the explanation James was seeking. The
only problem is that sensations, or qualia, resist functional
reduction, and, as James says, there still is no glimmer of an
explanation. But we have made some progress: we now know
what is needed to achieve such an explanation.
As earlier noted, there are those who think that functional re-
duction is not the only way to solve the problem of conscious-
ness; they argue that although pain and other qualia may not 
be functionally reducible, they are reducible in another way,
20. These issues will be discussed in more detail in chapter 4.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 28

--- Page 44 ---

through their identiﬁcation with physical/neural properties, 
and that this will enable us to close the gap between conscious-
ness and the brain and thereby provide us with an answer to
James’s question. We will see in later chapters why this new
mind-brain identity reduction is not an option for us. As we 
will argue,
21if functional reduction doesn’t work for qualia,
nothing will. 
T he T wo W orld-Knots
Let us take stock of where we are: the problem of mental
causation is solvable for a given class of mental properties if
and only if these properties are functionally reducible with
physical/biological properties as their realizers. But phenome-
nal mental properties are not functionally deﬁnable and hence
functionally irreducible. Hence, the problem of mental causa-
tion is not solvable for phenomenal mental properties. 
But, as we also saw, the problem of consciousness, or “the
mystery of consciousness,” is solvable if consciousness is func-
tionally reducible—and I will argue that it is solvable onlyif
consciousness is functionally reducible. So the functional irre-
ducibility of consciousness entails the unsolvability of both 
the problem of consciousness and the problem of mental
causation—at least as the latter problem concerns conscious-
ness. It is thus that the two problems, that of mental causation
and that of consciousness, turn out to share an interlocking fate.
What stands in the way of solving the problem of mental causa-
tion is consciousness. And what stands in the way of solving the
problem of consciousness is the impossibility of interpreting or
deﬁning it in terms of its causal relations to physical/biological
properties. They are indeed Weltknoten, problems that have
eluded our best philosophical efforts. They seem deeply
causation and consciousness 2 9
21. In chapters 4 and 5.
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 29

--- Page 45 ---

3 0 chapter 1
entrenched in the way we conceptualize the world and our-
selves, and seem to arise from some of the fundamental assump-
tions we hold about each. 
Does this mean that there is some hidden ﬂaw somewhere
in our system of concepts and assumptions, and that we need
to alter, in some basic way, our conceptual framework to rid
ourselves of these problems? Of course, if our scheme of con-
cepts were radically altered, the problems would be altered as
well; perhaps, the new scheme would not even permit these, or
equivalent, problems to be formulated. Some philosophers
would be willing to take this as a sufﬁcient ground for urging
us to abandon our present system of concepts in favor of a
cleansed and tidier one, claiming that the conundrum of men-
tal causation and consciousness is reason enough for jettison-
ing our shared scheme of intentional and phenomenal idioms,
with its alleged built-in “Cartesian” errors and confusions.
There are others who blame our penchant for thinking in
terms of robust productive causality for the vexing problem of
mental causation. Blaming our system of concepts, or our lan-
guage, for philosophical difﬁculties is a familiar philosophical
strategy of long standing. T o me, this often turns out to be 
an ostrich strategy—trying to avoid problems by ignoring
them. T o motivate the discarding of a framework, we need
independent reasons—we should be able to show it to be deﬁ-
cient, incomplete, or ﬂawed in some fundamental way, inde-
pendently of the fact that it generates puzzles and problems
that we are unable to deal with. Why should we suppose that
all problems are solvable—and solvable by us? ( Just because
we ﬁnd difﬁcult, perhaps insoluble, moral problems and puz-
zles, should we cast aside moral concepts and moral dis-
course?) It may well be that our mind-body problem, or some-
thing close to it, arises within any scheme that is rich enough
to do justice to the world as we experience it. It may well be
that the problem is an inexorable consequence of the tension
between the objective world of physical existence and the 
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 30

--- Page 46 ---

subjective world of experience, and that the distinction
between the objective and the subjective is unavoidable for re-
ﬂective cognizers and agents of the kind that we are.
22
T o conclude, then, the mind-body problem, for us, the
would-be physicalists, has come down to two problems, men-
tal causation and consciousness, and these together represent
the most profound challenge to physicalism. If physicalism is
to survive as a worldview for us, it must show just where we
belong in the physical world, and this means that it must give
an account of our status as conscious creatures with powers to
affect our surroundings in virtue of our consciousness and
mentality. The arguments that have been presented here al-
ready suggest that physicalism will not be able to survive intact
and in its entirety. We will try to determine how much of it
can survive, and we will see, I hope, that what does survive is
good enough for us.
causation and consciousness 3 1
22. A thought like this is suggested by Thomas Nagel in The View from
Nowhere(New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1986).
70572 CH01 GGS  1/10/05  1:12 PM  Page 31

--- Page 47 ---

2
R
/Tswashhe /Sswashupervenience /Aswashrgument 
/Mswashotivated, /Cswashlariﬁed, 
and /Dswashefended
An argumentwas presented in the preceding chapter to show
that, on an inﬂuential position on the mind-body problem,
mental properties turn out to be without causal efﬁcacy. This is
what I have called the supervenience argument, also called the
exclusion argument in the literature. The argument has drawn
comments, criticisms, and objections from a wide range of
philosophers, but mostly from those who want to defend or-
thodox nonreductive physicalism and other forms of mind-
body property dualism. Critics of the argument have raised
some signiﬁcant issues, both about the speciﬁcs of the argu-
ment and, more interestingly, about the broader philosophical
issues involved. In this chapter, I would like to address two of
the more pressing problems. One is that of “overdetermina-
tion,” brought up by a number of philosophers; the second is
the problem of “causal drainage,” forcefully developed by Ned
Block in his “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?”
1 Before we get
to these and other issues, I want to set out the leading idea that
motivates the supervenience argument and then offer what
1. Ned Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research67 (2003): 133–150.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 32

--- Page 48 ---

the supervenience argument 3 3
Ihope will be a clearer statement of the argument, along with
explanatory comments that some may ﬁnd useful. But ﬁrst we
need a brief description of the philosophical position that is the
target of the supervenience argument.
Nonreductive Physicalism
There is no consensus on exactly how nonreductive physicalism
is to be formulated, for the simple reason that there is no con-
sensus about either how physicalism is to be formulated or how
we should understand reduction. For present purposes, how-
ever, no precise formulation is needed; a broad-brush character-
ization will be sufﬁcient. Moreover, there need not be a single
“correct” or “right” formulation of physicalism; there probably
are a number of claims, not strictly equivalent, about the funda-
mentally physical character of the world, each of which can rea-
sonably be considered a statement of physicalism. The strengths
and weaknesses, merits and demerits, of these different physi-
calisms could be examined and debated, and reasonable people
could come to different conclusions about them. In any case,
most will agree that the following three doctrines are central to
nonreductive physicalism: mind-body supervenience, the physi-
cal irreducibility of the mental, and the causal efﬁcaciousness of
the mental. Mind-body supervenience, the claim that makes the
position a form of physicalism, can be stated as follows:
Supervenience.Mental properties strongly supervene on physical/
biological properties. That is, if any system sinstantiates a mental
property M at t, there necessarily exists a physical property 
P such that sinstantiates P at t, and necessarily anything 
instantiating P at any time instantiates M at that time.2
2. There are alternative, not quite equivalent, ways of stating mind-body
supervenience; one could get a good idea of what these might be from Brian
McLaughlin, “Varieties of Supervenience,” in Supervenience: New Essays,ed. Elias
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 33

--- Page 49 ---

3 4 chapter 2
I take supervenience as an ontological thesis involving the idea of
dependence—a sense of dependence that justiﬁes saying that 
a mental property is instantiated in a given organism at a time 
because, or in virtue ofthe fact that, one of its physical “base”
properties is instantiated by the organism at that time. Super-
venience, therefore, is not a mere claim of covariation between
mental and physical properties; it includes a claim of existential
dependence of the mental on the physical. I am assuming that a
serious physicalist will accept this interpretation of superve-
nience. Mind-body supervenience as a bare claim about how
mental and physical properties covary will be accepted by the
double-aspect theorist, the neutral monist, the emergentist, and
the epiphenomenalist; it can be accepted even by the substance
dualist.
The second component of nonreductive physicalism reﬂects
the “nonreductive” character of this form of physicalism:
Irreducibility.Mental properties are not reducible to, and are
not identical with, physical properties. 
There is no single well-deﬁned sense, or model, of reduction
shared by all disputants in this debate, but this will not matter
for us in the context of the supervenience argument; all we
need to assume here is that physically irreducible properties
remain outside the physical domain—that is, if anything is
physically reduced, it must be identical with some physical
item. The root meaning of reduction was given, I believe, by
J.J.C. Smart when he said that sensations are nothing “over
and above” brain processes.
3 If Xs are reduced to Ys, then Xs
are nothing over and above the Ys.
Savellos and Ümit Yalçin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). In
some contexts the interpretation of “necessarily” as it occurs in the last clause can
be crucial; for our purposes, there is no need to opt for any special speciﬁcation.
3. J.J.C. Smart, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” in The Nature of Mind,
ed. David M. Rosenthal (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1991), p. 170. Originally published in Philosophical Review68 (1959): 141–56. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 34

--- Page 50 ---

the supervenience argument 3 5
We now come to the third doctrine, concerning the causal
status of these irreducible mental properties.
Causal efﬁcacy.Mental properties have causal efﬁcacy—that is,
their instantiations can, and do, cause other properties, both
mental and physical, to be instantiated.
This last thesis is important to the many friends of the position
I am describing. The irreducibility claim is often motivated by
a desire to save mental properties as something special and dis-
tinctive, but if these properties turn out to be causally impotent
and explanatorily useless, that would rob them of any real in-
terest or signiﬁcance, rendering the issue of their reducibility
largely moot. Or one could argue that since physical properties
are assumed to be causally efﬁcacious, causally inert mental
properties obviously cannot be physically reduced. This means
that the rejection of mental causal efﬁcacy would make the ir-
reducibility claim true but trivial. In these ways, therefore, the
doctrines of irreducibility and causal efﬁcacy go hand in hand.
It can be debated whether these three doctrines constitute a
robust enough physicalism. The issue obviously turns on the
question whether mind-body supervenience as stated is suf-
ﬁcient for physicalism, since the irreducibility and mental causal
efﬁcacy have nothing speciﬁcally to do with physicalism;
Descartes endorsed both. Moreover, classic emergentism, not
usually considered a form of physicalism, endorsed all three,
making it a target of the supervenience argument.
4 However,
this issue will not affect the discussions to follow. My claims and
arguments are intended to apply to any position that accepts the
three propositions; what else it accepts makes no difference.
4. See my “Being Realistic about Emergence” in The Emergence of Emergence,
ed. Paul Davies and Philip Clayton (Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcom-
ing). The three doctrines, however, can be thought of as capturing the physicalist
core of emergentism. On supervenience and physicalism, see Jessica Wilson,
“Supervenience-Based Formulations of Physicalism,” forthcoming in Noûs.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 35

--- Page 51 ---

3 6 chapter 2
T he Fundamental Idea 
The idea that drives the supervenience argument can be ex-
pressed in the following proposition, which I name after the
great eighteenth-century American theologian-philosopher
Jonathan Edwards:
Edwards’s dictum. There is a tension between “vertical” deter-
mination and “horizontal” causation. In fact, vertical determi-
nation excludes horizontal causation.
What do I mean by “vertical” determination? Consider an ob-
ject, say this lump of bronze. At any given time it has a variety 
of intrinsic properties, like color, shape, texture, density, hard-
ness, electrical conductivity, and so on. Most of us would accept
the proposition that the bronze has these properties at this 
time in virtue of the fact that it has, at this time, a certain
microstructure—that is, it is composed of molecules of certain
kinds (copper and tin) in a certain speciﬁc structural conﬁgura-
tion. I describe this situation by saying that the macroproperties
of the bronze are vertically determined by its synchronous mi-
crostructure. The term “vertical” is meant to reﬂect the usual
practice of picturing micro-macro levels in a vertical array, with
the micro underpinning the macro. In contrast, we usually rep-
resent diachronic causal relations on a horizontal line, from past
(left) to future (right)—“time’s arrow” seems always to ﬂy from
left to right. From the causal point of view, the piece of bronze
has the properties it has at tbecause it had the properties it had
at t
/H11002/H9004t(and certain boundary conditions obtained during this
period). The past determines the future and the future depends
on the past. That is what I mean by “horizontal” causation. So
we have here two purported determinative relationships orthog-
onal to each other: vertical micro-macro mereological determi-
nation and horizontal past-to-future causal determination.
The lump of bronze has the color yellow at time t. Why is it
yellow at t? There are two presumptive answers: (1) because its
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 36

--- Page 52 ---

the supervenience argument 3 7
surface has microstructural property M at t; (2) because it was
yellow at t/H11002/H9004t. To appreciate the force of the supervenience
argument it is essential to see a prima facie tension between
these two explanations. As long as the lump has microproperty
M at t, it’s going to be yellow at t, no matter what happened
before t. Moreover, unless the lump has M, or another appro-
priate microproperty (with the right reﬂectance characteris-
tic), at t, it cannot be yellow at t. Anything that happened
before tseems irrelevant to the lump’s being yellow at t; its
having M at tis fully sufﬁcient in itself to make it yellow at t.
So far as I know, Jonathan Edwards was the ﬁrst philosopher
who saw a tension of precisely this kind. Edwards’ surprising
doctrine that there are no temporally persisting objects was
based on his belief that the existence of such objects is ex-
cluded by the fact that God is the sustaining cause of the cre-
ated world at every instant of time. There are no persisting
things because at every moment God creates, or recreates, the
entire world ex nihilo—that is what it means to say that God is
the sustaining cause of the world. Consider two successive
“time slices” of the bronze: each slice is created by God, and
there is no causal or other direct existential relationship be-
tween them. To illustrate his argument, Edwards offers a mar-
velously apt analogy:
The imagesof things in a glass, as we keep our eye upon them,
seem to remain precisely the same, with a continuing, perfect
identity. But it is known to be otherwise. Philosophers well
know that these images are constantly renewed, by the impres-
sion and reﬂection of newrays of light; so that the image im-
pressed by the former rays is constantly vanishing, and a new
image is impressed by newrays every moment, both on the
glass and on the eye... . And the new images being put on
immediatelyor instantlydo not make them the same, any more
than if it were done with the intermission of an houror a day.
The image that exists at this moment is not at all derivedfrom
the image which existed at the last preceding moment. As may
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 37

--- Page 53 ---

3 8 chapter 2
be seen, because if the succession of new raysbe intercepted, by
something interposed between the object and the glass, the
image immediately ceases; the past existenceof the image has no
inﬂuence to uphold it, so much as for a moment.5
Successive images are not causally related to each other; they
are each caused by something else. If we suppose that the per-
sistence of an object requires causal relations between its earlier
and later stages, Edwards is arguing that “horizontal” causation
involving created substances is excluded by their “vertical” de-
pendence on God as a sustaining cause of the world at every
instant. Remove God as the sustaining cause; the whole world
will vanish at that very instant.
6
It is simple to see how Edwards’s dictum applies to the mind-
body case, causing trouble for mental causation. Mind-body
supervenience, or the idea that the mental is physically
“realized”—in fact, any serious doctrine of mind-body depen-
dence will do—plays the role of vertical determination or
dependence, and mental causation, or any “higher-level” causa-
tion, is the horizontal causation at issue. The tension between
vertical determination and horizontal causation, or the former’s
threat to preempt and void the latter, has been, at least for me,
at the heart of the worries about mental causation.
5. Jonathan Edwards, Doctrines of Original Sin Defended(1758), Part IV,
Chapter II. The quotation is from Jonathan Edwards, ed. C. H. Faust and 
T. H. Johnson (New York: American Book Co., 1935), p. 335. (Italics in the
original.) It seems, however, that Edwards’s argument may well have been
foreshadowed by the occasionalists of the 17th century.
6. Some will argue that these considerations—and some of the crucial steps
in the supervenience argument—depend on the use of a robust, “thick” con-
cept of productive or generative causation rather than a “thin” concept based
on the idea of counterfactual dependence or simple Humean “constant con-
junctions,” and that thin causation is all the causation that there is. See Barry
Loewer’s “Comments on Jaegwon Kim’s Mind in a Physical World,” Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research65 (2002): 655–62, and my reply to Loewer,
ibid., 674–77.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 38

--- Page 54 ---

T he Supervenience Argument Reﬁned 
and Clariﬁed
Let us now turn to a restatement of the supervenience argument
in a more explicit and streamlined form. It is useful to divide the
argument into two stages; I believe each stage has its own inter-
est, and this will also enable me to present two materially differ-
ent ways of completing the second stage of the argument.
Stage 1
We begin with the supposition that there are cases of mental-
to-mental causation. Let M and M* be mental properties:
(1) M causes M*.
Properties as such don’t enter into causal relations; when we
say “M causes M*,” that is short for “An instance of M causes
an instance of M*” or “An instantiation of M causes M* to in-
stantiate on that occasion.” Also for brevity we suppress refer-
ence to times. From Supervenience, we have:
(2) For some physical property P*; M* has P* 
as its supervenience base.
As earlier noted, (1) and (2) together give rise to a tension
when we consider the question “Why is M* instantiated on
this occasion? What is responsible for, and explains, the fact
that M* occurs on this occasion?” For there are two seemingly
exclusionary answers: (a) “Because M caused M* to instantiate
on this occasion,” and (b) “Because P*, a supervenience base of
M*, is instantiated on this occasion.” This of course is where
Jonathan Edwards’s insight, encapsulated in Edwards’s dictum,
comes into play: Given that P* is present on this occasion, M*
would be there no matter what happened before; as M*’s
supervenience base, the instantiation of P* at tin and of itself
the supervenience argument 3 9
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 39

--- Page 55 ---

4 0 chapter 2
necessitates M*’s occurrence at t. This would be true even if
M*’s putative cause, M, had not occurred—unless, that is, the
occurrence of M had something to do with the occurrence of P* on
this occasion. This last observation points to a simple and nat-
ural way of dissipating the tension created by (a) and (b):
(3) M caused M* bycausing its supervenience base P*.
This completes Stage 1. What the argument has shown at
this point is that if Supervenienceis assumed, mental-to-mental
causation entails mental-to-physical causation—or, more gen-
erally, that “same-level” causation entails “downward” causa-
tion. Given Supervenience, it is not possible to have causation in
the mental realm without causation that crosses into the physi-
cal realm. This result is of some signiﬁcance; if we accept, as
most do, some doctrine of macro-micro supervenience, we can
no longer isolate causal relations within levels; any causal rela-
tion at level L (higher than the bottom level) entails a cross-
level, L to L/H110021, causal relation. In short, level-bound causal
autonomy is inconsistent with supervenience or dependence between
the levels. Further, an important part of the interest of the su-
pervenience argument is that it shows that, under the physical-
ist assumptions we are working with, mind-to-mind causation
is in trouble just as much as mind-to-body causation. Often the
problem of mental causation is presented as that of explaining
how the mental can inject causal inﬂuences into the causally
closed physical domain, that is, the problem of explaining
mental-to-physical causation. I wanted to do something more,
namely to show that physicalism can put in peril all forms of
mental causation, including mental-to-mental causation.
7 This
is why the argument begins with line (1). It is at Stage 2 that we
take up mental-to-physical causation. It is noteworthy that,
7. As we will see in the next chapter, an interesting parallel holds in the case
of substance dualism: under substance dualism, mental-to-mental causation
turns out to be as problematic as mental-to-physical causation. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 40

--- Page 56 ---

the supervenience argument 4 1
unlike in the second stage below, the argument up to this point
makes no explicit appeal to any special metaphysical principles;
in particular, no speciﬁc assumptions about the physical do-
main, such as its causal closure or completeness, enter the pic-
ture at this stage.
8 Mental-physical supervenience is the only
substantive premise that has been in play thus far.
Stage 2
There are two ways of completing the argument, and I believe
the second, which is new, is of some interest. I will ﬁrst present
the original version in a somewhat clearer form:
completion 1
We now turn our attention to M, the supposed mental cause
of M*. From Supervenience, it follows:
(4) M has a physical supervenience base, P.
There are strong reasons for thinking that P is a cause of P*. I
will not rehearse the considerations in support of this idea; let
us just note that P is (at least) nomologically sufﬁcient for M,
and the occurrence of M on this occasion depends on, and is
determined by, the presence of P on this occasion. Since ex
hypothesi M is a cause of P*, P would appear amply to qualify
as a cause of P* as well. So we have:
(5) M causes P*, and P causes P*. 
8. On some occasions I have tried to argue for (3) by invoking an exclusion
principle—see, for example, the “principle of determinative/generative exclu-
sion” in chapter 1. I think it preferable not to appeal to any general principle
here; I now prefer to rely on the reader’s seeing the tension I spoke of in con-
nection with the two answers to the question “Why is M* instantiated on this
occasion?” Anyone who understands Jonathan Edwards’s argument and his
mirror analogy will see it; I don’t believe invoking any “principle” will help
persuade anyone who is not with me here.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 41

--- Page 57 ---

4 2 chapter 2
Note that P’s causation of P* cannot be thought of as a causal
chain with M as an intermediate causal link; one reason is that
the P-to-M relation is not a causal relation. Note also that
since M supervenes on P, M and P occur precisely at the same
time. (Moreover, as we will shortly see, the two principles that
will be introduced, Exclusionand Closure, together disqualify M
as a cause of P*, making the idea of a causal chain from P to M
to P* a nonstarter.) 
To continue, from Irreducibility, we have:
(6) M /HS11005P.
9
Again, (5) and (6) present to us a situation with metaphysical
tension. For P* is represented here as having two distinct
causes, each sufﬁcient for its occurrence. The situation is ripe
for the application of the causal exclusion principle, which can
be stated as follows:
Exclusion. No single event can have more than one sufﬁcient
cause occurring at any given time—unless it is a genuine case
of causal overdetermination.
Let us assume that this is not a case of causal overdetermina-
tion (we will discuss the overdetermination issue below). 
(7) P* is not causally overdetermined by M and P.
By Exclusion, therefore, we must eliminate either M or P as
P*’s cause. Which one? 
9. Note: this only means that this instance of M/HS11005this instance of P. Does
this mean that a Davidsonian “token identity” sufﬁces here? The answer is no:
the relevant sense in which an instance of M /H11005an instance of P requires either
property identity M /H11005P or some form of reductive relationship between them.
(See Mind in a Physical World, ch. 4). The fact that properties M and P must be
implicated in the identity, or nonidentity, of M and P instances can be seen
from the fact that “An M-instance causes a P-instance” must be understood
with the proviso “in virtue of the former being an instance of M and the latter
an instance of P.”
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 42

--- Page 58 ---

the supervenience argument 4 3
(8) The putative mental cause, M, is excluded by the 
physical cause, P. That is, P, not M, is a cause of P*.
We can give relatively informal reasons for choosing P over M
as the cause of P*, but for a general theoretical justiﬁcation we
may appeal to the causal closure of the physical domain:
Closure. If a physical event has a cause that occurs at t, it has a
physical cause that occurs at t.10
If we were to choose M over P as P*’s cause, Closurewould kick
in again, leading us to posit a physical cause of P*, call it P1
(what could P1 be if not P?), and this would again call for the
application of Exclusion, forcing us to choose between M and
P1 (that is, P). Unless P is chosen and M excluded, we would
be off to an unending repetition of the same choice situation;
M must be excluded and P retained.
It is worthwhile to reﬂect on how Exclusionand Closurework
together to yield the epiphenomenalist conclusion (8). Exclusion
itself is neutral with respect to the mental-physical competition;
it says either the mental cause or the physical cause must go, but
doesn’t favor either over the other. What makes the difference—
what introduces an asymmetry into the situation—is Closure. It is
the causal closure of the physical world that excludes the mental
cause, enabling the physical cause to prevail. If the situation with
causal closure were the reverse, so that it was the mental domain,
not the physical domain, that was causally closed, the mental
10. For discussion of physical causal closure, or “completeness,” see, e.g.,
David Papineau, Thinking about Consciousness(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002),
ch. 1; E. J. Lowe, “Physical Causal Closure and the Invisibility of Mental Cau-
sation,” in Physicalism and Mental Causation, ed. Sven Walter and Heinz-Dieter
Heckmann (Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic, 2003). A simpler statement of
causal closure in the form “If a physical event has a cause, it has a physical
cause” will not do; given the transitivity of causation, the requirement would
be met by a causal chain consisting of a physical effect caused by a mental
cause which in turn is caused by a physical cause. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 43

--- Page 59 ---

4 4 chapter 2
cause would have prevailed over its physical competitor. I sup-
pose this could happen under some forms of Idealism; one would
then worry about the “problem” of physical causation.
completion 2
Let us begin with the last line of Stage 1:
(3) M causes M* by causing its physical 
supervenience base P*. 
From which it follows:
(4) M is a cause of P*.
By Closureit follows:
(5) P* has a physical cause—call it P—occurring 
at the time M occurs. 
(6) M /HS11005P (by Irreducibility). 
(7) Hence, P* has two distinct causes, M and P, 
and this is not a case of causal overdetermination. 
(8) Hence, by Exclusion, either M or P must go. 
(9) By Closureand Exclusion, M must go; P stays.
This is simpler than Completion 1. Supervenienceis not
needed as a premise, and the claim that M’s supervenience
base P has a valid claim to be a cause of P* has been bypassed,
making it unnecessary to devise an argument for it. However,
Completion 1, in some ways, is more intuitive; it better cap-
tures Jonathan Edwards’s fundamental insight and makes it
particularly salient how putative higher-level causal relations
give way to causal processes at a lower level. Either way, the
main signiﬁcance of Stage 2 lies in what it shows about the
possible hazards involved in the idea of “downward” causation,
namely that the assumptions of causal exclusion and lower-level
causal closure disallow downward causation. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 44

--- Page 60 ---

the supervenience argument 4 5
Figure 1 pictures the outcome of the argument under Com-
pletion 1. In this picture, there is but one causal relation, from
physical property P to another physical property P*, and the
initially posited causal relation from M to M* has been elimi-
nated. An apparent causal relation between the two mental
properties is explained away by their respective supervenience
on two physical properties that are connected by a genuine
causal process. In this picture neither M nor M* is implicated
in any causal relations; they play no role in shaping the causal
structure—they only supervene on properties that constitute
that structure. The supervenience relations together with the
causal relation involved can generate counterfactual depen-
dencies between the two mental properties, and between them
and the physical properties; but these are no more causal than
counterfactual dependencies involving any other supervenient
property and its subvenient base (compare the aesthetic prop-
erties of a work of art and their base physical properties).
Completion 2 presents a picture that is a bit less full: we no
longer have the vertical “supervenience” arrow from P to M.
M of course must have a physical supervenience base, but the
argument, unlike in Completion 1, does not require it to be a
cause of P*, although, as Completion 1 suggests, it may well
be. The moral, however, is the same: the M→ M* and M→ P*
causal relations have given way to an underlying physical
causal process, P→ P*.
Figure 1.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 45

--- Page 61 ---

4 6 chapter 2
Is Overdetermination an Option?
Several critics have taken issue with line (7), in both completions
of the argument, where the claim is made that we should not
think of M and P as two distinct overdetermining causes of P*.
One thing I said to defend this claim in Mind in a Physical World
was this: taking the overdetermination option would be in viola-
tion of Closure, for in a world in which P does not occur but
which is as close to the actual world as possible, M would be a
cause of P*, leaving P* without a physical cause. My critics have
convinced me that what I said there is not quite right and at best
incomplete.
Ned Block asks whether in the supposed possible world, one
in which the supervenience base P of M does not occur, M
could be thought of as occurring at all. If we take away the su-
pervenience base of M, shouldn’t that also take away M? This
is something to think about. If what Block has in mind is that
the following counterfactual may well be true, I agree:
(C) If P had not occurred, M would not have occurred.
For we are apt to reason like this: M was there because P was
there, so take away P and M goes as well. “If the patient’s noci-
ceptive neurons had not been stimulated at t, he would not have
experienced pain at t,” uttered, say, when we deliberately acti-
vated these neurons in an experimental situation, would evi-
dently be true. In considering the claim that M and P are each a
sufﬁcient cause of P*, however, we need to be able to consider a
possible situation in which M occurs without P and evaluate the
claim that in this possible situation P* nonetheless follows. If
such is not a possible situation—that is, if of necessity any nonP-
world is ipso facto a nonM-world—what signiﬁcance can we
attach to the claim that P and M are each an overdetermining
sufﬁcient cause of P*, that in addition to P, M also is a sufﬁcient
cause of P*? Superveniencedoes not render a nonP-world in
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 46

--- Page 62 ---

the supervenience argument 4 7
which M occurs impossible; all that Superveniencerequires is that
such a world must include an alternative physical base of M.
So suppose W is a world in which M occurs but P does not.
In an instructive and helpful discussion, Thomas Crisp and
Ted Warﬁeld have the following to say about such worlds:
Consider though: either [Supervenience] holds in W or it does
not. Suppose it does. It follows that M has a physical superve-
nience base P/H11032in W. What is the causal status of P/H11032vis-à-vis P*
in W? We won’t repeat ourselves, but we saw above an argu-
ment of Kim’s to the effect that if P/H11032is a supervenience base for
M and M causes P*, then P/H11032is also causally sufﬁcient for P*. If
[Supervenience] holds in W, therefore, P* does have a physical
cause in W, and [Closure] therefore does not fail in W.
11
Crisp and Warﬁeld are right. Notice, though, that in W, we
have a replay of exactly the same situation with which we
began—M has a physical base, P
/H11032, threatening to preempt it as
a cause of P*. In any world in which Supervenienceholds and M
causes P*, some physical property, instantiated at the same
time, can claim to be a sufﬁcient cause of P*. As long as Super-
venienceis held constant, there is no world in which M by itself,
independently of a physical base, brings about P*; whenever M
claims to be a cause of P*, there is some physical property wait-
ing to claim at least an equal causal status. In the actual world,
we may suppose that a continuous causal chain connects P with
P* (in some cases we may already have detailed neurophysio-
logical knowledge of the physical causal process leading from P
to P*).
12And it would be incoherent to suppose there is another
11.Thomas M. Crisp and Ted A. Warﬁeld, “Kim’s Master Argument,”
Noûs35 (2001): 304–16 (the quoted passage appears on p. 314).
12. In introducing consideration of causal chains, I am implicitly asking the
reader to think of causation in terms of actual productive/generative mecha-
nisms involving energy ﬂow, momentum transfer, and the like, and not merely
in terms of counterfactual dependencies. Needless to say, the overdetermina-
tion idea makes little sense when causation is understood this way.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 47

--- Page 63 ---

4 8 chapter 2
causal chain from M to P* that is independent of the causal
process connecting P with P*; the only plausible supposition is
that if there is a causal path from M to P*, that must coincide
with the causal path from P to P*. In W, another causal chain
connects P
/H11032with P*, and the M-P* chain must coincide with
that, and similarly in other such worlds. To be a cause of P*, M
must somehow ride piggyback on physical causal chains—
distinct ones depending on which physical property subserves
M on a given occasion, in the same world or in other possible
worlds. And we may ask: In virtue of what relation it bears to
physical property P does M earn its entitlement to a free ride
on the causal chain from P to P* and to claim this causal chain
to be its own? Obviously, the only signiﬁcant relation M bears
to P is supervenience. But why should supervenience confer
this right on M? The fact of the matter is that there is only one
causal process here, from P to P*,
13 and M’s supposed causal
contribution to the production of P* is totally mysterious. In
standard cases of overdetermination, like two bullets hitting the
victim’s heart at the same time, the short circuit and the over-
turned lantern causing a house ﬁre, and so on, each overdeter-
mining cause plays a distinct and distinctive causal role. The
usual notion of overdetermination involves two or more sepa-
rate and independent causal chains intersecting at a common
effect. Because of Supervenience, however, that is not the kind 
of situation we have here. In this sense, this is not a case of
genuine causal overdetermination, and Exclusionapplies in a
straightforward way. Moreover, anyone tempted by the idea
that mental events make their causal contributions by being
13. Some have suggested that the M-to-P* causation is a higher-level “re-
description” of the causal process from P to P*. E.g., John R. Searle, “Con-
sciousness, the Brain and the Connection Principle: A Reply,” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research55 (1995): 217–32, especially 218–19. Obviously, the
redescription strategy is available only to those who accept “M /H11005P,” namely
reductionist physicalists (Searle of course does not count himself among
them).
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 48

--- Page 64 ---

the supervenience argument 4 9
overdetermining causes should reﬂect on whether this option
could sufﬁciently vindicate the causal efﬁcacy of the mental.
Now for the second leg of Crisp and Warﬁeld’s dilemma: 
Now suppose that [Supervenience] does not hold in W. And 
suppose further that, just as Kim suggests, M causes P* in W 
without there being any physical cause of P*. Given these assump-
tions, [Closure] does indeed fail in W. But recall that we have sup-
posed along with Kim that the actual world is a Supervenience-
world. It follows from this supposition that W is either
nomologically or metaphysically impossible, depending on how
we read the relevant modal operator in the formulation of [Super-
venience]. So if W is a world in which [Closure] is violated in the
way Kim suggests, W is at least nomologically impossible.
What should nonreductivist fans of overdetermination think
about this? Should they give up their view because it implies that
[Closure] fails in worlds that are nomologically (and maybe even
metaphysically) impossible? We can’t see why they should.
14
I think we can set aside the possibility that mind-body superve-
nience is logically or metaphysically necessary, since such a
view is essentially a reductionist view,
15 and we are here consid-
ering Supervenienceas a part of nonreductive physicalism. Let
us assume then that Supervenienceis nomologically necessary,
and that it fails in W. So in virtue of violating Supervenience, W
is nomologically impossible. However, W is nomologically 
impossible not because some physical law is violated in W but
because some mental properties fail to supervene on physical
properties—that is, because some psychophysical laws of our
world fail in W. So W may well be a physically possible world;
in fact, we may stipulate W to be a perfect duplicate of our
14. Crisp and Warﬁeld, “Kim’s Master Argument,” p. 314.
15. This is not an uncontroversial issue, but we cannot go into it here. And
there are independent reasons for thinking that mind-brain supervenience, 
if it holds, must be construed as nomological, not logical or metaphysical,
supervenience.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 49

--- Page 65 ---

5 0 chapter 2
world in all physical respects, including spacetime structure,
basic physical laws, and fundamental particles. Should the
physicalist not care whether physical causal closure holds in a
world like W? Contrary to what Crisp and Warﬁeld suggest, it
seems obvious to me that anyone who cares about physicalism
should care very much about Closurein W.
A more direct way of ruling out overdetermination as an op-
tion is to adopt a stronger form of physical causal closure:
Strong closure. Any cause of a physical event is itself a physical
event—that is, no nonphysical event can be a cause of a physi-
cal event.16
Using this principle as a premise has two signiﬁcant effects.
First, it stops the overdetermination option in its tracks; Strong
closureby itself disallows mental-to-physical causation. Second,
Strong closureallows us to dispense with Exclusion. We no
longer need this principle to exclude M in favor of P as P*’s
cause, for the simple reason that Strong closure, in conjunction
with Irreducibility, makes M ineligible as a cause of P*.
How might the supervenience argument go under Strong
closure? Stage 1 is unaffected. Let’s brieﬂy look at how Com-
pletion 1 might go with Strong closure:
(3) M causes M* by causing P*.
(4) M has a physical supervenience base, P.
(5) M causes P*, and P causes P*.
Up to here, the argument is the same as before; from here the
argument can continue as follows:
(6*) For every physical property P, M /HS11005P Irreducibility.
(7*) M does not cause P* (from (6*) and Strong closure).
16. An even stronger form of closure can be obtained by also prohibiting
physical events from having mental effects—that is, by disallowing all “mixed”
causal chains, chains with both physical and mental events.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 50

--- Page 66 ---

the supervenience argument 5 1
(8*) M does not cause M* (from (3)17and (7*)).
(9*) P causes P* (from (5)).
The outcome is the same as in the original Completion 1,
namely Figure 1. But the argument has been simpliﬁed in that
Exclusionhas been dispensed with as a premise.
Is this a reason to prefer Strong closureto Closure? The an-
swer, I believe, is yes and no. Although the causal exclusion
principle has been widely accepted and I believe it is virtually
an analytic truth with not much content, some ﬁnd it prob-
lematic, and the fact that Strong closuremakes Exclusiondis-
pensable is a point in its favor. (This need not be taken to
mean that the argument is no longer properly called an “exclu-
sion” argument; even though no exclusion principle is used as
a premise, the outcomeof the argument is that mental causal
relations are “excluded” by physical causality.) Further, there
seems no reason for the physicalist to object to Strong closure;
so why not trade the two premises, Closureand Exclusion, for a
single premise, Strong closure, and in the process defuse the
overdetermination issue? I believe, though, that there is a
philosophical gain in staying with the weaker closure premise.
Adopting Strong closureas a premise is like starting your argu-
ment with mind-body causation already ruled out, at least for
nonreductivists; with Strong closureas your starting point,
there isn’t very much more distance you can go or need to go.
Perhaps philosophical arguments never make converts out of
those who are already committed to the opposite side; but I
believe that it can serve philosophical interest to begin with a
set of premises that are individually as weak as possible but
which somehow conspire together to yield the desired conclu-
sion. It is better, that is to say, to distribute the burden of de-
fending a conclusion among a set of relatively weak premises
than to place it on fewer but individually stronger premises.
17. It is implicit in (3) that this is the onlyway M can cause M*.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 51

--- Page 67 ---

5 2 chapter 2
The latter strategy is apt to provoke the complaint that the
argument begs the question and that it serves no useful pur-
pose. I think we learn something about the issues and desider-
ata involved and their interplay when we run the superve-
nience argument with Closurerather than Strong closure.
T he Generalization Argument 
My main aim in this chapter is to respond to the argument
Block has put forward in the following passage: 
The Exclusion Principle [the thesis that “sufﬁcient causation at
one level excludes sufﬁcient causation at another level”] leads
to problems about causal powers draining away. Kim discusses
a number of such problems, including the following two. First,
it is hard to believe that there is no mental causation, no physi-
ological causation, no molecular causation, no atomic causation
but only bottom level physical causation. Second, it is hard to
believe that there is no causation at all if there is no bottom
level of physics.
18
Why does Block think that if the supervenience argument
holds, there will be no physiological causation, no molecular
causation, etc. any more than mental causation? Because he
subscribes to what is called the “generalization argument”—the
idea that the supervenience argument generalizes beyond
mind-body causation, with the result that causation at anylevel
gives way to causation at the next lower level (if there is one),
just as the supposed causation at the mental level gets elimi-
nated in favor of causation at the physical/biological level.
Block is not alone here. A number of writers have expressed the
view that if the supposed problem of mental causation is a real
problem, a parallel problem should arise for all other special
18. Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” p. 138.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 52

--- Page 68 ---

the supervenience argument 5 3
sciences, except causation at the most fundamental physical
level.19Such a view is often stated against the backdrop of a
“layered” model of the domains of science, according to which
objects and properties of the world are arrayed in a hierarchy of
“levels,” with the basic physical particles and their properties at
the bottom level and, above it, the levels of atoms, molecules,
cells, organisms, and so on, all ordered in an ascending ladder-
like structure. It is this hierarchical view of the domains of
science that gives meaning to the talk of “higher” and “lower”
levels—in regard to sciences, laws, explanations, and the rest.
20
On a hierarchical picture of levels like this, it is natural to
think of mental causation only as a special case of higher-level
causation. If the supervenience argument shows causation at
the psychological level to be preempted by causation at the bio-
logical level, why couldn’t the argument be iterated to show
biological causation to be preempted by physicochemical cau-
sation, and so on down to the fundamental microphysical level?
The idea that the argument is generalizable this way gains
force from the widely accepted assumption that properties at
upper levels are supervenient on lower-level properties, the
eponymous premise that plays a crucial role in the argument.
Let me begin my response by pointing out that if indeed the
supervenience argument is generalizable, that only shows that
19. This includes Tyler Burge, Robert Van Gulick, and many others. See
my Mind in a Physical World, ch. 3 for references and discussion. Among other
discussions of the generalization argument are Paul Noordhof, “Micro-Based
Properties and the Supervenience Argument,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society99 (1999): 109–114; Carl Gillett, “Does the Argument from Realiza-
tion Generalize? Responses to Kim,” Southern Journal of Philosophy39 (2001):
79–98; Thomas D. Bontly, “The Supervenience Argument Generalizes,”
Philosophical Studies109 (2002): 75–96. 
20. Whether a layered model of this kind can be developed as a compre-
hensive ontology of the world is a debatable issue. I discuss some of the 
difﬁculties with such an approach in “The Layered Model: Metaphysical Con-
siderations,” Philosophical Explorations5 (2002): 2–20. See also John Heil, From
an Ontological Point of View(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), ch. 4.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 53

--- Page 69 ---

5 4 chapter 2
we have a general philosophical problem on hand, and that it
is not necessarily a refutation of the argument. If the argument
goes wrong, one would like to know just where and how it
goes wrong. Moreover, just saying that there “obviously” are
biological causation, physiological causation, and so on isn’t
very helpful; what has to be shown is that these kinds of
“higher-level” causation are irreducible to basic physical cau-
sation—namely, that there are these causal relations in addition
tothe underlying physical causal processes. It is important to
keep in mind that the supervenience argument assumes among
its premises the doctrine of the irreducibility of the mental;
this premise is invoked at line (6) in both completions of Stage
2. As may be recalled, the argument begins with the supposi-
tion that an instance of a mental property M causes another
mental property M* to instantiate (line (1)). Block says that
this M-to-M* causal relation is “putative—it is a premise in a
reductiothat Kim will reject.”
21 But this is not the full story:
there is another premise, the premise of irreducibility (line (6):
M /HS11005P), against which a reductio can also be performed. This
premise, not the supposed M-to-M* causal relation, has always
been my primary target. The real aim of the argument, as far
as my own philosophical interests are concerned, is not to
show that mentality is epiphenomenal, or that mental causal
relations are eliminated by physical causal relations; it is rather
to show “either reduction or causal impotence.” To put it
another way, my aim is to force a choice between the situation
depicted in ﬁgure 1 and what is pictured in ﬁgure 2. In this
picture, the M→ M* causation remains genuine and real; it is
the very same causal relationas P→ P*; the reduction collapses
the two levels into one, and there is here one causal relation,
not two. The aim of the supervenience argument is to clarify
the options available to the physicalist: If you deem yourself a
21. Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” p. 134.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 54

--- Page 70 ---

the supervenience argument 5 5
physicalist, you must choose between ﬁgure 1 and ﬁgure 2.
There are no other options.22
Indeed, the supervenience argument may be generalizable,
but all that would show is that if there is biological causation, bi-
ological properties are, or are reducible to, physical or physico-
chemical properties; it does not show that biological causation
does not exist. The epiphenomenalist brunt of the argument is
avoided if one is prepared, and is able, to choose the reduction-
ist branch of the dilemma. It should be kept in mind that merely
“choosing” reductionism doesn’t make reductionism true;
whether or not reductionism is sustainable as an option is an 
independent question that ought to be decided on its merits.
Many philosophers will reply that biological properties are
no more physically reducible than psychological properties, cit-
ing their “multiple realizability” in relation to physicochemical
properties. For most antireductionist philosophers, multiple
realizability has long been a mantra, an all-purpose antireduc-
tionist argument applied across the board to all special science
properties. They see multiple realization everywhere, and this
22. The underlying metaphysical moral of the two options is the same,
however: there is only one causal relation here, namely a physical one, and,
more generally, causality is fundamentally a physical phenomenon. An inter-
estingly similar picture results from Donald Davidson’s thesis that causation
requires “strict laws,” and that strict laws are found only in physics. See his
“Mental Events,” in Essays on Actions and Events(Oxford and New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1980).
Figure 2.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 55

--- Page 71 ---

5 6 chapter 2
leads them to see irreducibility everywhere. I believe, however,
that the notion of “realization” as it is often invoked in this
context is too loose and ill-formed, and that when realization is
properly understood, multiple realization only leads to re-
ducibility to multiple reduction bases, not to irreducibility.
23
Considerations like those motivating the supervenience ar-
gument do not have eliminative implications for macrocausa-
tion in general; the supervenience argument does not eliminate
all macrocausation, leaving only causal relations between
microentities and their properties. This baseball has causal
powers that none of its proper parts, in particular none of its
constituent microparticles, have, and in virtue of its mass and
hardness, the baseball can break a window when it strikes it
with a certain velocity. The shattering of the glass was caused
by the baseball and certainly not by the individual particles
composing it. True, the baseball is a composite object made up
of its constituent molecules, atoms, particles, or what have you,
and this complex structure consisting of microparticles broke
the window. But there is no mystery here: the baseball /H11005this
composite structure of microparticles.
24 Presumably, the causal
powers of the baseball are determinedby its microstructural fea-
tures and perhaps also explainablein terms of them. But deter-
mination or explanation need have no eliminative implications.
Perhaps, macrocausal relations are constituted by, or composed
of, a bunch of microcausal relations. But that does not banish
macrocausation out of existence any more than the fact that the
baseball is composed of microparticles entails its nonexistence.
All this is consistent with the supervenience argument. 
23. See my “Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction,” Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Research52 (1992): 1–26, and Mind in a Physical World, ch.
4. For further discussion of multiple realizability and reduction, see John Bickle,
Psychoneural Reduction: The New Wave(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
24. For a dissenting view—plusthe view that macrocausation is in general
preempted by microcausation—see Trenton Merricks, Objects and Persons
(Oxford: Clarendon, 2001).
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 56

--- Page 72 ---

the supervenience argument 5 7
Block’s Causal Drainage Argument
A micro-based property of an object is a property character-
izing its microstructure—it tells us what sorts of micro-
constituents the object is made up of and the structural relations
that conﬁgure these constituents into a stable object with sub-
stantival unity. Micro-based (or microstructural) properties of
an object are its macroproperties—they belong to the whole
object, not to its constituents—and, moreover, they do not su-
pervene on the properties of the object’s micro-constituents.
For that reason, the supervenience argument does not touch
micro-based properties,
25 and I have claimed that this prevents
causal powers from seeping downward from level to level,
from macro to micro. Further, I have argued that many chemi-
cal and biological properties seem construable as micro-based
properties, properties deﬁned or analyzable in terms of mi-
crostructure. Block recognizes this as my strategy. The initial
criticism he advances can be called the “multiple composition”
argument. He writes:
But why can’t micro-based properties be micro-based in alterna-
tive ways? Why isn’t jade an example of a micro-based property,
micro-based in both calcium magnesium silicate (nephrite) and
sodium aluminum silicate (jadeite)?...
My doubts about [Kim’s] picture center on the worry just
mentioned concerning multiple decomposition. Micro-based
properties are supposed to prevent draining away for both su-
pervenient and functional properties, but Kim’s plugging the
draining with micro-based properties depends on assuming
identities (such as “water/H11005H
2O”) and multiple composition
will preclude such identities.26
25. This has been disputed by some of the authors cited in footnote 19.
26. Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” pp. 145–46.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 57

--- Page 73 ---

5 8 chapter 2
Here Block appears to be thinking of multiple composition in
parallel with multiple realization: just as multiple realization
has been used as an argument against reducibility, multiple
composition could be used against identifying a macroprop-
erty, say being jade, with micro-based properties. This is an
interesting possibility; multiple compositionality may work as
well as multiple realizability, each against its reductionist tar-
get. However, I think that neither works very well.
There are two things to say about Block’s argument. First,
in spite of jade’s multiple composition, each instance of 
jade—that is, each individual piece of jade—is either jadeite or
nephrite, and I don’t see anything wrong about identifying its
being jade with itsbeing nephrite (if it is nephrite) or with its
being jadeite (if it’s jadeite). If it is nephrite, the causal powers
that it has in virtue of being jade will be exactly identical with
the causal powers of nephrite.All we need is identity at the 
level of instances, not necessarily at the level of kinds and prop-
erties; causation after all is a relation between property or 
kind-instances, not between properties or kinds as such. Second,
suppose a macroproperty has two or more distinct micro-
compositions. We can use the jade example again: we presum-
ably distinguish between the two compositions, jadeite and
nephrite, importantly because they are causallydistinguishable—
thatis, jadeite and nephrite have signiﬁcantly different causal
proﬁles. Given this, there are two options. We can either deny
that jade is a genuine kind (at least, jade is not a kind of min-
eral), on account of its causal heterogeneity, or identify jade
with a disjunctive kind, jadeite or nephrite (that is, being jade
is identiﬁed with having the microstructure of jadeite or the
microstructure of nephrite). The second option which allows
disjunctive kinds is a more conservative approach and may be
more viable as a general solution. On the disjunctive approach,
being jade turns out to be a causally heterogeneous property,
not a causally inert one, and jade turns out to be a causally
heterogeneous kind, not a causally irrelevant one. To disarm
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 58

--- Page 74 ---

the supervenience argument 5 9
Block’s multiple composition argument, adopting either dis-
junctive property/kind identities or instance (or token) identi-
ties seems sufﬁcient.
This, however, does not fully block the drainage argument.
There may be no causal seepage from macro to micro, but that
is not the only way the seepage can occur. The trouble can be
seen when we recognize that a given object can have micro-
based properties at various levels (the biological, the physico-
chemical, the atomic, etc.), and that higher-level micro-based
properties arguably supervene on their lower-level counter-
parts. Block has this in mind, I think, when he speaks of
“endless subvenience.”
27 Other commentators, in particular
Ausonio Marras,28 have also made this point. Let us see how
the idea might be developed. 
Take any macro-object, O, and let a totalmicro-based prop-
erty at level Lbe the property corresponding to a complete
description of O’s microstructure at level L. (Roughly, we can
think of “levels” in terms of modes of decomposition of mater-
ial objects into physically signiﬁcant constituents; examples 
of levels are the molecular level, the atomic level, and the level
of basic particles.) So if L is the level of the Standard Model, a
total micro-based property of O at this level would give a
complete description of O’s microstructure in terms of the
particles and forces posited in the Standard Model. The fol-
lowing is a plausible physicalist principle:
Macro-micro supervenience. All intrinsic properties of O, at any
level higher than L, supervene on the total micro-based prop-
erty of O at level L.
The idea is that wholes made up of the same (qualitatively iden-
tical) constituents conﬁgured in the same structural relationships
27. Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” p. 140.
28.Ausonio Marras in “Critical Notice of Mind in a Physical World,”
Canadian Journal of Philosophy30 (2000): 137–60; see p. 151. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 59

--- Page 75 ---

6 0 chapter 2
will exhibit an identical set of intrinsic properties. Since micro-
based properties are intrinsic properties, it follows:
For any object O, O’s micro-based properties at level L super-
vene on O’s total micro-based property at level L*, where 
L* /H11021L.
Consider a series of total micro-based properties of a given ob-
ject: ML, ML/H110021, ML/H110022,....Suppose this series has no end; it
continues on, without ever reaching a bottom level. That is, let
us suppose that the speculation of the physicists cited by Block
is correct, and that matter is inﬁnitely divisible (I will go along
with Block that all this makes perfectly good sense; but can we
really make sense of the idea of an object that is literally made
up of inﬁnitely many physically signiﬁcant parts, here and
now?) According to the supervenience argument, M
L appar-
ently cedes its causal powers to ML/H110021, whose causal powers in
turn are taken over by those of ML/H110022, and so on without end.
Here, Block’s worry appears well placed. The supervenience
argument implies the following general proposition:
Seepage. If property Q supervenes on a property Q* at a lower
level without being reducible to it, Q’s causal powers are pre-
empted by those of Q*.
This means that no member of the inﬁnite series of total micro-
based properties ML, ML/H110021, ...has causal powers, since every
member has a lower member on which it supervenes. If no mem-
ber of this series has causal powers, there are none to be had
anywhere in the series. Moreover, since all intrinsic properties of
the object in question are assumed to supervene on its total
micro-based properties at lower levels, none of the object’s intrin-
sic properties can have causal powers, and that means that the ob-
ject itself has no causal powers. All this on the premise that mi-
crophysics has no bottom level and matter is inﬁnitely divisible.
29
29. For an interesting (skeptical) discussion of the existence of a bottom level,
see Jonathan Schaffer, “Is There a Fundamental Level?” Noûs37 (2003): 498–517. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 60

--- Page 76 ---

the supervenience argument 6 1
This, I believe, is Block’s argument, or at least it is a close-
enough approximation to it. As Marras has pointed out, it
seems possible to develop the generalization argument within
a single level in the micro-macro hierarchy. In any case, the
argument is worth thinking about. Compare Seepagewith the
following alternative ways of conceiving the interlevel causal
relationship:
Explanation. If property Q supervenes on a property Q* at a
lower level without being reducible to it, Q’s causal powers
(and the causal relations into which Q enters) can be explained
in terms of the causal powers of Q*.
Constitution. If Q supervenes on Q*, Q’s causal powers are con-
stitutedby those of Q*.
Derivation/determination. If Q supervenes on Q*, Q’s causal
powers derive from, and are determined byand dependent on,
those of Q*.
It is interesting to note that, unlike Seepage, none of these
alternatives seem to be vulnerable to the drainage argument.
The reason is that these alternatives, insofar as we understand
them, don’t appear to have eliminative implications for causa-
tion at the higher, supervenient levels. For example, the fact
that Q’s causal powers are “explained” by the causal powers of
its underlying base Q* does not mean that the former are in
any sense preempted or eliminated by the latter, or even that
they are somehow reduced to the latter. Exactly what “consti-
tution”
30 might mean, or what “derivation” and “dependence”
amount to, requires further thought, but it is clear that these
30. For a defense of nonreductive physicalism based on the idea of consti-
tution, see Derk Pereboom, “Robust Nonreductive Physicalism,” Journal of
Philosophy99 (2002): 499–531. I believe that the main burden, which is yet to
be discharged, of this approach is to produce a serviceably clear concept of
constitution. See also Lynne Rudder Baker, Persons and Bodies: A Constitution
View(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 61

--- Page 77 ---

6 2 chapter 2
terms as understood in their rough ordinary philosophical
senses have no obviously eliminative intimations. 
So why not embrace one or another, or perhaps a combina-
tion, of these alternative ways of conceiving the interlevel
causal relationships? That would stop the drainage right at the
start, and whether there is, or is not, a bottom level makes no
difference. So why not say that M, though it doesn’t quite have
the causal status of P in relation to P*, is a “derivative” cause of
P* in virtue of its supervenience on P? M is not in itself an in-
dependent cause of P*; its causal status derives from its super-
venience on the causally active P. Some years back, I thought
that this might be a plausible way of vindicating mental causa-
tion.
31 This was the model of so-called supervenient causation.
But it soon began to dawn on me that this was an empty verbal
ploy; we can “say,” if we want, that M is a “supervenient”
cause, “dependent” or “derivative” cause, or whatever, and we
can embellish ﬁgure 1by drawing a horizontal arrow connect-
ing M with M*, with the annotation “superveniently causes,”
as in ﬁgure 3. But this is only a gimmick with no meaning; the
facts are as represented in the unadorned ﬁgure 1, and insert-
ing a dotted arrow and calling it “supervenient” causation, or
anything else (how about “pretend” or “faux” causation), does not
alter the situation one bit. It neither adds any new facts nor re-
veals any hitherto unnoticed relationships. Inserting the extra
arrow is not only pointless; it could also be philosophically perni-
cious if it should mislead us into thinking that we have thereby
conferred on M, the mental event, some real causal role. More-
over, embracing this approach would lead us back to the over-
determination/exclusion problem—unless we simply stipulate
the problem away by declaring that supervenient causal relations
do not compete with the causal relation underlying them.
31. In, e.g., “Epiphenomenal and Supervenient Causation,” Midwest Studies
in Philosophy9 (1984): 257–270. See also Ernest Sosa, “Mind-Body Interaction
and Supervenient Causation,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy9 (1984): 271–81.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 62

--- Page 78 ---

the supervenience argument 6 3
Jonathan Edwards would have approved my position: in his ar-
gument against persisting objects, he did not settle for deriva-
tive or dependent causation between created substances; he felt,
rightly, that God wholly preempted causation at “higher” levels.
What is Block’s own position in regard to these issues? He
writes:
But there is another point of view that recognizes causal efﬁ-
cacy at many levels and does not regard them as competing.
And this latter point of view also avoids the problem of causal
powers draining away.
32
And, concerning the “tension” I described at steps (1) and (2)
of the supervenience argument, Block writes: “Of course, the
non-reductive materialist who accepts causation at many levels
should not recognize any tension.”
33
Block’s position is the favored approach of most nonreduc-
tive physicalists; however, this popular position is precisely
what is being challenged. The nonreductive physicalist who ac-
cepts supervenience ought torecognize the tension; in view of
32. Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” p. 149. Terence Horgan, among
others, holds a similar view; see his “Nonreductive Physicalism and the Explana-
tory Autonomy of Psychology,” in Naturalism: A Critical Appraisal, ed. Stephen J.
Wagner and Richard Warner (Notre Dame: IN: Notre Dame University Press,
1993).
33. Block, “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” p. 135. 
Figure 3.
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 63

--- Page 79 ---

6 4 chapter 2
the considerations advanced in the supervenience argument—
basically, Jonathan Edwards’s insight—I believe the nonreduc-
tive physicalist owes us an explanation of why there is no tension
here. It would be nice if we could embrace causation at many
levels, including the psychological, the biological, and so on,
and also cross-level causation, both downward and upward, all
of them coexisting in harmony. And it isimportant to us to be
able to have trust in the causal efﬁcacy of our beliefs and de-
sires, emotions and consciousness, and to believe in our powers
as agents in the world—all this without reducing mentality to
mere patterns of electrical activity in the brain. But these are
only a wish list—the starting point of the mental causation de-
bate. The main purpose of the supervenience argument is to
bring into focus the disquieting fact that there are strong meta-
physical pressures on our pre-philosophical assumptions and
desiderata in this area. If the argument is correct, it shows that
there are inevitable causal entanglements between different
levels, raising all sorts of issues concerning causal closure, com-
petition, and exclusion, and forcing some signiﬁcant philosoph-
ical choices. The nonreductive materialist must sort out and
come to terms with these issues; ignoring them is not an option
for him. With his drainage argument, Block attempts to defeat
the supervenience argument. That is a ﬁrst step. But this argu-
ment has the form of a reductio: if it works, we will know the
argument cannot be sound, but that will not tell us just where
the argument goes wrong. And this knowledge is required if we
are to construct a positive account of multilevel causation of
the sort that Block and others have in mind.
In any case, what can be said to counter the drainage argu-
ment as lately formulated? As far as the dialectics of the mental
causation debate goes, my response here is the same as my
reply to Block’s statement that the supervenience argument is a
reductio against its ﬁrst premise (“Mental property M causes
mental property M*”). As may be recalled, I pointed out
that there is another premise against which a reductio can be
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 64

--- Page 80 ---

the supervenience argument 6 5
performed, namely the premise of psychophysical irreducibil-
ity, and that this was my real target. If, as Block’s argument sug-
gests, the supervenience argument can be continued to yield as
a further conclusion the following proposition:
(H) If there is no bottom level in microphysics, there is no
causation anywhere.
and if we ﬁnd (H) unacceptable, that only means that we need to
consider which of the premises of the argument is to be rejected.
My suggestion again is that the irreducibility premise should be
the prime candidate for rejection; I will elaborate on this below.
Before we go on, there is one point that needs to be clari-
ﬁed. Contrary to what seems sometimes assumed, it is not the
case that according to my argument, causation at any level L
gives way to causation at level L/H110021 (the next lower level), like
the rungs of a ladder that keep collapsing each on top of the
next lower one. That this is not the case is seen from the fact
that the argument requires Closureas a premise—the assump-
tion that the lower level in play is causally closed. This means
that the mental rung will not collapse onto the biological 
rung, as far as the supervenience argument is concerned, for
the simple reason that the biological level is not causally closed.
The same is true of macrolevel physics and chemistry. It is only
when we reach the fundamental level of microphysics that we
are likely to get a causally closed domain.
34 As I understand it,
34. Actually various complications arise with the talk of levels in this context.
In the only levels scheme that has been worked out with some precision, the
hierarchical scheme of Paul Oppenheim and Hilary Putnam (in their “Unity of
Science as a Working Hypothesis,” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. 2, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958), it is required that
each level includes all mereological aggregates of entities at that level (that 
is, each level is closed under mereological summation). Thus, the bottom level
of elementary particles, in this scheme, is in effect the universal domain that
includes molecules, organisms, and the rest. 
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 65

--- Page 81 ---

6 6 chapter 2
the so-called Standard Model is currently taken to represent
the bottom level. Assume that this level is causally closed; the
supervenience argument, if it works, shows that mental causal
relations give way to causal relations at this microlevel. And
similarly for biological causation, chemical causation, geologi-
cal causation, and the rest. So as far as the supervenience
argument goes, the bottom level of fundamental particles (as-
suming that this is the only level that is causally closed) is al-
ways the reference physical domain; there is no step-by-step
devolution of causal relations from level to level (I am not sug-
gesting that Block thinks that).
35
Block’s drainage argument evokes some deep metaphysical
associations, and this is part of what makes it so interesting.
Just think of the whole group of celebrated philosophical ar-
guments with a similar structure, going back to Aristotle and
Aquinas. I have in mind Aristotle’s argument for the existence
of a “prime mover”—the unmoved mover that is the source of
all motion. If something moves, it is moved by another thing
that moves, which in turn is moved by yet another mover, and
so on; but this series cannot go on ad inﬁnitum, for that would
make motion impossible. So there must be a mover that is it-
self not moved by anything else. Aquinas’s cosmological argu-
ment for the existence of God appears to work in a similar
way: there must be a ﬁrst cause that is itself uncaused because
the causal series cannot extend into the past without end. If it
did, nothing would exist. The classic foundationalist argu-
ment, such as we ﬁnd in Chisholm,
36 for the existence of “basic”
knowledge runs the same way, as do the familiar arguments for
35. A similar problem may well arise for mind-body supervenience; it is
likely that mental properties do not supervene on biological properties alone,
and that to get full supervenience we have to reach further down and include
nonbiological physicochemical properties in the base.
36. Roderick M. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edition (Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977).
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 66

--- Page 82 ---

the existence of semantic primitives, the existence of intrinsic
goods, and the like. I think it would be interesting to analyze
the metaphysics and logic of arguments that share this general
structure. Here, however, I will only make a couple of points
speciﬁcally in regard to Block’s drainage argument.
The ﬁrst point concerns causal closure. As earlier noted, a
causal collapse to the level below would occur only if the lower
level is causally closed. Are we assuming that if matter is inﬁ-
nitely divisible, physics will be causally closed at each level of
decomposition? I believe that the physicist David Bohm made
the observation that each time we descend to a lower micro-
level, we do so because the current level is not causally closed
(“explanatorily complete” may be a better term in this con-
text); that is, because there are phenomena at this level that
can only be explained by descending to a lower level. If some-
thing like that is true, no level in Block’s inﬁnitely descending
series of levels will be causally closed, or explanatorily com-
plete, and the supervenience argument cannot get a toehold.
We would not have the required closure premise available—
unless we take as our lowest level the unionof all the mi-
crolevels in this inﬁnite chain. Will such a union be causally
closed? It has to be, and I believe it may well give us the bot-
tom level which will stop Block’s inﬁnite causal drainage.
Second, we must return to reduction again. For Block’s
drainage argument to work in full force, it must be assumed
that the irreducibility premise will hold for purely physical
levels—we must assume that molecular facts are not reducible
to atomic facts, that atomic facts are not reducible to facts 
at the level of the Standard Model, and so on down the line.
How plausible is this assumption? There are well-known,
though by no means undisputed, arguments for regarding the
mental to be physically irreducible, and arguments have been
advanced to show that the biological level is irreducible to the
physicochemical level. But I know of no argument, other than
Block’s multiple-composition argument discussed above, to
the supervenience argument 6 7
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 67

--- Page 83 ---

6 8 chapter 2
show that the irreducibility assumption will stand as we go
down from one microphysical level to the next. The standard
view, as I understand it, is that chemistry and macrophysics are
reducible, and in fact have already been substantially reduced,
to particle physics via quantum mechanics.
37 Unless we have
reason to think that irreducibility will hold “all the way down,”
we have no reason to think that the causal drainage will go on
forever. Reduction is the stopper that will plug the cosmic hole
through which causal powers might drain away.
In fact, there appear to be presumptive reasons for thinking
that reducibility will hold for the kind of inﬁnite series Block
has in mind. Let us begin by noting that in various philosophi-
cal contexts the identity “the property of being water /H11005the
property of being H
2O” is often afﬁrmed and accepted. This
identity is accepted presumably on the basis of the fact that
water /H11005H
2O. Let us think a bit about what is involved. The
property of being H2O is a total micro-based property of water
at the atomic/molecular level; it is the property of being made
up of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom in a certain re-
lational structure. Being water is having this kind of microstruc-
ture. Having this microstructure is the microstructural essence
of water, and being water just is having that structure. We must
expect this line of thought to generalize downward, and the fol-
lowing may be one way to ﬂesh it out. Let us say that the prop-
erty of being H
2O is the total micro-based property of water at
the atomic level L (so having ML /H11005being H2O). So we have:
(1) Being water /H11005having ML. 
At the next level down, L/H110021, say the level of the Standard
Model, hydrogen atoms have a certain microstructural composi-
tion as do oxygen atoms, and water has a certain microstructural
37. See, e.g., Brian P. McLaughlin, “The Rise and Fall of British Emergen-
tism,” in Emergence or Reduction? ed. Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr, and
Jaegwon Kim (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992).
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 68

--- Page 84 ---

composition at this level; call it ML/H110021. Then by the same reason-
ing that led us to (1), we have:
(2) Being water /H11005having ML/H110021.
At the level L/H110022, the one below the Standard Model (if there
is such a level), water is again going to have a certain mi-
crostructure at that level; this is ML/H110022. We then have:
(3) Being water /H11005having ML/H110022.
and so on down the line, to ML/H110023 and the rest. These identities
in turn imply the following series of identities:
M L /H11005M L/H110021 /H11005M L/H110022 /H11005M L/H110023 ....
Voilà! These are the identities we need to stop the drainage.
The foregoing is somewhat sketchy and perhaps too quick,
and I do not wish to rest my reply to Block’s drainage chal-
lenge wholly on these rather speculative thoughts. The pri-
mary response to the drainage argument is the point that for
downward causal drainage to occur, the reduction option must
be ruled out for purely physical levels, including microphysical
levels, and it is far from obvious that this can be done. In fact,
the drainage problem provides us with one more reason to
perform a reductio against the irreducibility premise of the 
supervenience/exclusion argument.
the supervenience argument 6 9
70572 CH02 GGS  1/10/05  1:13 PM  Page 69

--- Page 85 ---

3
R
/Tswashhe /Rswashejection of /Iswashmmaterial /Mswashinds
A CAUSAL ARGUMENT
T he deep difﬁculties that beset contemporary nonreductive
physicalism might prompt some of us to explore nonphysicalist
alternatives; in fact, the nonreductivist’s predicament seems to
have injected new vigor into the dualist projects of philosophers
with antecedent antiphysicalist sympathies.
1 For the upshot of
our considerations on mental causation was that, for the physi-
calist, there are only two options left: reductionism and epiphe-
nomenalism. With good reason, most philosophers have found
neither choice palatable. On one hand, epiphenomenalism
strikes most of us as obviously wrong, if not incoherent; 
the idea that our thoughts, wants, and intentions might lack
causal efﬁcacy of any kind is deeply troubling, going as it does
against everything we believe about ourselves as agents and cog-
nizers. It is the kind of doctrine—perhaps radical skepticism is
another example—that, even if we had to acknowledge it as
true, could not serve as a guide to life; it cannot serve as a
premise in our practical reasoning, and it is not possible for us
1. For example, William Hasker, The Emergent Self(Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1999); Timothy O’Connor, Persons and Causes(Oxford and
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2001). 
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 70

--- Page 86 ---

to live as though it is true.2 Reductionism, on the other hand,
has seemed to many people not much better: if minds turn out
to be mere conﬁgurations of neurons, silicon chips, or whatever
and consciousness and thoughts are simply patterns of electrical
activity in some groups of neurons, that doesn’t seem much like
saving minds as something distinctive, something we value,
something that makes us the feeling, thinking, and rule-following
creatures that we are. So why not look outside physicalism? But
what options are there if we set aside the physicalist picture?
Leaving physicalism behind is to abandon ontological physical-
ism, the view that bits of matter and their aggregates in space-
time exhaust the contents of the world. This means that one
would be embracing an ontology that posits entities other than
material substances—that is, immaterial minds, or souls, outside
physical space, with immaterial, nonphysical properties.
3
Will a dualist ontology of immaterial minds help us with
mental causation and consciousness? That is the question I
want to consider here. I will argue that ontological dualism
provides us with no help at all, and that in fact it makes 
things worse. My target will be the interactionist dualism of
Descartes. I will be focusing on how mental causation fares
within the Cartesian scheme. My conclusion will be: Very
badly. As for consciousness, my view is that dualist ontologies
offer us no special help; they will only prompt us to reformu-
late the problem, or perhaps lull us into ignoring it. Brief re-
ﬂection should convince us that the introduction of immaterial
souls as bearers of consciousness will not help to mitigate
immaterial minds rejected 7 1
2. As things turn out, I will be arguing, in the ﬁnal chapter, that we have to
live with a residual form of epiphenomenalism. 
3. Here we will not consider neutral monism and other theories that posit a
reality that is neither physical nor mental but of which the physical and the
mental are two “aspects” or “manifestations.” I believe such theories, in addi-
tion to introducing something wholly mysterious and ad hoc, do no better
than property dualism, and that in fact for our purposes they will likely turn
out to be only variants of property dualism.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 71

--- Page 87 ---

7 2 chapter 3
William James’s sense of perplexity about consciousness,4 or
relieve the emergentists’ bafﬂement over the emergence of
consciousness. I will not, however, take up the issue of con-
sciousness in regard to immaterial minds; the difﬁculties that
ontological dualism faces with the problem of causality under-
mine it so seriously, in my view, as to render the question what
further work immaterial souls might do entirely moot. 
Cartesian Dualism and Mental Causation
We commonly think that we, as persons, have both a mental
and a bodily dimension—or mental aspects and material as-
pects. Something like this dualism of personhood, I believe, is
common lore shared across most cultures and religious tradi-
tions, although it is seldom articulated in the form of an ex-
plicit set of doctrines as in modern western philosophy and
some developed theologies. It is often part of this “folk dual-
ism” that we are able to survive bodily deaths, as souls or spir-
its, and retain all or most of the mental aspects of ourselves,
such as memory, the capacity for thought and volition, and
traits of character and personality, long after our bodies have
crumbled to dust. 
Spirits and souls as conceived in popular lore seem not to be
entirely without physical properties, if only vestigially physical
ones, and are not what Descartes and other philosophical du-
alists would call souls or minds—wholly immaterial and non-
physical substances with no physical properties whatever. For
example, souls are commonly said to leavethe body when a
person dies and rise upwardtoward heaven, indicating that they
are thought to have, and be able to change, locations in physical
space. And they can be heard and seen, we are told, by people
endowed with special powers and in an especially propitious
4. See chapter 1.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 72

--- Page 88 ---

frame of mind. Souls are sometimes pictured as balls of bright
light, causing the air to stir as they glide through space and
even emitting faint unearthly sounds. But souls and spirits
depicted in stories and literature, and in ﬁlms, are not the
immaterial minds of the serious dualist. These latter souls 
are wholly immaterial and entirely outside physical space. 
But can we make sense of the idea that an immaterial soul
can be in causal commerce with a material body, and that my
immaterial mind can causally inﬂuence the physicochemical
processes going on in my material brain? Doubts about such a
possibility are as old as Descartes’s interactionist dualism itself.
Conventional wisdom in philosophy of mind has it that its
inability to account for mental causation was the downfall of
Descartes’s mind-body dualism. As has often been noted, his
radical dualism of mental and material substances was thought
to preclude the possibility of causal transaction between them.
Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia achieved philosophical immor-
tality by confronting Descartes with her celebrated challenge
to explain “how the mind of a man can determine the bodily
spirits [i.e., the ﬂuids in the nerves, muscles, etc.] in producing
voluntary actions, being only a thinking substance.”
5 Accord-
ing to one commentator, Richard A. Watson, the perceived
inconsistency of mind-body causation with the radical duality
of minds and bodies was not only a major theoretical ﬂaw in
Cartesianism but also the historical cause of its decline.
6
The reason standardly offered for the supposed incoherence
of Cartesian interactionist dualism is that it is difﬁcult to
immaterial minds rejected 7 3
5. Elisabeth to Descartes, 16 May 1643. This quotation is taken from
Daniel Garber, “Understanding Interaction: What Descartes Should Have
T old Elisabeth,” in Descartes Embodied(Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2001), p. 172. There is an affecting chapter on Princess Elisabeth in
Richard Watson’s biography of Descartes, Cogito, Ergo Sum: The Life of René
Descartes(Boston: David R. Godine, 2002).
6. Richard A. Watson, The Downfall of Cartesianism 1673–1712(The
Hague, Holland: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966).
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 73

--- Page 89 ---

7 4 chapter 3
“conceive” how two substances with such radically diverse na-
tures, one in spacetime with mass, inertia, and the like and the
other lacking wholly in material properties and not even in
physical space, could exercise causal inﬂuence on each other.
Apparently, various principles about causation, such as that
cause and effect must show a certain degree of mutual afﬁnity
or “essential likeness,” that there can be no “greater reality” in
an effect than there is in its cause, or that physical causation
requires the impact of one body upon another, seem to have
played a role. Anthony Kenny, a philosopher well known for
his philosophical acuity as well as historical erudition, writes:
On Descartes’ principles it is difﬁcult to see how an unextended
thinking substance can cause motion in an extended unthinking
substance and how the extended unthinking substance can cause
sensations in the unextended thinking substance. The proper-
ties of the two kinds of substance seem to place them in such
diverse categories that it is impossible for them to interact.
7
The trouble is that this is all that Kenny has to say about
Descartes’s difﬁculties with mind-body causation—and, as far
as I know, that is pretty much all we get from Descartes’s crit-
ics and commentators. But as an argument this is incomplete
and unsatisfying. As it stands, it is not much of an argument;
rather, it only expresses a vague, inchoate dissatisfaction of the
sort that ought to prompt us to look for a real argument. Why
is it incoherent to think that there can be causal interaction
between things in “diverse categories”? Why is it “impossible”
for things with diverse natures to enter into causal relations
with one another? What sorts or degrees of diverseness make
trouble and why? 
It has not been an easy matter to pin down exactly what is
wrong with positing causal relations between substances with
unlike natures, and explain in concrete terms what it is about
7. Anthony Kenny, Descartes(New Y ork: Random House, 1968), pp. 222–23. 
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 74

--- Page 90 ---

the natures of mental and material substance that make them
unﬁt to enter into causal relations with each other. And there
have been commentators who have defended Descartes against
charges of incoherence like Kenny’s. Louis Loeb is one of
them.
8 Loeb’s defense rests on his claim that Descartes was a
proto-Humean about causation—namely that, for Descartes,
causality amounted to nothing more than brute regularity, or
“constant conjunction,” and there can be no a priori metaphys-
ical constraints, such as resemblance or mutual afﬁnity, on what
events can be causally joined with what other events. Loeb sup-
ports his interpretation with this passage from Descartes:
There is no reason to be surprised that certain motions of the
heart should be naturally connected in this way with certain
thoughts, which they in no way resemble. The soul’s natural
capacity for union with a body brings with it the possibility of
an association between thoughts and bodily motions or condi-
tions so that when the same conditions recur in the body they
impel the soul to the same thought; and conversely when the
same thought recurs, it disposes the body to return to the same
conditions.
9
On Loeb’s view, then, the fact that soul and body are of such
diverse natures was not, for Descartes, even a presumptive
barrier to their entering into the most intimate of causal
relations. It seems to me that this reply might be effective as a
immaterial minds rejected 7 5
8. Louis E. Loeb, From Descartes to Hume(Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell
University Press, 1981). See pp. 134–49. See also Daniel Garber’s “Under-
standing Interaction: What Descartes Should Have T old Elisabeth,” cited in
note 5; Eileen O’Neill, “Mind-Body Interaction and Metaphysical Consis-
tency: A Defense of Descartes,” 227–45. Journal of the History of Philosophy25
(1987); Marleen Rozemond, Descartes’s Dualism(Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1998).
9. Descartes’ Philosophical Letters, trans. and ed. Anthony Kenny (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1963), p. 210. I am doubtful as to whether this pas-
sage supports Loeb’s Humean reading of Descartes, for Descartes is using
here causal verbs like “impel” and “dispose” to describe the regularities.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 75

--- Page 91 ---

7 6 chapter 3
ﬁrst pass—as a challenge to the critics of Descartes like Kenny
to put up a real argument or shut up. Why can’t Descartes just
say that causation, at least on some fundamental level, is a
brute fact based solely on regularities governing events, and
that there is compelling evidence, in the form of the countless
mind-body correlations familiar from everyday experience, for
the reality of mind-body causation? But does it help Descartes
to turn him into a proto-Humean “constant conjunctionist”
on causation? I don’t think it does, and the reason is simple to
see and also instructive. It can be seen that Descartes’s trouble
with mental causation has nothing to do with the bruteness or
primitiveness of causation or whether causation is merely a
matter of Humean regularity, and that it has everything to do
with the supposed nonspatiality of Cartesian minds.
Suppose that two persons, Smith and Jones, are “psy-
chophysically synchronized,” as it were, in such a way that each
time Smith’s mind wills to raise his hand, Jones’s mind also wills
to raise his ( Jones’s) hand, and every time they will to raise
their hands, their hands rise. There is a constant conjunction
between Smith’s mind’s willing to raise a hand and Smith’s
hand’s rising, and, similarly, between Jones’s mind’s willing to
raise a hand and Jones’s hand’s going up. If you are a constant
conjunctionist about causation, this would sufﬁce for saying
that a given instance of Smith’s willing to raise a hand is a cause
of the subsequent rising of his hand, and similarly in the case of
Jones. But there is a problem. For we see that instances of
Smith’s mind’s willing to raise a hand are constantly conjoined
not only with his hand’s rising but also with Jones’s hand’s rising,
and, similarly, instances of Jones’s mind’s willing to raise a hand
are constantly conjoined with Smith’s hand’s rising. So why is it
not the case that Smith’s volition causes Jones’s hand to go up,
and that Jones’s volition causes Smith’s hand to go up?
It will not do to say that after all Smith wills hishand to rise
and that’s why his willing causes his hand, not Jones’s hand, to
rise. It isn’t clear what this reply can accomplish, but it begs
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 76

--- Page 92 ---

the question on hand. The reason is that what makes Smith’s
hand Smith’s, not Jones’s, that is, what makes Smith’s body the
body with which Smith’s mind is “united,” is the fact that there
is specially intimate and direct causal commerce between the
two. T o say that this is the body with which this mind is united
is to say that this body is the only material thing that this mind
can directlyaffect—that is, without anything else serving as a
causal intermediary—and that all changes this mind can cause
in other bodies are via changes in this body, changes directly
caused by this mind. This is mybody, and this is myarm, be-
cause they are things that I can move without moving any
other body. I can raise yourarm only by grabbing it with my
hand and pulling it up.
10 And something similar must obtain
for body-to-mind causation as well. The “union” of a mind
and a body that Descartes speaks of, therefore, presupposes
mental causation. Whether or not this is a historically correct
reading of Descartes, a causal account of “ownership” seems
the most natural option for substance dualists, and I do not
know of noncausal alternatives that make any real sense. 
I have heard some people say that we could simply take the
concept of the mind’s “union” with a body as an unexplained
and unexplainable primitive,
11and that it is simply a primitive
fact, perhaps divinely ordained,12 that this mind and this body
are merged in a proper union that is a person. I ﬁnd such an
immaterial minds rejected 7 7
10. Does this exclude telekinesis? Y es. That probably is the main reason
why there is something a priori strange about telekinesis. If telekinesis were a
widely spread everyday phenomenon, that might very well undermine the idea
that each of us has a distinct body.
11. According to Daniel Garber, something like this was Descartes’s view; in ad-
dition, Descartes claimed the notion to be intelligible in its own right; see Garber’s
“Understanding Interaction: What Descartes Should Have T old Elisabeth.”
12. For an unabashedly theistic approach of this kind, see John Foster, “A
Brief Defense of the Cartesian View,” in Soul, Body, and Survival, ed. Kevin
Corcoran (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001), p. 29.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 77

--- Page 93 ---

7 8 chapter 3
approach inadequate and unsatisfying. For it concedes that the
notion of “union” of a mind and a body, and hence the notion
of a person, is unintelligible. For what is it for an immaterial
thing wholly outside space to be “united” or “joined” with a
material body with a speciﬁc location in space? The word
“united” merely gives a name to a mystery rather than clarify-
ing it. If God chose to unite my body with my mind, just what
is it that he did? I am not asking whyhe chose to unite this
particular mind with this particular body, or whyhe decided to
engage in such activities as uniting minds and bodies, or
whetherhe, or anyone else, could have powers to do things like
that. All of that could remain a mystery and I wouldn’t com-
plain. What I am asking for is more basic: If God “united” my
mind and my body to make a person, there must be a relation-
ship R such that a mind stands in relation R to a body if and
only if that mind and that body constitute a unitary person. In
uniting my mind and my body, God related the two with R.
Unless we know what R is, we do not know what it is that God
wrought. The word “union” remains a mere label, and we do
not understand what it is that the theistic explanation is at-
tempting to explain when it says that God ordained the “union.” 
Causation and the “P airing” Problem
The difﬁculty we have seen with Loeb’s interpretation of
Descartes as a Humean in matters of causation, I believe, points
to a more fundamental difﬁculty in the idea that mental sub-
stances, outside physical space, can enter into causal relations
with objects in physical space. What is perhaps more surprising,
the very same difﬁculty besets the idea that such nonspatial
mental substances can enter into any sort of causal relations,
whether with material substances or with other mental substances. 
Let us begin with a simple example of physical causation:
two guns, A and B, are simultaneously ﬁred, and this results in
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 78

--- Page 94 ---

the simultaneous death of two persons, Adam and Bob. What
makes it the case that the ﬁring of A caused Adam’s death and
the ﬁring of B caused Bob’s death, and not the other way
around? What are the principles that underlie the correct and
incorrect pairingsof cause and effect in a situation like this?
We can call this “the causal pairing problem,” or “the pairing
problem” for short.
13
T wo possible ways for handling this problem come to mind. 
(1) We can trace a continuous causal chain from the ﬁring of A
to Adam’s death, and another such chain from the ﬁring of B
to Bob’s death. (In fact, we can, with a high-speed camera,
trace the bullet’s trajectory from gun A to Adam and similarly
for gun B and Bob.) No causal chain exists from the ﬁring of A
to Bob’s death, or from the ﬁring of B to Adam’s death.
(2) We look for a “pairing relation”, R, that holds between A ’s
ﬁring and Adam’s death and between B’s ﬁring and Bob’s
death, but not between A ’s ﬁring and Bob’s death or B’s ﬁring
and Adam’s death. In this particular case, when the two guns
were ﬁred, gun A, not gun B, was located at an appropriate
distance from Adam and pointed in his direction, and similarly
with gun B and Bob. It is these spatial relations(distance, orien-
tation, etc.) that help pair the ﬁring of A with Adam’s death
and the ﬁring of B with Bob’s death. Spatial relations seem to
serve as the “pairing relations” in this case, and perhaps for all
cases of physical causation involving distinct objects.
The two methods may be related, but let us set aside this
question for now. 
T urn now to a situation involving nonphysical Cartesian
souls as causal agents. There are two souls, A and B, and they
perform an identical mental act at time t, as a result of which a
change occurs in material substance M shortly after t. We may
immaterial minds rejected 7 9
13. The “pairing problem” was ﬁrst formulated by John Foster in “Psycho-
physical Causal Relations,” American Philosophical Quarterly5 (1968): 64–70.
See also Foster’s The Immaterial Self(London: Routledge, 1991). I earlier
discussed this problem in “Causation, Nomic Subsumption, and the Concept
of Event,” Journal of Philosophy70 (1973): 217–36. 
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 79

--- Page 95 ---

8 0 chapter 3
suppose that mental actions of the kind involved generally
cause physical changes of the sort that happened in M, and,
moreover, that in the present case it is soul A ’s action, not soul
B’s, that caused the change in M. Surely, such a possibility
must exist. But ask: What relation might serve to pair soul A ’s
action with the change in M, a relation that is absent in the
case of soul B’s action and the change in M? That is, what
could be the pairing relation in this case? Evidently, no spatial
relations can be invoked to answer this question, for souls are
not in space and are not able to bear spatial relations to mater-
ial things. Soul A cannot be any “nearer” to material object M,
or more propitiously “oriented” in relation to it, than soul B is.
Is there anything that can do for souls what space, or a net-
work of spatial relations, does for material things?
But what about mind-to-mind causation? Would this be any
easier for Descartes? Consider a purely mental world, a world
inhabited only by Cartesian souls; such a world must be possi-
ble, since souls are “substances,” that is, independent existents.
Soul A acts in a certain way and so does soul B at the same
time. This is followed by certain changes in two other souls,
A* and B*. Suppose that actions of A and B are causes of the
changes in A* and B*. But which cause caused which effect? If
we want a solution that is analogous to case (2) above for the
ﬁrings of guns and the deaths, what we need is a pairing rela-
tion R such that R holds, say, for A and A*, and for B and B*,
but not for A and B*, or for B and A*. Since these entities are
immaterial souls outside physical space, R cannot be, or in-
clude, a spatial relation, or any other kind of physical property
or relation. The radical nonspatiality of mental substances
rules out the possibility of invoking spatial relationships to
ground cause-effect pairings.
Evidently, then, the pairing relation R must be some kind of
psychological relation. But what could that be? Could R be
some kind of intentional relation, such as thinking of, picking
out, and referring to? Perhaps, soul A gazes at souls A* and B*,
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 80

--- Page 96 ---

and singles out A*, and causes a change in it. But how do we
understand these relations like gazing at and picking out?
What is it for A to pick out A* rather than B*? T o pick out
some concrete thing outside us, we must be in a certain cogni-
tive relation to it; we must perceive it somehow and be able to
single it out from other things near and around it—that is,
perceptually identify it. T ake perception: What is it for me to
perceive this tree, not another tree which is hidden behind it
and which is qualitatively indistinguishable from it? The only
credible answer we have is the familiar causal account, accord-
ing to which the tree that I perceive is the one that is causing
my perceptual experience as of a tree, and I do not see the hid-
den tree because it bears no causal relation to my perceptual
experience.
14 Ultimately, these intentional relations must be
explained on the basis of causal relations (this is not to say that
they are wholly analyzable in terms of causality), and this
means that we cannot explain what it is for soul A to pick out
soul A* rather than B* except by positing some kind of causal
relation that holds for A and A* but not for A and B*. If this is
right, invoking intentional relations to do causal pairings begs
the question: we need causal relations to understand inten-
tionality. Even if intentional relations were free of causal
involvements, that would not by itself show that they would
sufﬁce as pairing relations. In addition, they must satisfy cer-
tain structural requirements; as will become clear as we pro-
ceed, they must sufﬁce for the individuation of intentional
objects, and it is by no means clear that intentional relations
can satisfy these requirements.
We are not necessarily supposing that one single R will suf-
ﬁce for all causal relations between two mental substances. But
if the physical case is any guide, we seem to be in need of a
immaterial minds rejected 8 1
14. This of course is the causal theory of perception. See H. P . Grice, “The
Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supple-
mentary vol. 35 (1961).
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 81

--- Page 97 ---

8 2 chapter 3
certain kind of “space,” not physical space of course, but some
kind of a nonphysical coordinate system that gives every men-
tal substance and every event involving a mental substance a
unique location(at a time), and which yields for each pair of
mental entities a determinate relationship deﬁned by their
“locations” (analogous to the distance-orientation relation
between a pair of spatial objects). Such a system of “mental
space” could provide us with a basis for a solution to the pair-
ing problem, and enable us to make sense of causal relations
between nonspatial mental entities. But I don’t think we have
any idea what such a framework might look like—what purely
psychological relations might generate such a space-like struc-
ture. I don’t think we have any idea where to begin.
What about using the notion of causal chain to connect the
souls in the right cause-effect relationships? Can there be a
causal chain between soul A ’s action and the change in soul A*,
and between soul B’s action and the change in soul B*? But do
we have any understanding of such purely mental causal
chains? What could such chains be like outside physical space?
Hume required that a pair of causally connected events that
are spatiotemporally separated be connected by a chain of
spatially contiguousevents. It is difﬁcult to imagine what kind of
causal chain might be inserted between events involving two
mental substances. Presumably we have to place a third soul,
C, between soul A and soul A*, such that A ’s action causes a
change in C which in turn causes the change in A*. But what
could “between” mean here? What is it for an immaterial and
nonspatial thing to be “between” two other immaterial and
nonspatial things? In the physical case, it is physical space that
gives a sense to betweenness. In the mental case, what could
serve the role that space serves in the physical case?
One might say: For soul C to be “between” souls A and A*
in a sense relevant to present purposes is for A ’s action to cause
a change in C and for this change to cause a change in A*.
That is, betweenness is to be taken as causal betweenness.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 82

--- Page 98 ---

This of course is the idea of a causal chain, but it is clear that
this idea does not give us an independent handle on the pair-
ing problem. The reason is easy to see: it begs the question.
Our original question was: How do we pair soul A ’s action with
a change in soul A*? Now we have two pairing problems
instead of one: First, we need to pair soul A ’s action with a
change in a third soul, C, and then we need to pair this change
in C with the change in A*. This means that the two methods
above, (1) and (2), for cause-effect paring, are not indepen-
dent, and this for a very simple reason: the very idea of a causal
chain makes sense only if an appropriate notion of causation 
is already in hand, and this requires a prior solution to the
pairing problem. It follows that method (2) is the only way to
effect cause-effect pairings. 
We are, therefore, back with (2)—that is, with the question
of what psychological relations might serve the role that spa-
tial relations serve in the case of physical causation. The prob-
lem here is independent of the Humean constant conjunction
view of causation, and therefore independent of the difﬁculty
we raised for Loeb’s defense of Descartes.
15 For suppose that
there is a “necessary,” counterfactual-sustaining regularity con-
necting properties F and G of immaterial mental substances. 
A mental substance A has F at t, and an instant later, at t*, two
mental substances, B and C, which share identical intrinsic
properties, acquire property G. I think we must countenance
the following to be a possible situation: A ’s having Fat tcauses
B to have G at t*, but it does not cause C to have G at t*. Sup-
pose it is claimed that what distinguishes the two cases is that
immaterial minds rejected 8 3
15. As can be seen by reﬂecting on the case discussed earlier of Smith and
Jones who are “psychophysically synchronized,” the pairing problem arises
even at the level of stating Humean constant conjunctions. So, even if we
make Descartes into a Humean, as Loeb suggests, this would not help
Descartes to escape the pairing problem. More broadly, my arguments do not
depend on the use of a heavy-duty concept of causation, as has been suggested
by some writers.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 83

--- Page 99 ---

8 4 chapter 3
the counterfactual “If A had not had F at t, B would not
have had G at t*” is true, whereas the counterfactual “If A had
not had Fat t, C would not have had G at t*” is false. Well and
good. But if that is the case, there must be an intelligible
and principled account of why the ﬁrst counterfactual is true
and the second false. I do not believe we could simply assert
this as a brute fact for which no explanation is possible or
needed and leave it at that. Since B and C are intrinsically
alike, the difference in the truth-values of the two counterfac-
tuals must be on account of some relation R that A bears to B
but not to C. What could this relation be? Cases like this are
not outré examples made up for philosophical argument; such
situations should be perfectly ordinary ones in a Cartesian
world. If so, how would we ascertain causal relationships in
such a world?
If these reﬂections are essentially right, our idea of causa-
tion requires that the causally connected items be situated in a
space-like framework. It has been widely believed, as we
noted, that Cartesian dualism of two substances runs into in-
surmountable difﬁculties in explaining the possibility of causal
relations across the two domains, mind to body and body to
mind—especially, the former. But what our considerations
show is that the problem runs deeper: the very same difﬁcul-
ties beset substantival dualism in regard to the possibility of
mental-to-mental causation. Under substance dualism, mind-
to-mind causation is no more intelligible than mind-to-body
causation. Furthermore, the difﬁculty is rooted deep in the
nature of immaterial minds: it is their supposed essential non-
spatiality that makes it impossible for them to meet a basic re-
quirement of causality, namely the need for pairing relations.
Perhaps, Leibniz was wise to renounce all causal relations
between individual substances, or monads—although I have no
idea as to his actual reasons for this doctrine. A purely Cartesian
world seems like a pretty lonely place, inhabited by immaterial
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 84

--- Page 100 ---

souls each of which is an island unto itself, totally isolated
from all other souls. Even the actual world, if we are immater-
ial souls, would be a lonely place for us; each of us, as an im-
material entity, would be entirely cut off from anything else,
whether physical or nonphysical, in our surroundings. Can
you imagine any existence lonelier than an immaterial self?
Causality and Space
The plausible fact that the causal pairing problem for physical
causation is solved by invoking spatial relations tells us some-
thing important about causation and the physical domain. By
locating each and every physical item—object and event—in
an all-encompassing coordinate system, the framework of
physical space imposes a determinate relation on every pair of
items in that domain. Causal structure of the physical domain
presupposes this spatial (or more broadly, spacetime) frame-
work. Causal relations must be selective and discriminating, in
the sense that there can be two objects with identical intrinsic
properties such that a third object causally acts on one but not
the other, and, similarly, that there can be two intrinsically in-
discernible objects such that one of them, but not the other,
causally acts on a third object. We believe that objects with
identical intrinsic properties must have the same causal powers
or potentials, both active and passive (some would identify the
causal powers of an object with the set of its intrinsic proper-
ties). However, objects with the same causal powers can differ
in the exercise, or manifestation, of their powers, vis-à-vis
other objects around them. This calls for a principled way of
distinguishing intrinsically indiscernible objects in causal situ-
ations, and it is plausible that spatial relations provide us with
the principal means for doing this. Prima facie, spatial rela-
tions have the right sorts of properties; for example, causal in-
ﬂuences generally diminish as distance increases, and barriers
immaterial minds rejected 8 5
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 85

--- Page 101 ---

8 6 chapter 3
of various sorts can be set up in the right places in space to
prevent or impede propagation of causal inﬂuences (though
not of gravity, we are told). In general, causal relations be-
tween physical objects or events appear to depend crucially on
their spatiotemporal relations to each other; think about the
point of establishing alibis—“I wasn’t there,” if true, can be
sufﬁcient for “I didn’t do it.” T o avoid being burned in a ﬁre,
you run away from it as fast as you can—that is, you try to put
as much distance as you can between you and the ﬁre. The
temporal order alone will not be sufﬁcient as a causal frame-
work; for there can be two or more contemporaneous objects
with identical intrinsic properties whose causal behaviors are
different. We need a full spacetime framework for this pur-
pose. It was not for nothing that Hume included “contiguity”
in space and time, as well as constant conjunction and tem-
poral precedence, among his conditions for causal relations.
From our present perspective, Hume’s contiguity condition—
or the condition that a spatially separated cause-effect be con-
nected by a chain of contiguous cause-effect pairs—can be
seen as his solution to the pairing problem. It is also what
makes Humean causation an essentially spatial concept. Out-
side physical space, Humean causation makes no sense. It seems
to me that the signiﬁcance and importance of this condition
for Hume’s account of causation has not been properly under-
stood or appreciated. 
If this is right, it gives us one plausible way of vindicating
the critics of Descartes who, as we saw, argued that the radi-
cally diverse natures of mental and material substances pre-
clude causal relations between them. It is of the essence of
material substances that they have determinate positions in
spacetime and that there be a determinate spatiotemporal rela-
tionship between each pair of them.
16 Descartes of course
talked of extendedness in space as the essence of matter, but we
16. At least on the classic conception of spacetime.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 86

--- Page 102 ---

can broadly construe this to include other spatial properties
and relations for material substances. Now consider the men-
tal side: As I take it, the Cartesian doctrine has it that it is part
of the souls’ essential nature that they are wholly outside the
spatial order and lack all spatial properties. And it is this essen-
tial nonspatiality that makes trouble for their participation 
in causal relations. As earlier noted, it isn’t just mind-to-body
causation, but also mind-to-mind causation, that is imperiled
by the nonspatiality of immaterial minds. 
We have already seen how difﬁculties arise for mind-to-
body and mind-to-mind causation. Unsurprisingly, body-to-
mind causation fares no better. The details are similar and can
be skipped. But let us note that given that we had trouble envi-
sioning a system of pairing relations for the domain of mental
substances, it seems out of the question that we could generate
a system that would work across the divide between the mental
and material realms. If this is true, not even epiphenomenal-
ism is an option for the serious substance dualist.
I am of course not claiming that these considerations are
what motivated the long line of critics of Descartes’s interac-
tionism. I am only suggesting a way of ﬂeshing out their wor-
ries and showing that there is indeed a concrete basis for these
worries. It turns out that, as Kenny and others have said,
causal interaction between mind and matter is precluded by
their diverse natures, and we have identiﬁed the essential di-
versity that matters, namely the spatiality of bodies and the
supposed nonspatiality of minds.
“Afﬁnity” does turn out to make a difference for causation
after all. Causality requires pairing relations, and this diversity
between minds and bodies does not permit such relations for
minds and bodies. What the critics perhaps didn’t see was the
possibility that the same difﬁculty bedevils causal relations
within the realm of the minds as well. If all this is right, there
is no need to appeal to the alleged “mechanical” nature of
material causation and the supposed teleological or rational
immaterial minds rejected 8 7
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 87

--- Page 103 ---

8 8 chapter 3
character of mental causation to show that mind-body causa-
tion is problematic. An effective argument can be formulated
at a more general and basic level.
Why Not Locate Souls in Space?
These reﬂections might lead one to wonder whether it
would help the cause of dualist causation if immaterial minds
were brought into space and given locations in it, not as ex-
tended substances like material bodies but as extensionless
points. After all, Descartes spoke of the pineal gland as “the
seat” of the soul, and it is easy to ﬁnd passages in his writings
that seem to give souls positions in space. And most people,
philosophers included, who believe in souls appear to think
that our souls are somehow located inside our bodies—my
soul in my body and your soul in your body. It seems to me
that the thinking here is closely associated with the idea that
my soul is in direct causal contact with my body and your soul
with your body. The pineal gland is the seat of the soul for
Descartes only because it is where unmediated mind-body
causal interaction is thought to take place. This conﬁrms my
general feeling that mind-body causation generates pressures
to bring minds somehow into space, which, for Descartes, is
exclusively the realm of matter.
In any case, putting souls into physical space may create
more problems than solve them. For one thing, we need a 
motivated way of locating each soul at a particular point in
space. Leibniz said that we locate the soul in a body but we
don’t think it is at some particular place within it:
The second [mode of being somewhere] is the deﬁnitive. In this
case, one can “deﬁne”—i.e. determine—that the located thing
lies within a given space without being able to specify exact
points or places which it occupies exclusively. That is how
some people have thought that the soul is in the body, because
they have not thought it possible to specify an exact point such
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 88

--- Page 104 ---

that the soul or something pertaining to it is there and at no
other point. Many competent people still take that view.17
But does this make any sense? If my soul, as a geometric point,
is in my body, it must be either in the top half of my body or
its bottom half. If it’s in the top half, it must be either in its left
or right half, and so on, and we should be able to corner the
soul into as small and speciﬁc a region of my body as we like.
And why should we locate my soul in my body to begin with?
Why can’t we locate all the souls of this world in one tiny
place, say this pencil holder on my desk, like the many thou-
sand angels dancing on the head of a pin? 
It would beg the question to locate my soul where my body,
or brain, is on the ground that my soul and my body are in di-
rect causal interaction with each other; the reason is that the
possibility of such interaction is what is at issue and we are
considering the localizability of souls in order to make mind-
body causation possible. Second, if locating souls in space is 
to help with the pairing problem, it must be the case that no
more than one soul can occupy a single spatial point; for oth-
erwise spatial relations would not sufﬁce to uniquely identify
each soul in relation to other souls in space. This is analogous
to the principle of “impenetrability of matter,” a principle
whose point can be taken to be the claim that space provides
us with a criterion of individuation for material things. This
principle says that material objects occupying exactly the same
spatial region at one time are one and the same—at least from
the causal point of view.
18What we need is a similar principle
immaterial minds rejected 8 9
17. Leibniz, New Essays on Human Understanding, tr. and ed. Peter Remnant
and Jonathan Bennett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), bk. 2,
ch. 23, sec. 21. 
18. This qualiﬁcation is in consideration of a fairly widely shared view that
there are counterexamples (“coincident objects”) to the principle that material
objects are individuated by spatial coincidence; e.g., a statue and the lump of
bronze that “constitutes” it. But then there are philosophers, e.g., Lynne
Rudder Baker, who hold—implausibly, in my opinion—that these spatially
coincident objects can, and do, have different causal powers.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 89

--- Page 105 ---

9 0 chapter 3
for souls, that is, a principle of “impenetrability of souls”: T wo
distinct souls cannot occupy exactly the same point in space at
the same time. But if souls are subject to spatial exclusion, in
addition to the fact that the exercise of their causal powers are
constrained by spatial relations, why aren’t souls just material
objects, albeit of a very special, and strange, kind? Moreover,
there is a prior question: Why should we think that a principle
of spatial exclusion applies to immaterial souls? T o solve the
pairing problem for souls by placing them in space we need
such a principle, but that is not a reason for thinking that the
principle is true. We cannot wish it into truth—we need inde-
pendent reasons and evidence.
Moreover, if a soul, all of it, is at a geometric point, it is puz-
zling how it could have enough structure to account for all the
marvelous causal work it is supposed to perform and how one
might explain the differences between souls in regard to their
causal powers. Y ou may say: A soul’s causal powers arise from
its mental structure, and mental structure doesn’t take up
space. But what is mental structure? What are its parts and
how are the parts conﬁgured in a structure? If a soul’s mental
structure is to account for its distinctive causal powers, then,
given the pairing problem and the essentiality of spatial rela-
tions for causation, it is unclear how a wholly nonspatial men-
tal structure could account for a soul’s causal powers. T o go
on: If souls exclude each other for spatial occupancy, do they
exclude material bodies as well? If not, why not? It may be that
one’s dualist commitments dictate certain answers to these
questions. But that would hardly show they are the “correct”
answers. When we think of the myriad questions and puzzles
that arise from locating souls in physical space, it is difﬁcult to
escape the conclusion that whatever answers might be offered
to these questions would likely look ad hoc and fail to con-
vince. Locating souls in space, therefore, is not an option that
is going to help the dualist cause, and Descartes was wise to
keep them out of it.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 90

--- Page 106 ---

Concluding Remarks
I have tried to explore considerations that seem to show that
the causal relation indeed exerts a strong pressure toward a de-
gree of homogeneity over its domain, and, moreover, that the
kind of homogeneity it requires includes, at a minimum,
spatiotemporality, which arguably entails physicality. The
more we think about causation, the clearer becomes our real-
ization that the possibility of causation between distinct ob-
jects depends on a shared space-like coordinate system in
which these objects are located, a scheme that individuates ob-
jects by their “locations” in the scheme. Are there such
schemes other than physical space? I don’t believe we know of
any. This alone makes trouble for serious substance dualisms
and dualist conceptions of what it is to be a person—unless,
like Leibniz, you are prepared to give up causal relations alto-
gether. Malebranche denied causal relations between all ﬁnite
substances, reserving causal powers exclusively for God, whom
he regarded as the only genuine causal agent that exists. It is
perhaps not surprising that among the dualists of his time,
Descartes was the only major philosopher who chose to in-
clude minds as an integral part of the causal structure of the
world. In defense of Descartes, we can ask: What would be the
point of having souls as immaterial substances if they turn out
to have no causal powers, not even powers to be affected by
things around them? It is all too easy to excoriate Descartes
for his unworkable metaphysics; I believe we should applaud
him for showing a healthy respect for commonsense in de-
fending mental causation and in persevering to make sense of
our intuitive dualist conception of what it is to be a person. 
It appears that for many of Descartes’s contemporaries, sub-
stance dualism was more important than mental causation;
Descartes tried to have both and got himself in deep trouble.
It seems that at that point in time it didn’t occur to most
immaterial minds rejected 9 1
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 91

--- Page 107 ---

9 2 chapter 3
philosophers to blame the trouble on substance dualism and
keep mental causation.
What we must conclude, therefore, is that substance dual-
ism offers little hope for mitigating our difﬁculties with mental
causation. Our considerations show that the very idea of im-
material, nonspatial entities precludes them from entering into
causal relations; in fact, I think that the very idea of such ob-
jects may well be incoherent and unintelligible. In the preced-
ing two chapters we saw that property dualism, of which
nonreductive physicalism is the most inﬂuential contemporary
form, encounters deep difﬁculties with mental causation. We
have now seen that substance dualism fares no better. Our
overall provisional conclusion has to be that no form of dual-
ism, whether substance or property dualism, can serve as a
basis for explaining how it is possible for our mentality to be
so deeply enmeshed in the causal network of the physical
world. For it seems beyond doubt that mentality is part of the
causal structure of the world and appears seamlessly integrated
into it.
19
19. This chapter is descended from a paper ﬁrst presented at a conference
on mind-body dualism at University of Notre Dame in March, 1998. See
Timothy O’Connor’s reply, “Causality, Mind, and Free Will,” in Soul, Body
and Survival, ed. Kevin Corcoran (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
2001). For further discussion, see Noa Latham, “Substance Physicalism,” in
Physicalism and Its Discontents, ed. Carl Gillett and Barry Loewer (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
70572 CH03 GGS  1/10/05  1:14 PM  Page 92

--- Page 108 ---

4
R
/Rswasheduction, /Rswasheductive /Eswashxplanation,
and /Cswashlosing the “/Gswashap”
It is not a matter of dispute that mental phenomena are inti-
mately correlated with physical events, and, so far as we know,
neural events in the brain are the physical correlates of mental
events. Often one speaks of the neural “substrates” of mental
states, suggesting that there is here a dependency relationship
between the mental and the neural that goes beyond mere cor-
relation. Mind-body supervenience as it is standardly understood
captures this idea: mental phenomena not only correlate with
neural processes but their existence and occurrence are contin-
gent on the presence of appropriate processes in the brain. Some
prefer to say that mental phenomena are “emergent phenomena”
arising from neural processes. Whichever idiom you prefer, there
is this question to ponder: Why does pain correlate with, depend
on, or emerge from C-ﬁber stimulation? Why doesn’t it corre-
late, etc. with a neural state of another kind? Why doesn’t itch or
tickle arise from C-ﬁber stimulation? Why does any conscious
experience arise from neural states like C-ﬁber stimulation? 
Answering these and related questions constitutes the prob-
lem of the “explanatory gap,” a by-now familiar term intro-
duced by Joseph Levine in 1983;
1 it is what David Chalmers
1. Joseph Levine, “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly64 (1983): 354–61.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 93

--- Page 109 ---

9 4 chapter 4
has called the “hard problem” of consciousness.2But the prob-
lem goes further back, at least to T. H. Huxley in 1866,3
William James in 1890,4 and the British emergentists of the
early twenteith century. It is called an explanatory gap because
it evidently calls for an explanation of why pain, not itch or
tickle, arises out of C-ﬁber stimulation, and why and how con-
scious experience arises from neural states. But it is also a pre-
dictive, or epistemic, gap: as the emergentists claimed, it seems
possible for us to know all about the physiology of a creature,
say Thomas Nagel’s famously inscrutable bats,
5 but have no idea
of the qualitative character of its inner experience. Prima facie,
an unbridgeable gap seems to exist, separating even the most
complete and perfect knowledge of the brain as a biological/
physical system from knowledge of the conscious experiences
that may be going on in that brain. 
Exactly what needs to be done to close this gap? Two ideas
have often been mentioned for closing the gap, and these are
reduction and reductive explanation. The thought is that if we
could reducepain to C-ﬁber stimulation, or reductively explain
pain in terms of a neural state, that would sufﬁce to eliminate
the gap. But what is reduction and what is reductive explana-
tion? And how do they manage to close the gap? These are
among the questions we will be taking up here.
2. David Chalmers, The Conscious Mind(Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1996).
3. T. H. Huxley wrote: “But what consciousness is, we know not; and how
it is that anything so remarkable as a state of consciousness comes about as the
result of irritating nervous tissue is just as unaccountable as the appearance of
the Djin when Aladdin rubbed his lamp in the story, or as any other ultimate
fact of nature”; Lessons in Elementary Physiology(London: The Macmillan Co.,
1866). (I owe this reference to Güven Güzeldere’s introduction [“The Many
Faces of Consciousness: A Field Guide”] to The Nature of Consciousness, ed.
Ned Block, Güven Güzeldere, and Owen Flanagan (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1997).
4. See chapter 1.
5. Thomas Nagel, “What Is It Like To Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review83
(1974): 435–50.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 94

--- Page 110 ---

Reduction and Reductive Explanation
As everyone knows, reduction and reductionism have had a
rough time of it for several decades. Reductive explanation,
however, has been spared the ill repute of reduction. In fact,
philosophers who are proud and sworn enemies of reduction
seem to have only nice things to say about reductive explana-
tion. They regard it as a viable enterprise of great importance,
scientiﬁcally and philosophically, even where reduction has
been precluded as a possibility.
Since around the mid-century, reductionism in many areas has
seemed to many like an unsophisticated and naively overreach-
ing doctrine, and reductions have come to be viewed as making
unrealistic and unattainable demands, both philosophically and
scientiﬁcally. In contrast, reductive explanation has a kinder and
gentler ring to it, and seems not to be burdened with the impos-
sible metaphysical demands that reduction seems to force upon
us. To do justice to our physicalist inclinations and the pervasive
and highly successful micro-oriented research strategies in the
sciences, why isn’t it enough to require that the phenomena of
the world are reductively explainablein physical terms? Reductive
explanation, unlike reduction, could safeguard the ontological
autonomy of higher-level, nonphysical phenomena. Explaining a
phenomenon seems in no way to damage or diminish its onto-
logical status, whereas reducing it strikes us as undermining its
standing as a genuine existent. And if all phenomena are physi-
cally explainable, why isn’t that good enough for physicalism?
Jerry Fodor’s 1974 paper, “Special Sciences,” has often been
credited, and rightly so, for having had a major hand in turn-
ing the tide against reductionist physicalism. It is interesting
to see, however, that in the midst of his relentless argument
against reductionism, Fodor takes a brief pause to throw off
these seldom noticed obiter dicta:
It seems to me (to put the point quite generally) that the classical
construal of the unity of science has really badly misconstrued the
reduction and explanation 9 5
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 95

--- Page 111 ---

9 6 chapter 4
goalof scientiﬁc reduction. The point of reduction is notprimar-
ily to ﬁnd some natural kind predicate of physics coextensive with
each kind predicate of a special science. It is, rather, to explicate the
physical mechanisms whereby events conform to the laws of the special
sciences.I have been arguing that there is no logical or epistemo-
logical reason why success in the second of these projects should
require success in the ﬁrst, and that the two are likely to come
apart in factwherever the physical mechanisms whereby events
conform to a law of the special sciences are heterogeneous.
6
Finding for each special science predicate a nomologically
coextensive predicate of physics would generate enough
“bridge laws” connecting the proprietary vocabularies of the
two sciences to enable a Nagelian derivational reduction of the
former to the latter. But the phenomenon of multiple realiza-
tion, which Fodor and others have taken to be pervasive for
special science properties, makes these bridge laws unavailable.
Hence, there can be no reduction of the special sciences, in-
cluding psychology, and no reduction of higher-level special
science properties.However, this does not preclude, Fodor is
suggesting, the possibility of explaining special science phenomena
and laws in terms of their underlying physical mechanisms.
7 In
fact, Fodor is recommending that reduction be replaced by
reductive explanation as the goal of micro-oriented scientiﬁc
research. Unfortunately, though, Fodor says nothing further
about reductive explanation in “Special Sciences,” making it
difﬁcult to assess his claim that reductive explanation in terms
of “physical mechanisms” can thrive even where reduction
6. Jerry Fodor, “Special Sciences, or the Disunity of Science as a Working
Hypothesis,” in Readings in Philosophy of Psychology, vol. 1, ed. Ned Block
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 127 (emphasis added).
Originally published in 1974.
7. Fodor’s enthusiasm for implementing physical mechanisms for higher-
level phenomena, including psychological phenomena, has not diminished;
see, e.g., his “Making Mind Matter More,” in A Theory of Content and Other
Essays(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990).
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 96

--- Page 112 ---

fails, and that it is good enough to serve the purposes for
which others had sought reductions.
An approach of this kind appears to be shared by more than
a few philosophers working in this area. Although they are
against the possibility of reduction, in particular mind-body
reduction, their allegiance to physicalism shows itself in their
assumption that psychological phenomena—psychological ca-
pacities, functions, and activities—are grounded in underlying
physical mechanisms. If the brain is not the seat of our souls,
as Descartes said, it continues, for contemporary antireduc-
tionists, to be the seat of our mentality,
8 and as physicalists we
should expect to ﬁnd in the brain the mechanisms that drive
our psychology. David Chalmers, for example, embraces this
approach as his starting point. Like Fodor, he thinks that while
multiple realization may well rule out reduction, this doesn’t
mean that it rules out reductive explanation. In The Conscious
Mind, he makes his position explicit:
In a certain sense, phenomena that can be realized in many dif-
ferent physical substrates—learning, for example—might not
be reducible in that we cannot identifylearning with any spe-
ciﬁc lower-level phenomena. But this multiple realizability
does not stand in the way of reductively explainingany instance
of learning in terms of lower-level phenomena.
9
The idea of reductive explanation is at the core of Chalmers’s
argument for an antiphysicalist view of consciousness. Accord-
ing to him, we cannot reductively explain consciousness in
physical terms any more than we can reduce it. This means, for
Chalmers, that consciousness cannot be accommodated within
a physicalist scheme, and hence that physicalism is false.
reduction and explanation 9 7
8. Note the wonderful title of Paul Churchland’s book, The Engine of Rea-
son, the Seat of the Soul: A Philosophical Journey into the Brain(Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1996). Churchland of course is a reductionist.
9. David Chalmers, The Conscious Mind, p. 43. Emphasis in the original.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 97

--- Page 113 ---

9 8 chapter 4
This raises a host of questions. How does reductive explana-
tion work, and what is it about reductive explanation that makes
it invulnerable to the multiple realization, and other antire-
ductionist, arguments? How does reductive explanation differ
from plain ordinary explanation? And can we really separate
reductive explanation from reduction? 
Bridge-Law Reduction and Functional Reduction
Before we get to the speciﬁc issues, I want to set the stage with
a brief review of the general issue of reduction. Recent discus-
sions of reduction and reductionism have been dominated 
by the classic model of “bridge-law” reduction, developed by
Ernest Nagel in the 1950s and ’60s.
10It will be helpful to
brieﬂy review this model and see why it does not underwrite a
concept of reduction that is appropriate for the purposes of
mind-body debates.
Nagel was mainly concerned to model reduction of theories, a
procedure whereby a scientiﬁc theory is reductively absorbed
into a more basic theory, and he thought of it as consisting in a
logical/mathematical derivation of the laws of the theory tar-
geted for reduction from the laws of the base theory. Since the
proprietary vocabularies in which laws of the two theories are
couched must be expected to be disjoint, it was thought that to
enable the required derivation, auxiliary premises connecting the
predicates of the two theories are needed. More speciﬁcally,
Nagel reduction requires that each primitive predicate, M, of the
theory being reduced be connected with a predicate, P, of the
base theory in a “bridge law” (or “bridge principle”) of the form:
For any x
1,...,xn, M(x1,...,xn) if and only if P(x1,...,xn)
10. See Ernest Nagel, The Structure of Science(New York: Harcourt, Brace
and World, 1961), ch 11.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 98

--- Page 114 ---

These bridge laws, taken to be empirical and contingent, are
to serve as auxiliary premises of reductive derivations.11
It is easily seen that if this bridge law requirement is met,
Nagel reduction of the target theory is guaranteed. For let L be
a law of the theory to be reduced; we can use the bridge laws as
deﬁnitions to rewrite L in the vocabulary of the base theory,
turning L into L*, a statement in the language of the base the-
ory. Now, either L* is derivable from the laws of the base the-
ory or it is not. If it is, the derivability condition is met. If it is
not, add L* to the base theory as an additional law. This is justi-
ﬁed, since L* is expressed purely in the predicates of the base
theory and, in missing L*, the original base theory is missing a
general truth within its domain. Moreover, adding L* to the
theory does not expand its ontological or conceptual resources.
This is why bridge laws are the heart of Nagel reduction. It is
no wonder then that the availability of bridge laws has been the
focus of debate whenever the issue of reducibility is raised. 
This model of reduction is beset with grave difﬁculties, but
since I have elaborated on them elsewhere,
12I will just mention
one that is directly pertinent to our present purposes. Brieﬂy,
the difﬁculty is this: By adding the bridge laws to the reductive
resources as auxiliary premises, Nagel reduction essentially extends
the reduction base. If we take reduction to be an explanatory
reduction and explanation 9 9
11. Nagel himself did not require that these laws be biconditionals—that is,
that there be a coextensivepredicate in the reducing theory for each predicate in
the higher theory. He only required, at least in his later writings, that enough
connecting laws (whatever their forms might be) be available to make deriva-
tion possible. But, as the quotation from Fodor in the preceding section makes
clear, Nagel reduction is standardly interpreted to require that the bridge laws
be biconditionals. And there are good reasons for this; see my Mind in a Physical
World(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998). In any case, the relevant point is
that the Nagel model with this enhanced bridge-law condition has been the
standard reference in the debates concerning reductionism.
12. In “Making Sense of Emergence,” Philosophical Studies95 (1999): 1–36,
and Mind in a Physical World(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books,
1998).
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 99

--- Page 115 ---

1 0 0 chapter 4
process which yields an explanation of the laws and phenomena
being reduced on the basis of the laws of the base theory, Nagel
reduction fails to generate such explanations. For, to do so, the
reductive derivation must derive the laws being reduced solely
from the explanatory resources available in the base domain. In a
Nagel reduction, however, the bridge laws connecting the two
domains enter the picture as indispensable supplementary as-
sumptions, and this means that the base theory has been ex-
panded both in its ideology (via addition of new predicates/
concepts) and in its ontology (via addition of new properties).
Moreover, these a posteriori bridge laws are now among the
basic laws of the expanded base theory. Suppose, as an example,
pain correlates with a certain neural state, say, C-ﬁber stimula-
tion. On a Nagel reduction of pain theory to neurophysiology,
then, the pain-Cfs bridge law is an unexplained premise of the
derivation of pain laws from laws of neurophysiology. This
means that the pain-Cfs correlation law is now one of the ax-
ioms of the expanded base theory, and that this new base theory
no longer is a pure neurophysiological theory—its primitive
predicates include “pain,” and among its axioms is a law about
pain. But consider the explanatory questions that the emergen-
tists asked—or the questions of the sort that Huxley and James
found compelling but unanswerable. What was being de-
manded was an explanation of why pain correlates with Cfs, to
begin with. Why is it that pain arises when Cfs occurs, not
when A/H9254-ﬁbers are activated? Why doesn’t itch or tickle
emerge instead? Why does any conscious experience emerge
from Cfs? These are precisely requests for explanations of the
bridge laws themselves. In using the bridge laws as auxiliary
premises of reductive derivations, the Nagelian reductionist is
simply assuming exactly what needs to be derived and ex-
plained if we are to answer the explanatory questions raised by
Huxley, James, and the emergentists—that is, if we are to close
the explanatory gap or solve the hard problem of consciousness.
A Nagelian bridge-law reduction of psychology to physical/
biological theory is something that the emergentists would
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 100

--- Page 116 ---

have gladly acknowledged as a real possibility—in fact, an
accomplishable task.13It should be clear that a Nagelian reduc-
tion of psychology to neurophysiology is simply irrelevant to
the issue of reductively explaining psychological phenomena
and laws on the basis of neurophysiological laws.
The model of functional reduction which I believe should
replace the bridge-law model is intended to remedy the above
and other shortcomings of the Nagel model. I will now give a
brief description of functional reduction. To reduce a property,
say being a gene, on this model, we must ﬁrst “functionalize”
it; that is, we must deﬁne, or redeﬁne, it in terms of the causal
task the property is to perform. Thus, being a gene may be de-
ﬁned as being a mechanism that encodes and transmits genetic
information. That is the ﬁrst step. Next, we must ﬁnd the
“realizers” of the functionally deﬁned property—that is, prop-
erties in the reduction base domain that perform the speciﬁed
causal task. It turns out that DNA molecules are the mecha-
nisms that perform the task of coding and transmitting genetic
information—at least, in terrestrial organisms. Third, we must
have an explanatory theory that explains just how the realizers
of the property being reduced manage to perform the causal
task. In the case of the gene and the DNA molecules, presum-
ably molecular biology is in charge of providing the desired
explanations.
For ease of reference, I restate all this in schematic form: 
Step 1 [Functionalization of the target property]
Property M to be reduced is given a functional deﬁnitionof
the following form:
Having M /H11005def. having some property or other P (in the re-
duction base domain) such that P performs causal task C.
reduction and explanation 1 0 1
13. As noted in chapter 1, an obvious and natural proposal at this point is to
insist that bridge laws be replaced by property identities. We will be discussing
this alternative later in this chapter and the following chapter.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 101

--- Page 117 ---

1 0 2 chapter 4
For a functionally deﬁned property M, any property in the
base domain that ﬁts the causal speciﬁcation deﬁnitive of M
(that is, a property that performs causal task C) is called a
“realizer” of M.
Step 2 [Identiﬁcation of the realizers of M]
Find the properties (or mechanisms) in the reduction base
that perform the causal task C.
Step 3 [Developing an explanatory theory]
Construct a theory that explains how the realizers of M per-
form task C.
As I will argue below, it can be seen that unlike Nagelian
bridge-law reductions, functional reductions in our sense yield
reductive explanations of phenomena involving reduced prop-
erties, and that these explanations can satisfy the emergentists’
explanatory demands. Moreover, it can be shown that func-
tional reductions also satisfy the emergentists’ demand that in-
stantiations of reduced properties be predictable solely on the
basis of information concerning phenomena at the base level. 
Before moving on, I would like to note the following point:
functional reduction as characterized here will, as a rule, pro-
ceed in a piecemeal fashion; for it is highly unlikely that we
will ever be able to identify, or even be interested in identify-
ing, all the actual and nomologically possible realizers of M.
What is more likely is that we would be looking for the realiz-
ers of M in a particular population of current interest; for ex-
ample, the realizers of pain in humans and perhaps other
higher mammals. When we have identiﬁed pain’s realizers in
humans, we are entitled to claim that we have reduced human
pain to human neurophysiology. Nagel reduction of pain
requires an all-or-nothing, one-shot reduction of pain across
all organisms, species, and systems. It is clear that functional
reduction gives us a more realistic picture of reduction in the
sciences.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 102

--- Page 118 ---

Explanatory Ascent and Constraint (R)
To return to our main topic, the question is this: What is a
reductive explanation and how does it differ from explanations
that are not reductive? Emergentists claimed that emergent phe-
nomena are not reductively explainable, or predictable, on the
basis of the “basal” conditions from which they emerge. Samuel
Alexander, a leading theoretician of British emergentism, urged
us to accept the facts of emergence “with natural piety.” I believe
that when the emergentists claimed emergents to be unexplain-
able, they had in mind reductive explanation as a distinctive vari-
ety of explanation. For emergentists, like C. Lloyd Morgan and
C. D. Broad, were well aware that there is an obvious sense in
which emergent phenomena are explainable and predictable.
14
Suppose that pain occurs (in humans) when C-ﬁbers are acti-
vated. Given this, we can predict that a person will experience
pain on the basis of the evidence that her C-ﬁbers are going to be
activated. At the commonsensical level we predict the occurrence
of pain, and other mental states, all the time: I see that a fall has
caused a bad bruise on your knee and can conﬁdently predict
that you are going to experience a severe pain in the knee. But, as
Broad would have pointed out,
15such predictions presuppose in
their evidence base prior knowledge of the connection between
the emergents and their basal conditions—for example, a corre-
lation between pain and C-ﬁber activation, or between pain and
tissue damage. Consider the following inference:
Whenever someone’s C-ﬁbers are stimulated, she experiences
pain.
Jones’s C-ﬁbers are stimulated at t.
Therefore, she experiences pain at t.
reduction and explanation 1 0 3
14. C. Lloyd Morgan, Emergent Evolution(London: Williams & Norgate,
1923); C. D. Broad, The Mind and Its Place in Nature(London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1960); ﬁrst published in 1925.
15. See Broad, The Mind and Its Place in Nature, p. 65.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 103

--- Page 119 ---

1 0 4 chapter 4
This looks like a perfectly acceptable explanation of why Jones ex-
periences pain at tin terms of her C-ﬁber being stimulated at t; it
has the form of a Hempelian, “deductive-nomological,” argu-
ment, and it can also serve as a predictive inference to Jones’s pain
at ton the basis of her neural condition at t. But no one would
take it as a reductiveexplanation of Jones’s pain in terms of her
neurophysiology; nor will it count as an afﬁrmative answer to the
emergentist question “Is it possible to infer the occurrences of
pain and other conscious states from knowledge of neurophysiol-
ogy?” We may, with Broad, call predictions of this sort “inductive
predictions”: from knowledge of past correlations between C-
ﬁber activation and pain, and the knowledge that C-ﬁber activa-
tion will occur, we predict that pain will occur. In contrast, what
the emergentists denied was the possibility of what we may call
“theoretical prediction” of pain; their claim was that no amount of
knowledge about our neural/biological states alonewill sufﬁce for
prediction of pain. To predict pain we must rely on the past obser-
vation of pain, in particular the physical conditions under which
pain occurs. But such correlations obviously go beyond neuro-
physiology; they are what Broad calls “trans-ordinal laws,” laws
that connect phenomena of one order (or level) with those of an
adjacent order (or level). In effect, these are the Nagelian bridge
laws, laws bridging two levels or domains. It is no surprise, emer-
gentists will say, that you can inductively predict the occurrence of
an emergent, since such inductive predictions make use of an-
tecedent knowledge of the conditions under which the emergent
phenomenon occurs. For genuine theoretical predictions of
emergents, your evidence base is restricted to information solely
about the base level, the level from which the emergents emerge.
To make a theoretical prediction, therefore, we must deduce a
statement about the emergent (say, a conscious state) from a set of
statements exclusively about the basal level (neural/biological
states). And this, the emergentists claimed, cannot be done.
16
16. See Broad’s instructive discussion in The Mind and Its Place in Nature, 
pp. 61–69.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 104

--- Page 120 ---

The displayed argument above is disqualiﬁed as a reduc-
tive explanation for the same reason: the explanans of this
explanation makes use of a trans-ordinal law, a law connecting
phenomena at different levels, and that is why this explanation
does not count as a reductive, or “mechanistic” (as the emer-
gentists would say), explanation of Jones’s pain. This should
remind us of the failure of Nagel’s bridge-law reductions to de-
liver reductions or reductive explanations. For, as noted, bridge
laws are precisely Broad’s trans-ordinal laws, and just as the use
of bridge laws as auxiliary premises vitiates Nagelian reductions
as genuine reductions, the use of trans-ordinal, or emergent,
laws in an explanation disqualiﬁes it as a reductive explanation.
If a principled reason is wanted for excluding explanations
of this kind as reductive, we can say this: the use of these trans-
ordinal laws means that the property whose instantiation is
being explained is already part of the ontology of the explana-
tory theory, and that the concept representing that property is
part of the vocabulary of this theory. As we said, the use of
such laws expands both the ontology and ideology of the base
theory. Consider the above explanation of Jones’s pain. Its
explanans contains reference to pain, and the theory being in-
voked to explain this instance of pain already explicitly in-
cludes pains, or the property pain, in its ontology, and makes
use of the pain-neural correlation as a basic law. This is why
this explanation is not a reductive explanation of Jones’s pain.
These thoughts point to the following requirement for re-
ductive explanations:
(R) The explanatory premises of a reductive explanation of
a phenomenon involving property F (e.g., an explanation
of why F is instantiated on this occasion) must not refer
to F.
17
reduction and explanation 1 0 5
17. I believe that for most of our present purposes the following weaker
constraint will do:
(R*) The explanatory premises of a reductive explanation of a phenom-
enon involving property F must not include a law pertaining to F.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 105

--- Page 121 ---

1 0 6 chapter 4
We could strengthen (R): Not only must the explanans of a re-
ductive explanation of F not refer to F, but it also must not
refer to any other property at the level of F—or, equivalently,
a reductive explanation of F may refer in its explanans only to
properties at levels lower than that of F. Thus understood, a
reductive explanation of pain, for example, would be prohib-
ited from invoking not only pain but also any other conscious
states, or perhaps any other mental states.
18
The idea of reduction, and reductive explanation, involves
two distinct domains or levels. To explain a phenomenon sim-
pliciter we may invoke phenomena at the same level, or even
those at a higher level, in the explanans. That is the way causal
explanations ordinarily work; an event and the cause that is
cited to explain it are often at the same level. A window broke
because a rock hit it; a billiard ball began moving because 
another one collided with it; and so on. But a reductive expla-
nation of a phenomenon must be expected to do its job by re-
sorting only to explanatory resources at a different level, a “lower”
level in relation to the level of the phenomenon to be ex-
plained. Why else speak of “reductive” explanation?
Explanation is plausibly regarded as involving logical de-
rivation; at least, logical derivability is the only concrete and
objective criterion available in discussions of explainability. To
explain a phenomenon we must derive it, or derive a statement
representing it, from a set of statements representing its ex-
planans. As is well known, this is a crucial part of the Hempelian
deductive-nomological model of explanation, and it is not un-
controversial. However, we will assume in this discussion that
18. Clearly what other states are to be included along with F depends on
what we understand by “level.” It is equally clear that the individuation of lev-
els is a context-dependent affair; whether, for example, nonphenomenal (e.g.,
cognitive) mental states are to be allowed in reductive explanation of qualia
depends on the nature of the particular reductive project at issue.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 106

--- Page 122 ---

explanation is via logical derivation;19this is not a point con-
tested in this debate. In any case, if we accept constraint (R),
reductive explanation poses a real challenge, and it is this:
How are we to make explanatory ascent from one level to an-
other? Given that explanation is deduction, how is it possible
to make a deductive transition from the base level, where our
explanatory resources are located, to the higher level, where
our explanandum is located?
20
We may call this “the problem of explanatory ascent.” It is the
main problem involved in the problem of the explanatory gap:
If explanation requires deduction, how can we deductively ﬁll
the gap between the explanandum at one level and the pur-
ported explanans at another level? To make the problem more
concrete: To explain “Jones is experiencing pain” neurophysi-
ologically, we must deduce it from a set of neurophysiological
statements about Jones. But the term “pain,” or the concept of
pain, does not even appear in neurophysiology. So how could
we deduce “Jones is experiencing pain” from neurophysiologi-
cal statements? (Compare Hume’s problem of deriving “ought”
from “is.”) Obviously, some additional help is needed.
There are three presumptive possibilities that might be con-
sidered as enablers of explanatory ascent:
(i) Bridge laws, or trans-ordinal laws—contingent, empirical
laws connecting explanandum phenomena with phenomena at
the reduction base.
reduction and explanation 1 0 7
19. This of course is not to say that all logical derivations are explanations.
For a defense of the view that explanation involves logical derivation, see my
“Hempel, Explanation, Metaphysics,” Philosophical Studies94 (1999): 1–20.
20. Joseph Levine puts this question as follows: “The problem is this. Given
the difference between the vocabularies in which the microfacts and macrofacts
are expressed, how do we get a derivation of the latter from the former?” Purple
Haze(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), p. 64. Levine’s answer is the
same as mine: There must be conceptual, deﬁnitional connections.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 107

--- Page 123 ---

1 0 8 chapter 4
(ii) Conceptual connections, e.g., deﬁnitions, providing
conceptual/semantic relations between the phenomena at the
two levels.
(iii) Identity statements that identify the explanandum phe-
nomena with certain lower-level phenomena.21
Each of these possibilities must meet the constraint (R) on
reductive explanation. This means that we already know that
(i) must be ruled out. As we saw, the use of these empirical
connecting laws begs the question as far as reductiveexplana-
tion is concerned. So we are down to two possibilities, (ii) and
(iii), that is, conceptual connections and identities.
Functional Reduction 
and Reductive Explanation
Chalmers is one of the philosophers who advocate concep-
tual connections as vehicles of reductive explanations. He
writes:
What is it that allows such diverse phenomena as reproduction,
learning, and heat to be reductively explained? In all these
cases, the nature of the concepts required to characterize
the phenomena is crucial. If someone objected to a cellular ex-
planation of reproduction, “This explains how a cellular
process can lead to the production of a complex physical entity
that is similar to the original entity, but it doesn’t explain
reproduction,” we would have little patience—for that is all
that “reproduction” means. In general, a reductive explanation
21. We will not worry about this statement being a kind of oxymoron, for
one could ask how it is possible for anything at one levelto be identical with
something at a different level. Levels talk can be interpreted to apply to con-
cepts and languages instead of things in the world. At any rate, there is a
pressing need to make the talk of levels more precise.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 108

--- Page 124 ---

of a phenomenon is accompanied by some rough-and-ready
analysisof the phenomenon in question, whether implicit or
explicit.22
And he evidently believes that explanatory ascent requirescon-
ceptual connections:
The point may seem trivial, but the possibility of this kind of
analysis undergirds the possibility of reductive explanation in
general. Without such an analysis, there would be no explana-
tory bridge from the lower-level physical facts to the phenome-
non in question.
23
But what form does Chalmers’s “conceptual analysis” take?
Here is what he says:
For the most interesting phenomena that require explanation,
including phenomena such as reproduction and learning, the
relevant notions can usually be analyzed functionally. The core
of such notions can be characterized in terms of the perfor-
mance of some function or functions (where “function” is
taken causally rather than teleologically), or in terms of the ca-
pacity to perform those functions. It follows that once we have
explained how those functions are performed, then we have ex-
plained the phenomenon in question. Once we have explained
how an organism performs the function of producing another
organism, we have explained reproduction, for all it means to
reproduce is to perform that function.
24
Joseph Levine, in an earlier paper, takes a similar approach:
But now how is it that we get an explanation of these superﬁ-
cial properties [observable properties of water] from the chem-
ical theory? Remember, explanation is supposed to involve a
reduction and explanation 1 0 9
22. The Conscious Mind, p. 43.
23. The Conscious Mind, p. 44.
24. Ibid.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 109

--- Page 125 ---

1 1 0 chapter 4
deductive relation between explanans and explanandum. . . .
For instance, suppose I want to explain why water boils, or
freezes, at the temperatures it does. In order to get an explana-
tion of these facts, we need a deﬁnition of “boiling” and “freez-
ing” that brings these terms into the proprietary vocabularies
of the theories appealed to in the explanation.
25
Both Chalmers and Levine are suggesting, then, that the
reductive explanatory ascent can, and must, be mediated by
deﬁnitions, and by deﬁnitions they have in mind analytic deﬁ-
nitions grounded in conceptual analysis, something that can be
formulated and evaluated a priori.
Chalmers, in the ﬁrst of the quoted passages, sounds as
though what he has in mind is an explicit deﬁnition of the
standard form, for example:
Reproduction /H11005
def. organism producing another organism.
But actually what Chalmers and Levine have in mind for de-
ﬁnitions is something a little more complicated. Note that
Chalmers talks of “functional analysis” (in the second quoted
passage) and “causal role”; and what Levine calls “explanatory
reduction” below is nothing more or less than the functional
reduction I described earlier:
Notice that on [the view favored by Levine] explanatory reduc-
tion is, in a way, a two-stage process. Stage 1 involves the (rela-
tively? quasi?) a priori process of working the concept of the
property to be reduced “into shape” for reduction by identify-
ing the causal role for which we are seeking the underlying
mechanisms. Stage 2 involves the empirical work of discover-
ing just what those underlying mechanisms are.
26
25. Joseph Levine, “On Leaving Out What It’s Like,” in Consciousness, ed.
Martin Davies and Glyn W. Humphreys (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), p. 131.
26. “On Leaving Out What It’s Like,” p. 132. The idea of functional reduc-
tion, or functional reductive explanation, though not the terms, can be traced
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 110

--- Page 126 ---

Levine’s two stages correspond exactly to our Steps 1 and 2,
and when he talks about deﬁnitions, we should take him to be
talking about functional deﬁnitions, that is, deﬁnitions in
terms of causal tasks described in a base-level vocabulary.
What does a reductive explanation look like when it uses
functional deﬁnitions for explanatory ascent? Suppose M is
the property for which we seek a reductive explanation; let us
suppose that our explanandum is some object, x, having M at t.
So we are formulating a reductive explanation of why xhas M.
Let C be the causal task, or role, deﬁning M. And suppose that
xhas M on this occasion because xhas one of M’s realizers, say
P
i, on this occasion. A reductive explanation of x’s having M at
tmay look like this:
(I) xhas Piat t.
Pisatisﬁes causal role C (in systems like x).
Having M /H11005def. having some property satisfying causal 
role C.
Therefore, xhas M at t.
Does (I) violate constraint (R) on account of its third line with an
occurrence of “M”? The answer is no: the third line is not an ex-
planatory premise; it is a deﬁnition, and deﬁnitions do not count
as extra premises of a deduction. Deﬁnitions are cheap in proofs;
they are free. To put it another way, the third line does not refer
to M; it doesn’t talk about M. Rather, if it refers to anything, it
refers to the concept, or term, M. The above explanation, there-
fore, does not violate constraint (R). Another point to notice is
that this explanatory argument involves an empirical law, the sec-
ond line, among its explanatory premises, and it can be consid-
ered a deductive-nomological explanation in Hempel’s sense.
It is also obvious how (I) can be viewed as a predictive
argument—a prediction that xwill have M at t—exclusively on 
reduction and explanation 1 1 1
further back, at least to the writings of David Lewis and David Armstrong in the
1960s.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 111

--- Page 127 ---

1 1 2 chapter 4
the basis of lower-level facts, that is, facts at the level of M’s
realizers. Again, the third line, being a deﬁnition, is not a de-
scription of a fact involving M.
Suppose pain has been functionalized, say, à la David Arm-
strong: being in pain is being in a state apt to be caused by tis-
sue damage and apt for causing winces and groans. Why is
Jones in pain? Because to be in pain is to be in some state that
is apt to be caused by tissue damage and apt for causing winces
and groans, and Jones is now in neural state N, which, as it
happens, is a state apt to be caused by tissue damage and apt
for causing winces and groans. This seems, intuitively, like a
perfectly good reductive explanation of Jones’s pain, and this
explanation is easily converted into a prediction of pain on the
basis of facts not involving pain. If this is right, it shows how a
functional reduction can close the explanatory gap. 
We can also reductively explain why neural state N “corre-
lates” with pain:
(II) A system, x, is in neural state N at t.
Neural state N satisﬁes causal role C (in systems like x).
Having pain/H11005def. being in some state satisfying causal 
role C.
Therefore, xis in pain at t.
One moral to be drawn at this point is that reduction, when
understood in terms of the functional model, yields reductive
explanation. Moreover, reductive explanations of the type con-
sidered here, exempliﬁed in (I) and (II), are possible only if re-
ductions, of the functional kind, are on hand. Evidently this is
one point in favor of the functional model of reduction.
Earlier we saw Chalmers’s claim that even where “reduction”
is not available reductive explanation may still be possible.
This claim is consistent with our result because by “reduction”
he evidently has in mind not functional reduction but type
identity reduction of the sort to be discussed in the following
section.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 112

--- Page 128 ---

Kripkean Identities and Reductive Explanation
But is functional reduction the only way to make a reductive ex-
planatory ascent? A negative position has been forcefully argued
by Ned Block and Robert Stalnaker.
27 They agree that a func-
tional reduction, in our sense, is sufﬁcientfor reductive
explanation, but they say it is not the only way. Their point is
that a posteriori necessary identities of the kind Kripke has
made famous,
28 like “water /H11005H 2O” and “heat is molecular mo-
tion,” sufﬁce to close the explanatory gap across reductive lev-
els. When we are in a position to avail ourselves of identities like
“pain /H11005neural state N,” not as a matter of conceptual analysis
or deﬁnition, but as a posteriori identities, we have in our pos-
session the means for explanatory ascent from neurobiology 
to phenomenology of experience. Thus, they are proposing 
(iii) above as another option—actually, the only option, since,
according to them, functional deﬁnitions of higher-level
properties are almost never available. A similar position is de-
fended by Christopher Hill,
29 and Hill and Brian McLaughlin
in a critical discussion of Chalmers;30 however, we will here
focus on Block and Stalnaker’s arguments.
Here is what Block and Stalnaker say:
All we reject is the a priori, purely conceptual status attributed to
the bridge principles connecting the ordinary description of the
reduction and explanation 1 1 3
27. Ned Block and Robert Stalnaker, “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and
the Explanatory Gap,” Philosophical Review108 (1999): 1–46.
28. Saul Kripke, Naming and Necessity(Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1980). 
29. Christopher Hill, Sensations(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991). We will take up Hill’s argument for psychoneural identiﬁcation in the
next chapter.
30. Christopher Hill and Brian McLaughlin, “There Are Fewer Things 
in Reality Than Are Dreamt of in Chalmers’ Philosophy,” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research59 (1999): 445–54.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 113

--- Page 129 ---

1 1 4 chapter 4
phenomena to be explained with its description in the language
of science. What is actually deduced in such an explanation is a
description wholly within the language of science of the phenom-
enon to be explained. For this to answer the original explanatory
question, posed in so-called folk vocabulary, all we need to add is
the claim that the phenomenon described in scientiﬁc language is
the same ordinary phenomenon described in a different way. But
if the closing of an explanatory gap does not require an a priori
deduction of the folk description of the phenomena, then it has
not been shown that unavailability of a conceptual analysis of
consciousness need be an obstacle to the closing of the explana-
tory gap between consciousness and the physical.
31
The following are psychoneural identities of the sort Block
and Stalnaker have in mind:
Consciousness /H11005pyramidal cell activity
Pain /H11005C-ﬁber stimulation
Suppose we want to explain why consciousness ceases in people
when they are administered sodium pentothal. From the quoted
paragraph above, Block and Stalnaker evidently think that a re-
ductive explanation of this phenomenon could work like this:
(III) T (neurophysiology)
An injection of sodium pentothal causes pyramidal cell 
activity to cease (from T).
(K) Consciousness /H11005pyramidal cell activity.
Therefore, an injection of sodium pentothal causes loss 
of consciousness.
As I take it, Block and Stalnaker would view this derivation 
as follows: Neurophysiological theory T logically yields, and
explains, the second line. The explanatory activity is ﬁnished
when the second line has been derived from T. When this
31. “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism and the Explanatory Gap,” pp. 8–9.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 114

--- Page 130 ---

explanation is in hand, we are in a position to claim, via the
identity (K), that we have explained why an injection of
sodium pentothal causes people to lose consciousness. 
Does (III) comply with constraint (R)? Does the occurrence of
“consciousness” in the third line violate the condition that the
property for which a reductive explanation is sought not be re-
ferred to in any of the explanatory premises? Recall that, on
Block and Stalnaker’s understanding, the deduction of the ex-
planandum (the last line) from the two preceding lines is not itself
part of the explanation. It lies outside the scope of theory T, and
it is an extra-theoretical commentary on an explanatory accom-
plishment within the theory, and this means that (K) is not an
explanatory premise. It follows that the use of (K) is in full com-
pliance with constraint (R). All that (K) does in this derivation is
to serve as a rewrite rule: it allows us to redescribe the phenome-
non that has already been explained in another vocabulary—in
this instance, the “folk” vocabulary of vernacular psychology. 
Unlike deﬁnitions based on conceptual analysis, however,
Block and Stalnaker’s identities are empirical, and one might
raise the following concern. Analytic deﬁnitions, being a priori
and devoid of factual content, are unproblematic as vehicles of
reductive derivations; and in so far as a deﬁnition “makes” a
statement, it is about concepts and expressions, not about
things in the world. However, Kripkean identities have rich
empirical content; in fact, they apparently entail correlations,
and since (R), and also (R*), disallow correlation laws about
properties being reduced, we should also disallow stronger
statements that imply these correlations. Here a satisfactory
reply must be based on a general view about the role of identi-
ties in explanation.
32In any case, there is a point to the objec-
tion that we can appreciate when it is recast as an objection to
the use of these identities in prediction. That is, these identities,
being a posteriori, will not help at all with the emergentists’
reduction and explanation 1 1 5
32. These issues will be taken up in the next chapter.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 115

--- Page 131 ---

1 1 6 chapter 4
question: Can we predict anything about pain or consciousness
solely on the basis of our knowledge about its underlying phys-
iological substrate? Making use of Kripkean identities about
pain and consciousness in the predictive base will obviously not
meet the emergentists’ demand. That is to say, these a posteri-
ori identities, whatever they may do for the closing of the ex-
planatory gap, will not help at all in closing the epistemic gap
between the brain and consciousness. 
Let us turn to another possible explanandum for reductive
explanation: Why is Jones conscious at t? As far I can tell, all that
we can muster on the Block-Stalnaker model is the following:
(IV) Pyramidal cell activity is going on in Jones’s brain at t.
(K) Consciousness /H11005pyramidal cell activity.
Therefore, Jones is conscious at t.
Notice that there is no involvement of neurophysiological theory
in this derivation; in particular, (K) cannot be viewed as entailed
by neurophysiology—the term “consciousness” does not even
appear in that theory. Moreover, the derivation involves no laws,
with the identity (K) alone underwriting the deductive transition.
But just because (K) is an identity, it seems dubious that it can
have any explanatory power of its own. To be sure, like deﬁni-
tions, identities can serve to mediatebetween steps in an explana-
tory deduction, as we saw in connection with (III); but can they
generate, or ground, explanations on their own? When we are
struck by “the mystery of consciousness,” when the emergentists
looked in vain for an understanding of why consciousness
emerges from biological processes, or when we ponder the ques-
tion how a phenomenon like consciousness should, or could,
exist in a world that is fundamentally material—that is, when we
worry about understanding the phenomenon of consciousness—
are the likes of (IV) responsive to our explanatory needs? 
At this point, Block and Stalnaker will reply as follows: Identi-
ties like (K) should be seen not as helping to answer explanatory
questions like “Why is Jones conscious whenever pyramidal cell
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 116

--- Page 132 ---

activity is going on in his brain?” but rather as neutralizing or
dissipating them—that is, as showing that there is nothing here to
be explained. Why is there water just where and when H2O is pres-
ent? Why do the two correlate? The appropriate answer here is
this: Water just is H
2O, and there is here no correlation to be ex-
plained. Why does Hillary Rodham Clinton show up just where
and when Chelsea’s mother shows up? Again, there is no mysteri-
ous correlation to be explained; there is no intelligible question as
to how the one “emerges” from the other, or anything of the
sort. Just so with consciousness and pyramidal cell activity. Given
(K), it no longer makes sense to ask how consciousness emerges
out of pyramidal cell activity, not from another sort of neural
process, or why there is consciousness just when and where these
pyramidal cell activities occur. One is the same as the other, and
there is nothing here to explain. Thus, Block and Stalnaker write: 
If we believe that heat is correlated with but not identical to
molecular kinetic energy, we should regard as legitimate the
question of why the correlation exists and what its mechanism is.
But once we realize that heat ismolecular kinetic energy, ques-
tions like this can be seen as wrongheaded.
33
Remarks about Block and Stalnaker’s Proposal
A good many philosophers, and also scientists, will ﬁnd these
conclusions disappointing. The emergentists’ questions about
consciousness, about why and how conscious states arise from
reduction and explanation 1 1 7
33. “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explanatory Gap,” p. 24. For
this approach to work, Block and Stalnaker must claim that identities them-
selves are not open to further explanatory requests (e.g., “Why is pain identi-
cal with Cfs?”). Their view is that identities have no explanations. Here is
perhaps where the necessity of the Kripkean identities can play a role; for
many contingent identities, like “Michael Jordan is the best player on the
team,” seem to be eminently explainable.
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 117

--- Page 133 ---

1 1 8 chapter 4
their neural base, are presumptively intelligible questions, they
would insist, and any move to show them “improper” or
“wrongheaded” should be resisted. These identities don’t
“close” the explanatory gap; rather, what they show, if they
show anything, is that no such gap exists, or ever existed. Com-
pare this with how the explanatory gap is handled under the
model of functional reduction: recall our earlier examples, 
(I) and (II), of reductive explanation under the functional
model. Unlike Block and Stalnaker’s (IV), (I) and (II) do seem
to involve an explanatory process; they tell us a reductionist
story about why Jones is experiencing pain at t, and why pains 
and C-ﬁber excitation correlate, without making the explana-
tory questions illegitimate. Note that both (I) and (II) involve
a law as an explanatory premise; a statement to the effect that 
a given property ﬁlls a speciﬁed causal role is a general law-
like statement. All this assumes that pain is functionally re-
ducible. If, as is likely, pain is not so reducible, we would 
just have to accept pain as something whose occurrence is 
not explainable in terms of the physiological process from
which it arises. That is, we would have to accept defeat and
acknowledge that there are things in this world that have no
explanations.
The main point to note is this: On Block and Stalnaker’s
account of identity-mediated reduction, even if we have
successfully reduced pain to C-ﬁber stimulation, and con-
sciousness to pyramidal cell activity, that would not yield an
explanation, reductive or otherwise, of the occurrence of pain
in terms of C-ﬁber stimulation, or the occurrence of con-
sciousness in terms of pyramidal cell activity. An identity
reduction of X to Y does not generate an explanation of the
occurrence of X in terms of Y, or Y in terms of X; nor does it
enable us to explain why X has a certain property F by saying
that Y has property F and X /H11005Y. (It wouldn’t be much of an
explanation to say that the evening star is bright because the
morning star is bright and the evening star is the morning
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 118

--- Page 134 ---

star.) On Block and Stalnaker’s approach, the question why
such a thing as consciousness exists in this world turns into the
question why there is such a thing as pyramidal cell activity.
The mystery of consciousness, then, is reduced to the “mys-
tery” of pyramidal cell activity, which doesn’t seem like much
of a mystery; at least it is not the mystery with which we
began. Block and Stalnaker, and like-minded type physicalists,
would welcome this result as the hoped-for elimination of the
supposed but groundless mystery; these identities would, in
their view, put an end to the gratuitous mystery-mongering by
the emergentists, Huxley, and the rest. Going back to the issue
of reduction vs. reductive explanation, we see that, on Block
and Stalnaker’s approach, we have reduction but no reductive
explanation. This is in contrast with the functional reductive
solution to the problem of the gap which gives us both reduc-
tion and reductive explanation.
In any case, it would seem that here we are at a standoff
between identity reductionists, like Block and Stalnaker, and
emergentists. Emergentists may very well want to rule out
these identities precisely on the ground that they illegitimatize
questions about consciousness that are perfectly intelligible,
though unanswerable. This means that we are here in need of
an independentand neutralground for accepting or rejecting
these Kripkean mind-body identities. What would be ques-
tion-begging is for the identity reductionists to argue that
these identities are warranted just because, or at least partly
because, they make the emergentists’ embarrassing questions
about consciousness go away. Similarly, it would be question-
begging for the emergentists to reject the identities on the
ground that they render their own favorite questions improper
and wrongheaded. It is clear, therefore, that Block and
Stalnaker’s proposals depend crucially on the strength of the
ground for embracing identities like (K). If there are com-
pelling scientiﬁc or philosophical reasons for accepting the
likes of (K), that ought to silence the emergentists. 
reduction and explanation 1 1 9
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 119

--- Page 135 ---

1 2 0 chapter 4
So what can Block and Stalnaker offer as a warrant for these
identities? I think this is the critical question for them and
other new identity theorists, like Christopher Hill and Brian
McLaughlin. Recall Block and Stalnaker’s argument against
functional reduction, which goes like this: “Of course, if mental
properties are functionally deﬁnable, that would be wonderful—
it would give us reductive explanation of consciousness and
close the explanatory gap. The only trouble is, these functional
deﬁnitions are just not available.” Block and Stalnaker must be
able to resist this obvious rejoinder: “Of course, if mental prop-
erties can be type-identiﬁed with physical/neural properties,
that would be wonderful—it would give us reduction and help
rid us of the explanatory gap. The only trouble is, these psy-
choneural identities are just not available.” What can Block and
Stalnaker, and their type physicalist friends, say in rebuttal? Do
they have a positive argument to show that we are indeed enti-
tled to these identities? They claim they do. This will be our
next topic. 
70572 CH04 GGS  1/10/05  1:15 PM  Page 120

--- Page 136 ---

5
R
Explanatory Arguments for 
Type Physicalism and 
Why They Don’t Work
One notabledevelopment in the debates over the mind-body
problem during the last dozen or so years so is the revival of
type physicalism, the view that mental properties and kinds 
are identical with physical properties and kinds. This was the
original form of the mind-body identity theory advanced by
Herbert Feigl and J.J.C. Smart in the late 1950s, a position
that began losing favor with philosophers by the late 1960s
and was abandoned by a large majority of philosophers by the
mid-1970s. Much of the current push toward, or back to, type
physicalism appears to be a reaction to Joseph Levine’s
explanatory-gap problem, or what David Chalmers has called
the hard problem of consciousness. The central idea is that the
explanatory gap between consciousness and the brain could be
closed if we could identify states of consciousness with states
of the brain. Brian Loar, an early proponent of the new type
physicalism, writes:
It is my view that we can have it both ways. We may take
thephenomenological intuition at face value, accepting intro-
spective concepts and their conceptual irreducibility, and at
the same time take phenomenal qualities to be identical with
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 121

--- Page 137 ---

1 2 2 chapter 5
physical-functional properties of the sort envisaged by contem-
porary brain science. As I see it, there is no persuasive philosophi-
cally articulated argument to the contrary.1
Note what Loar says in the last sentence of this paragraph;
it is indicative of the attitude common among current type
physicalists, and it is reminiscent of Smart’s attitude in 1959
when he ﬁrst proposed the identity theory. Without much ex-
aggeration, it can be characterized as follows: “I saythat pain is
identical with C-ﬁber stimulation, and I saythat sensations are
identical with brain processes. Refute me if you don’t like it!”
In his classic paper, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” Smart
gestures toward a positive argument for his theory based on
simplicity considerations, but the obvious emphasis is on the
absence of coercive negative arguments; he says “it is the ob-
ject of this paper to show that there are no philosophical argu-
ments which compel us to be dualists.”
2 It is no accident that
Smart devotes the bulk of his paper to answering putative ob-
jections, all eight of them! This strategy is unsurprising be-
cause Smart doesn’t think there can be empirical or scientiﬁc
arguments for or against the identity theory. He writes:
...if the issue is between...some form of materialism on the one
hand and epiphenomenalism on the other hand, then the issue is
not an empirical one. For there is no conceivable experiment
which could decide between materialism and epiphenomenalism.
3
Here Smart speaks only of “experimental” evidence, but it is
clear from the context that he does not believe there could be
1. Brian Loar, “Phenomenal States,” reprinted in The Nature of Consciousness,
ed. Ned Block, Owen Flanagan, and Güven Güzeldere (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1999), p. 598. Originally published in Philosophical Persepectives4 (1990),
81–108. Added emphasis.
2. J.J.C. Smart, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” reprinted in The Nature of
Mind, ed. David M. Rosenthal (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1991), p. 170. Originally published in Philosophical Review68 (1959): 141–56.
3. “Sensations and Brain Processes,” p. 175 (in the Rosenthal volume).
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 122

--- Page 138 ---

a broadly scientiﬁc argument or ground favoring the mind-
brain identity hypothesis over epiphenomenalism or other
dualist alternatives. Christopher Hill is exactly right when he
observes that “instead of giving carefully formulated positive
arguments, the materialists of Smart’s era relied mainly on
sketchy appeals to simplicity and terse complaints about the
obscurity and messiness of competing views.
4
Are T here Positive Arguments 
for T ype Physicalism?
But what can be said that would give positive support for
mind-body identiﬁcation, something that might persuade
someone who has no antecedent physicalist commitments, or
perhaps even convert a dualist? What are the positive reasons
or grounds for accepting type physicalism? Perhaps, a dualist,
too, can refute, or somehow neutralize, all the philosophical
objections we can throw at him—at least, to his and his com-
mitted friends’ satisfaction. Some of the current writers who
favor type physicalism focus only on showing that the identiﬁ-
cation of a sensory quality with a neural/physical property is
not conceptually or otherwise incoherent, and therefore that it
remains a metaphysical and epistemic possibility. But that is far
from showing that psychoneural identiﬁcation has something
positive to recommend it. Fortunately, some recent writers
have addressed this issue, coming up with signiﬁcant proposals
for positive grounds for type physicalism. Here I have in mind
Christopher Hill, Brian McLaughlin, Ned Block and Robert
Stalnaker, all of whom have formulated what I will call ex-
planatory arguments for type physicalism. The argument ad-
vanced jointly by Block and Stalnaker differs markedly from
explanatory arguments 1 2 3
4. Christopher S. Hill, Sensations(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991), p. 19.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 123

--- Page 139 ---

1 2 4 chapter 5
the argument of the kind formulated by Hill and McLaughlin;
in fact, as we will see, the two arguments are at odds with each
other. Nevertheless, their central theme is the same: mind-brain
identities can play certain critical and indispensable explanatory
functions, and this confers upon them sufﬁcient warrant for
acceptance.
5 Before we go on with an examination of these ar-
guments, let me make some general remarks about possible
positive arguments for type physicalism.
Any positive argument for type physicalism must come up
with reasons for moving from psychoneural correlations to
psychoneural identities—that is, from, say, “pain occurs if and
only if C-ﬁber stimulation occurs” to “pain is identical with 
C-ﬁber stimulation.” The thesis that there are pervasive psy-
choneural correlations is widely accepted. But the existence of
such correlations is consistent with many dualist theories, like
epiphenomenalism, emergentism, and even substance dualism;
in fact, it is entailed by some of them. The critical question,
therefore, is what grounds there are that make it compelling,
or at least reasonable, to upgrade the correlations to identities.
As I see it, there are three types of arguments that could be,
and have been, advanced on behalf of psychoneural type iden-
tities. The ﬁrst, originally promoted by Smart without much
elaboration, is the simplicity argument, to the effect that iden-
tifying mental states, including states of consciousness, with
neural/physical states of the brain, helps us attain the simplest,
most parsimonious worldview. The second is the explanatory
approach I have just described.
6 The last is the causal argu-
ment, and it is the one I believe works best if anything does.
5. In a book that has just been published, A Physicalist Manifesto(Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003), Andrew Melnyk, too, presents an “in-
ference to the best explanation” argument for physicalism (his “realization
physicalism”). 
6. In Sensations, Hill recognizes these three arguments for type physical-
ism;however, he thinks very little of the causal argument, putting his money
on the explanatory argument (as we will see).
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 124

--- Page 140 ---

The canonical form of the argument is very simple and goes
like this: Mentality has causal effects in the physical world;
however, the physical world is causally closed; therefore, men-
tality must be part of the physical world, and, speciﬁcally,
mental states are identical with brain states. David Papineau’s
argument in his recent book
7 is a good example of this form 
of the causal argument. Donald Davidson’s well-known argu-
ment for anomalous monism
8 is another causal argument for
physicalism, although the physicalism it endorses is what is
known as token physicalism—and a quite weak form of it at
that. Of the three arguments in support of type physicalism, 
I believe the causal argument is the only one that goes some
real distance, although not far enough.
9 The explanatory argu-
ments, as I will try to show, are seriously ﬂawed and incapable
of generating any real support for type physicalism. As for the
simplicity argument, I believe it is difﬁcult to formulate it in 
a non–question-begging way, though it can provide reassur-
ances to those who are already committed physicalists. What a
physicalist may seize upon as the most parsimonious and ele-
gant ontology would be apt to strike the dualist as a hopelessly
inadequate scheme which discards, or ignores, the entities that
are needed to save the phenomena. A simple and direct appeal
to Ockham’s razor of the sort Smart makes is unlikely to leave
much of an impression on the serious dualist, and it is doubtful
that it would sway the uncommitted. For the genuinely un-
committed are uncommitted only because they haven’t made
up their minds about just what phenomena must be saved in
an overall ontology of the world, or, what comes to the same,
explanatory arguments 1 2 5
7. David Papineau, Thinking about Consciousness(Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2002), ch. 1. 
8. Donald Davidson, “Mental Events,” reprinted in Essays on Actions and
Events(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1980); originally pub-
lished in 1970.
9. As the reader will recognize, the causal argument and its limits are the
main topic of this book.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 125

--- Page 141 ---

1 2 6 chapter 5
about what entities fall “beyond necessity.” Unless and until
the protected group of phenomena has been identiﬁed, the
simplicity argument cannot even be formulated. The reason is
that there are no simplicity arguments in a vacuum; they must
all take the general form “This scheme should be accepted be-
cause it is the simplest one that saves phenomena X, Y, and Z.”
Obviously, physicalists and nonphysicalists are not likely to
agree on what X, Y, Z are. 
Hill’s and McLaughlin’s 
Explanatory Argument
Hill, who, as we saw, is well aware of the dearth of positive
arguments for type physicalism, goes on to say that he is going
to remedy this situation by offering an argument based on the
explanatory power of type physicalism, referring to it as “the
strongest reason for preferring type physicalism”
10 over its
competitors. His strategy is to appeal to the so-called principle
of inference to the best explanation, ﬁrst explicitly formulated
by Gilbert Harman,
11and argue that type physicalism, which
identiﬁes psychological types with neural/physical types, is the
best explanation of the pervasive fact of psychophysical corre-
lations. In his view, this shows “decisively that type physicalism
is the correctanswer to the mind-body problem.”
12
McLaughlin takes a similar approach in his defense of type
physicalism for sensory experience.13McLaughlin begins by
noting that the following claim, afﬁrming the existence of
10. Sensations, p. 22.
11. Gilbert Harman, “The Inference to the Best Explanation,” Philosophical
Review74 (1966): 88–95.
12. Sensations, p. 24. Emphasis added.
13. Brian P. McLaughlin, “In Defense of New Wave Materialism: A Re-
sponse to Horgan and Tienson,” in Physicalism and Its Discontents, ed. Carl
Gillett and Barry Loewer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 126

--- Page 142 ---

lawful correlations between sensory experiences and physical/
functional states, is widely accepted:14
Correlation Thesis. For every type of sensation state, S, there is a
type of physical state P such that it is nomologically necessary
that for any organism, x, xis in S if and only if xis in P.
As McLaughlin notes, the Correlation Thesis itself will not
sufﬁce as a solution to the mind-body problem, since it is con-
sistent with a host of competing responses to the problem,
such as epiphenomenalism, the dual-aspect theory, and emer-
gentism. McLaughlin claims, however, that the doctrine of
type physicalism, namely:
Type Identity Thesis. For every type of sensation state, S, there is
a type of physical state, P, such that S /H11005P.
offers “the best explanationof the correlation thesis.”15Unlike
Hill, McLaughlin does not explicitly advert to the principle of
inference to the best explanation; he only appeals to what he
calls considerations of “overall coherence and theoretical sim-
plicity.”
16In one respect, though, McLaughlin goes further 
than Hill: he says that since these psychophysical identities, as
“Kripkean” identities, are metaphysically necessary, they can ex-
plain the lawlikeness of the psychophysical correlations, in
virtue of the fact that metaphysical necessity entails nomological
necessity. In any case, the explanatory argument under consid-
eration seems to run on two levels. First, speciﬁc psychoneural
correlations (for example, the correlation “pain occurs iff C-
ﬁber stimulation occurs”) are explained by the corresponding
identities (the identity “pain/H11005Cfs”). Second, the general thesis
explanatory arguments 1 2 7
14. McLaughlin, “In Defense of New Wave Materialism,” p. 319. I have
slightly simpliﬁed McLaughlin’s formulation; in particular, I have replaced his
“physical/functional” with “physical.” This should make no difference to the
discussion to follow.
15. “In Defense of New Wave Materialism,” p. 319.
16. “In Defense of New Wave Materialism,” pp. 320, 323.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 127

--- Page 143 ---

1 2 8 chapter 5
of psychophysical correlation, that is, McLaughlin’s “Correla-
tion Thesis” above, is explained by type physicalism, namely the
“Type Identity Thesis.” As I take it, each is claimed to be the
“best” explanation available for its explanandum.
Hill’s and McLaughlin’s explanatory arguments prompt a
host of questions. Let us begin by noting that inference to the
best explanation is standardly thought to be inductive, or “am-
pliative,” inference; this was originally claimed by Harman and
it is endorsed by Hill. (McLaughlin, however, must be ex-
empted from the following remarks, since he is silent on this
issue and there seems no reason to think that he conceives of
his argument as a form of inductive inference.) If inference 
to the best explanation is inductive inference, we may legiti-
mately raise this question: Is the warrant or justiﬁcation that
the present application of the inference confers on its conclu-
sion, type physicalism, weighty and compelling enough to
make it rational for us to accept it as true? Even if we were to
grant that type physicalism is to be preferred over its rivals,
the warrant it enjoys might be far from sufﬁcient for it to
merit our “outright” belief or acceptance.
17And the fact that
the truthof type physicalism, not just its status as a preferred
choice, is what is at issue is clear from Hill’s statement of the
inference to the best explanation principle:
If a theory provides a good explanation of a set of facts, and the
explanation is better than any explanation provided by a com-
peting theory, there is a good and sufﬁcient reason for believ-
ing that the theory is true.
18
17. “Outright belief’ in something like Timothy Williamson’s sense, in his
Knowledge and Its Limits(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 99. Out-
right beliefs are beliefs whose contents the believer is prepared to use as
premises in practical inference.
18. Sensations,p. 22. Added emphasis. McLaughlin, however, does not
make an explicit claim of truth on behalf of type physicalism, although it
seems clear that he thinks that the explanatory argument lends type physical-
ism sufﬁcient warrant for our acceptance.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 128

--- Page 144 ---

And, as noted earlier, Hill takes his explanatory argument to
“show decisively that type materialism is the correct answer to
the mind-body problem.”
19But what if the explanation offered
by type physicalism for psychophysical correlations is only
marginally better than those offered by its competitors? 
There are other serious questions to think about concerning
this application of inference to the best explanation. Given that
type physicalism is to be compared with its rivals in point of ex-
planatory power, why are these theories tested onlyin respect of
how well they explain psychophysical correlations? Inductive
reasoning, whose aim is to reach a conclusion that we should
believe as true, or be prepared to use as a guide to action, must
respect the principle of total evidence, and in the present case
this means that the data, or evidence, to be explained must be
all the data relevant to the issue on hand.
20 It may not be clear
exactly what these data are in the present case, but surely it is
arbitrary to consider only the fact of psychophysical correla-
tions. Dualists will say that among the relevant data are such
things as the presumptive authoritativeness and privacy of
ﬁrst-person access to one’s own mental states, the persistence
condition of persons, the multiple physical realizability of men-
tal properties, the possibility of qualia inversions, the possibility
of “zombies,” and the like. These are all contested and disputed
issues; however, like it or not, dealing with them isthe mind-
body problem.
21What we should not do, it seems to me, is 
to pick the fact of psychoneural correlations alone as the
explanatory arguments 1 2 9
19. Sensations,p. 24.
20. In this sense, Hill’s statement of the rule of inference to the best expla-
nation quoted above is incomplete in referring to a theory giving the best ex-
planation of “a set of facts.” Which set of facts? Clearly, reference should be
made to something like “all the facts in the domain.”
21. In his further defense of type physicalism in Sensations,Hill addresses
many of these issues, often in a sensitive and persuasive way. In doing this,
though, Hill appears to be conceding that his explanatory argument by itself
could not be a decisive ground for type physicalism.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 129

--- Page 145 ---

1 3 0 chapter 5
explanandum, and argue that since type physicalism offers the
best explanation of this datum, it must be the overall winner—
and, moreover, it must be true! It is possible that type physical-
ism gives the best overall account of all these facts, but that
must be shown, and that would go far beyond the kind of ex-
planatory argument under consideration.
One last general point about the explanatory argument: part
of what lends plausibility to the talk of inference to the best
explanation in empirical science is the fact that putting com-
peting theories to test on the basis of how well they ex-
plainthedata is an ongoing, in-principle never-ending, affair.
Whenfurther data are in, the rankings of the theories in terms
of their explanatory power may very well change. Or what
comes to the same thing: we subject the theories to further test
by deriving new predictions from them. That is typical of—
some will say, constitutive of—what goes on in the “inductive”
sciences. But this feature seems entirely lacking in the applica-
tion of the explanatory test to the competing mind-body
theories. Here, as the advocates of the explanatory argument
see it, it seems like an open-and-shut affair. There seems no
possible further evidence, or data, to determine whether the
current winner of the explanatory battle will continue to
reign;and it is difﬁcult to conceive what furtherevidence might
be uncovered in the future that might favor, say, epiphenome-
nalism over type physicalism, or the double-aspect theory over
emergentism. Inference to the best explanation has been adver-
tised as inductive inference, but it is prima facie implausible
that an inductive rule could determine the fate of these rival
theories of the mind—or philosophical theories in general.
One ﬁnal point: this obviously is not a place to raise general
questions about the status of the rule of inference to the best
explanation, but we should keep in mind the fact that explana-
tion is a plastic and fragile notion; some will say that what
counts as an explanation is a highly context-sensitive (if not
outright relative or subjective) and pragmatic affair, and we
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 130

--- Page 146 ---

should be cautious, if not suspicious, about any inference rule
that essentially rests on considerations of explanation.22
Do Psychoneural Identities Explain 
Psychoneural Correlations?
Let us now turn to a more basic, and absolutely central, ques-
tion: Do identities explain correlations, as claimed by Hill and
McLaughlin? Does the identity “pain /H11005C-ﬁber stimulation”
really explainthe correlation “pain occurs 
i Cfs occurs” (I am
using “i” to mean “if and only if”), and if so, how does it do
it? What does the explanation look like? And what kind of
explanation is it? These questions are of critical importance to
the explanatory argument. For if speciﬁc psychoneural identi-
ties do not explain the corresponding correlations, there is no
hope that type physicalism (McLaughlin’s “Type Identity The-
sis”) will explain the general psychoneural correlation thesis
(McLaughlin’s “Correlation Thesis”).
Consider then the following argument:
(/H9251) (K) Pain/H11005C-ﬁber stimulation.
Therefore, (C) Pain occurs i Cfs occurs.
As I take it, Hill and McLaughlin will make the following
claims: ﬁrst, (K) logically implies the correlation (C); second,
(K) thereby explains (C)—that is, (/H9251) is an explanatory argu-
ment. These claims assume that identities, in particular neces-
sary Kripkean identities, can generate explanations in their
own right. Is this correct?
explanatory arguments 1 3 1
22. It seems to me that in most cases where inference to the best explana-
tion is invoked, all that “explanation” amounts to is logical implication or de-
duction, and logical deducibility seems the only substantive and robust core 
of the talk of explanation. For a general discussion and critique of inference 
to the best explanation, see Bas van Fraassen, Laws and Symmetry(Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1989).
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 131

--- Page 147 ---

1 3 2 chapter 5
Suppose someone claims that he has an explanation of why
Cicero is wise, and proceeds to offer the following argument
as his explanation:
(/H9252) Tully is wise.
Tully /H11005Cicero.
Therefore, Cicero is wise.
If anyone should offer this as an explanation of why Cicero is
wise, we surely would not take it seriously. Compare this argu-
ment with the following:
This steel rod is being heated.
Metals expand when heated.
Therefore, this rod is expanding.
Unlike the law “Metals expand when heated” involved in this
plainly explanatory argument, the identity “Tully /H11005Cicero” in
(/H9252) seems to do no explanatory work. If it does anything to
move the inference along, it is by allowing us to rewritethe
premise “Tully is wise” as “Cicero is wise,” by putting equals
for equals (that is, via the substitutivity of identities). The fact
represented by the ﬁrst premise “Tully is wise” is the very
same fact as the fact represented by the conclusion “Cicero is
wise”; in moving from premise to conclusion, the same fact is
redescribed. There is no movement here from one fact to an-
other, something that surely must happen in a genuine ex-
planatory argument. Identities seem best taken as mere rewrite
rules in inferential contexts; they generate no explanatory
connections between the explanandum and the phenomena
invoked in the explanans; they seem not to have explanatory
efﬁcacy of their own.
23
23. Here I am speaking only of necessary identities with rigid designators,
not contingent identities like “Margaret Okayo was the women’s winner of the
2003 New York Marathon” and “Jerry is the fastest talker among philoso-
phers,” which seem eminently explainable.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 132

--- Page 148 ---

These remarks are in accord with what Block and Stalnaker
say about the role of identities in explanations. In their argument
against the view that a reductive explanation of a phenomenon
(say, consciousness) requires an a priori conceptual connection
between the phenomenon and the base phenomenon that ex-
plains it, they write:
24
All we reject is the a priori, purely conceptual status attributed
to the bridge principles connecting the ordinary description of
the phenomenon to be explained with its description in the
language of science. What is actually deduced in such an expla-
nation is a description wholly within the language of science of
the phenomenon to be explained. For this to answer the origi-
nal explanatory question, posed in so-called folk vocabulary, 
all we need to add is the claim that the phenomenon described
in scientiﬁc language is the same ordinary phenomenon de-
scribed in a different way.
Suppose someone asks, in “folk vocabulary”, “Why did Jones
lose consciousness at time t?” The following will serve as an
explanation:
Jones was given an injection of sodium pentothal shortly before t.
Administration of sodium pentothal to a patient causes pyrami-
dal cell activity to cease.
Therefore, pyramidal cell activity ceased in Jones at t.
Consciousness /H11005pyramidal cell activity.
Therefore, Jones lost consciousness at t.
On Block and Stalnaker’s view, explanatory activity is over at
the third line. What the Kripkean identity, “consciousness /H11005
pyramidal cell activity,” does is to enable us to rewrite the
explanatory arguments 1 3 3
24. Ned Block and Robert Stalnaker, “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and
the Explanatory Gap,” Philosophical Review108 (1999): 1–46. The quotation is
from pp. 8–9.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 133

--- Page 149 ---

1 3 4 chapter 5
explanandum statement, redescribing in folk vocabulary the
phenomenon that has already been explained. This allows us
to claim that we have explained why Jones lost consciousness
at t. That is, identities do not play a role in generating expla-
nations; they only allow us to redescribe facts. I believe this is
a plausible view.
Moreover, the kind of “explanation” represented by (/H9251)
above seems entirely unlike scientiﬁc explanations of correla-
tions. In science there seem to be two principal ways of ex-
plaining correlations: ﬁrst, correlations are sometimes explained
by invoking a single lower-level process or structure under-
lying the correlated phenomena; second, the explanation may
proceed by showing the correlated phenomena to be collateral
effects of a common cause. For example, the correlation be-
tween thermal and electrical conductivity is explained by the
fact that both types of conduction involve the movement of
free electrons through the lattice structure of metals. And we
may explain the correlations between tidal movements and the
phases of the moon by showing both to be causal effects of 
the relative positions of the earth and the moon in relation to
the sun. Explanations of these kinds are very familiar both in
everyday life and in the sciences;
25 they are substantive expla-
nations subject to further tests and possible falsiﬁcations. And
they contrast sharply with the seemingly empty explanations
of the kind offered in (/H9251). In any case, it is quite obvious that
scientists will not in general attempt to explain correlations by
identifying the correlated properties—for example, by identi-
fying thermal and electrical conductivity, or high temperatures
and the glowing of an iron bar.
An explanation, when it is deductive, is best thought of as a
derivation, not just a display of the premises and conclusion as
25. If we take the correlations to be laws, there is a general way of explain-
ing laws, namely by deriving them from more basic laws.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 134

--- Page 150 ---

in (/H9251). To gain a real explanatory insight, we must see how the
conclusion can be derived, step by step, from the explanatory
premises. That is, an explanation is a proof, not just a listing 
of the explanatory premises and explanandum. How might we
derive the explanatory conclusion “pain occurs i Cfs occurs”
from the identity “pain /H11005Cfs”? To my knowledge, there is 
no rule in logic that says “From ‘X /H11005Y,’ infer ‘X occurs i Y
occurs.’” Rather, ﬁrst-order logic standardly offers the follow-
ing two rules involving identity:
26
Axiom schema: X /H11005X.
Rule of substitution: From “...X...” and “X /H11005Y,” infer 
“...Y...”.
Given this, the only way I see how a derivation of a correlation
from an identity might go is like this:
(/H9253) Pain occurs i pain occurs.
Pain /H11005Cfs.
Therefore, pain occurs i Cfs occurs.
The ﬁrst line is an instance of the truth-functional tautology 
“p i p,” and the identity of the second line allows us to rewrite
it in accordance with the rule of substitution, by putting “Cfs”
for the second occurrence of “pain” in the ﬁrst line. (Obviously,
we could have begun with the tautology “Cfs occurs i Cfs 
occurs” as the initial premise.)
Does the derivation, (/H9253), look to you like an explanation of 
a correlation in terms of an identity? Does it look to you like
any kind of explanation? It surely does not to me. The sole
explanatory premise is the tautologous “pain occurs i pain
occurs,” an instance of a factually empty logical truth. The
purported explanandum is simply a rewrite of this plainest of
explanatory arguments 1 3 5
26. See, e.g., Elliott Mendelson, Introduction to Mathematical Logic(Princeton:
D. Van Nostrand, 1964), p. 75.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 135

--- Page 151 ---

1 3 6 chapter 5
all tautologies, and as such it reports no new fact beyond the
“fact” reported by “pain occurs i pain occurs.” This derivation
seems no more explanatory than the derivation, (/H9252), of “Cicero
is wise” from “Tully is wise.” It is a far cry from genuine, fac-
tually substantial and empirically falsiﬁable, explanations of
correlations found in the sciences.
We don’t have to say identities have absolutely no role in
explanatory contexts. What identities can do is to help defendor
justifyexplanatory claims. Schematically this works as follows:
“We have explained why X is F, because X /H11005Y and we have an
explanation of why Y is F.” Consider: “We have explained why
when water freezes its volume increases, because water /H11005H
2O,
and our physical theory explains why when a quantity of H2O
molecules turns into a solid its volume increases.” Further, if
we take sentences or statements as explananda, we can say that
identities enlarge the domain of our explanations. I believe the
view advocated here assigns a simple but important role to
identities in explanation. It can explain the vaunted additional
explanatory power sometimes assigned to scientiﬁc identities
like “water /H11005H
2O,” “light /H11005electromagnetic radiation,”
“genes /H11005DNA molecules,” and the rest, in a simple and satis-
fying way, without regarding identities themselves as generat-
ing new explanations of facts and regularities.
To return to the issue of identities and correlations, it has been
argued plausibly that the whole point of identities is that they
enable us to transcendcorrelations, not explain them. Recall what
Smart said about identities versus correlations in his 1959 paper:
That [the states of consciousness like visual, auditory, and tac-
tual sensations, and aches and pains] are correlatedwith brain
processes does not help, for to say that they are correlatedis
to say that they are something “over and above.” You cannot
correlate something with itself. You can correlate footprints
with burglars, but not Bill Sikes the burglar with Bill Sikes the
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 136

--- Page 152 ---

burglar. So sensations, states of consciousness, do seem to be
the one sort of thing left outside the physical picture, and for
various reasons I just cannot believe that this can be so.
27
For Smart, then, identities and correlations exclude each other.
We ascend to psychoneural identities in order to discard and
transcend psychoneural correlations. The identity “pain /H11005Cfs”
enables us to do away with the correlation “pain occurs i Cfs
occurs.” And as physicalists we must rid ourselves of this correla-
tion because qua correlation it countenances pains as something
“over and above” Cfs. Herbert Feigl, another original type phys-
icalist, took a similar line: the correlation “pain occurs i Cfs
occurs” is a “nomological dangler” which the identity “pain /H11005
Cfs” enables us to get rid of.
28On this approach, psychoneural
identities get their warrant precisely from the fact that they elim-
inate psychoneural correlations or “dangling” laws, not from the
supposed explanations they provide for them.
To counter Smart’s remarks, one might say that there is an in-
terpretation of the correlation that makes it compatible with the
identity, and it is this: Given “pain /H11005Cfs,” all that the correla-
tion “pain occurs i Cfs occurs” says is what the harmless
tautologies “pain occurs i pain occurs” and “Cfs occurs i Cfs
occurs” say, and neither of these needs to be taken to imply that
pains are “over and above” Cfs. But this can scarcely be consid-
ered a defense of the line McLaughlin and Hill are taking about
the explanation of correlations by identities. As derived à la (/H9253),
“pain occurs i Cfs occurs” says no more than “pain occurs i
pain occurs” or “Cfs occurs i Cfs occurs,” and this means that
we have in effect lost our original explanandum; that is, the cor-
relation, which we took to be empirical and signiﬁcant (remem-
ber that McLaughlin considers it a law) has turned into an
explanatory arguments 1 3 7
27. Smart, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” in Rosenthal, The Nature of
Mind,p. 169. Emphasis in the original.
28. Herbert Feigl, “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical,’” Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science,vol. 2 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958.)
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 137

--- Page 153 ---

1 3 8 chapter 5
instance of “p i p,” leaving nothing of signiﬁcance to be ex-
plained. So Smart’s perspective on this could be put this way: If
we have the identity “pain /H11005Cfs” in hand, it is not the case that
we can explain the correlation “pain i Cfs” with the identity;
rather, the identity shows that there is here nothing to be ex-
plained. If anyone should ask “Why is it the case that pains cor-
relate with Cfs?”, we should reply that pains are Cfs, and that
pain no more correlates with Cfs than pain correlates with pain.
Talk of correlation here makes no better sense than in the case
of water and H
2O, or light and electromagnetic radiation. That
seems to me like the right response. As for the explanatory gap
between pain and Cfs, the identity “pain /H11005Cfs” shows that the
supposed gap is not there—it never was. Since there is one
thing here, not two, there is no gap to close or bridge. 
What I have been saying is in accord with Block and 
Stalnaker’s views on identities vis-à-vis correlations. They, 
too, argue for type physicalism on explanatory grounds, but
their approach is quite different from—actually, opposed to—
McLaughlin’s and Hill’s. Psychoneural identities help us with
explanations, on their view, but not as explanations of the asso-
ciated correlations. Here is what they say:
If we believe that heat is correlated with but not identical to
molecular kinetic energy, we should regard as legitimate the
question of why the correlation exists and what its mechanism
is. But once we realize that heat ismolecular kinetic energy,
questions like this will be seen as wrongheaded.
29
As we saw, emergentists have claimed that explanatory questions
like “Why does pain correlate with Cfs?”, “Why doesn’t pain
correlate with A/H9254-ﬁber stimulation?”, “Why doesn’t itch corre-
late with Cfs?”, and “Why does any conscious experience corre-
late with Cfs?” could not in principle be answered, and that, for
this reason, the phenomena of emergence must be accepted and
29. Block and Stalnaker, “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explana-
tory Gap,” p. 24.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 138

--- Page 154 ---

physicalism rejected. Block and Stalnaker are saying that one
important philosophical function of an identity like “pain /H11005
Cfs” is to show these requests for explanation to be “wrong-
headed” and improper. Why? Because, as was just noted, given
the identity, the correlation vanishes, leaving nothing to be ex-
plained. The identity “pain /H11005Cfs” rescinds the correlation, and
thereby voids the presupposition of the question “Why does
pain correlate with Cfs, not with another neural state?” Since
this why-question has a false presupposition, it has no correct
answer.
30 These explanatory why-questions can be dealt with—
by showing that they are, as Block and Stalnaker put it, “wrong-
headed,” not by providing them with answers. This reading of
Block and Stalnaker, therefore, puts them on Smart and Feigl’s
side, with Hill and McLaughlin on the opposite side. 
Block and Stalnaker’s Explanatory Argument
As we saw, Block and Stalnaker’s approach to the explanatory
gap is via the type identiﬁcation of sensory states with
neural/physical states. If we can identify pain with Cfs, there
can be no gap between the two; only when we allow them to
be diverse, the issue of an explanatory gap can arise. The clos-
ing of the gap via an identity, they claim, makes potentially
embarrassing explanatory questions go away. These questions,
and the gap, will remain to haunt us if we refuse to acknowl-
edge the identity of pain with Cfs.
31
explanatory arguments 1 3 9
30. On why-questions, see Sylvain Bromberger, “Why-Questions,” in Mind
and Cosmos,ed. Robert Colodny (Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press, 1966).
31. For this to hold, Block and Stalnaker have to argue for one more 
claim, namely that these identities are not themselves subject to explanatory
challenges—that is, they are not the sort of thing that can be, or need to be, ex-
plained. As long as it makes sense to ask “Why is pain identical with Cfs, not
with A/H9254-ﬁber stimulation?” and similar questions, the explanatory gap will re-
open. Block and Stalnaker understandably take the view that identities are not
explainable (“Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explanatory Gap,” p. 24).
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 139

--- Page 155 ---

1 4 0 chapter 5
We can grant all this—if we had “pain /H11005Cfs” and other
such psychoneural identities, that would indeed be dandy! We
could then rid ourselves of the explanatory gap and dismiss as
wrongheaded all those explanatory demands that inspired a
whole philosophical movement, emergentism, with its dubious
commitment to “downward causation.” We can agree with
Block and Stalnaker that these psychoneural identities would
be highly desirable things to have. But where do we get them?
What are the grounds for thinking they are true? What is 
the basis of our entitlement to these identities? Block and 
Stalnaker take this question seriously and try to provide an 
answer. I think their answer, like the argument of Hill 
and McLaughlin, is seriously ﬂawed, and I will try to show 
you why.
Block and Stalnaker take psychoneural identities like “pain /H11005
Cfs” and “consciousness /H11005pyramidal cell activity” (an example
they take out of the research by Francis Crick and Christof
Koch
32) as belonging to a familiar class of identities, which
Hilary Putnam once called “theoretical identiﬁcations,”33like
the following:
Water /H11005H 2O.
Heat /H11005molecular kinetic energy.
Light /H11005electromagnetic radiation.
We have been calling these “Kripkean” identities, necessary 
a posteriori identity statements that tell us what the “real na-
ture” of some object or phenomenon is. Block and Stalnaker’s
crucial claim is that psychoneural identities like “pain /H11005Cfs”
can be justiﬁed, or epistemically grounded, in exactly the same
32. For a popular presentation of this work, see Francis Crick, The Astonish-
ing Hypothesis(New York: Scribner, 1994).
33. Hilary Putnam, “Minds and Machines,” in Mind, Language, and Reality
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975); ﬁrst published in 1960.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 140

--- Page 156 ---

way these familiar scientiﬁc identities are justiﬁed and
grounded. 
Let us ﬁrst see how, according to Block and Stalnaker, these
scientiﬁc identities are justiﬁed—from what they derive their
warrant. Here is what they say:
Why do we suppose that heat /H11005molecular kinetic energy? Con-
sider the explanation given above of why heating water makes it
boil. Suppose that heat /H11005molecular kinetic energy, pressure /H11005
molecular momentum transfer, and boiling /H11005a certain kind of
molecular motion. ...Then we have an account of how heating
water produces boiling. If we were to accept mere correlations
instead of identities, we would only have an account of how
something correlated with heating causes something correlated
with boiling....Identities allow a transfer of explanatory and
causal force not allowed by mere correlations. Assuming that
heat /H11005mke, that pressure /H11005molecular momentum transfer, etc.
allows us to explain facts that we could not otherwise explain.
Thus, we are justiﬁed by the principle of inference to the best expla-
nationin inferring that these identities are true.
34
In this paragraph, Block and Stalnaker build an apparently
plausible case for the identities, heat with mke and pressure
with molecular momentum transfer, on explanatory grounds.
Notice especially their explicit appeal to the principle of infer-
ence to the best explanation: acceptance of these identities 
is sufﬁciently justiﬁed because they enable explanations that
mere correlations could not yield. In fact, on Block and 
Stalnaker’s view, identities have a dual explanatory role: on one
hand, they enable certain explanations that we want to have,
and on the other, as we have seen, they “disable,” as we might
say, certain explanatory questions that we are better off not
explanatory arguments 1 4 1
34. Block and Stalnaker, “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explana-
tory Gap,” pp. 23–24. Emphasis added.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 141

--- Page 157 ---

1 4 2 chapter 5
having to face, like “Why is there water where and only where
there is H2O?”
What then of psychoneural identities? Block and Stalnaker
write:
Suppose that there is an a posteriori truth of the form con-
sciousness /H11005brain state B. Recall the suggestion by Crick and
Koch, mentioned earlier, that consciousness is pyramidal cell
activity....
Without the help of conceptual analysis, how might such an
identity claim be justiﬁed? By using the kinds of method-
ological considerations sketched in our discussion of simplicity
above—the same kinds of considerations that are used to justify
water /H11005H
2O.35
This proposal is bold and surprising—and more than a little
incredible! For Block and Stalnaker are saying in effect that
the mind-body problem is a scientiﬁc research problem on the
order of the discovery that water /H11005H
2O and that heat /H11005mol-
ecular kinetic energy. Not that these and other similar scien-
tiﬁc discoveries were easy or entirely straightforward, or that
scientiﬁc methodology is irrelevant to philosophical debates.
Rather, the point is that it is difﬁcult to believe that a problem
that has long vexed so many great minds in western philoso-
phy, including some of the ﬁnest scientists, dividing them into
a host of warring camps, should turn out to be something that
could have been solved the same way that scientists deter-
mined the molecular structure of water. As we saw earlier, not
even Smart, perhaps the most sanguine of the contemporary
materialists, thought that the choice between type physicalism
and dualism was a matter to be decided by science.
Our task here, however, is to analyze and evaluate the merits
of Block and Stalnaker’s argument. Let us ﬁrst see what they
35. Block and Stalnaker, “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explana-
tory Gap,” p. 29. Emphasis added.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 142

--- Page 158 ---

are saying about the case of boiling water. Consider the two
hypotheses below, (Corr) and (Id):
(Corr) Water correlates with H2O; heating water correlates with
the increase of mke of the H2O molecules; the boiling of water
correlates with molecular activity M of the H2O molecules.
(Id) Water /H11005H 2O; heating water /H11005increasing mke of the H2O
molecules; the boiling of water /H11005molecular activity M of the
H 2O molecules.
We have a well-conﬁrmed and well-understood physical the-
ory that explains in detail the process whereby increasing mke
of H
2O molecules causes molecular activity M. So (Id) yields
the following derivation:
(/H9254) P (physical theory)
Increasing mke of H2O causes molecular activity M.
(Id) 
Therefore, heating water causes water to boil.
Line 2 is derived from physical theory P, and P explains it.
Using (Id) and the rule of substitution, we then derive the
conclusion, and we can now claim that we have an explana-
tion of why heating water causes it to boil. We can say, with
Block and Stalnaker, that the identities of (Id) allow a “trans-
fer” of explanatory and causal force. Compare this with the
situation in which we would ﬁnd ourselves if we were to accept
(Corr) but not (Id). (Corr) would only sanction the following
derivation:
(/H9255) P (physical theory)
Increasing mke of H2O causes molecular activity M.
(Corr)
Therefore, heating water is correlated with a phenome-
non which causes the phenomenon with which boiling is
correlated.
explanatory arguments 1 4 3
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 143

--- Page 159 ---

1 4 4 chapter 5
Here there is no explanation of why heating water causes it to
boil. (Corr) does not enable the explanatory force of physical
theory P to reach the phenomenon given in folk language. But
this is exactly what (Id) can accomplish. Since (Id) makes it
possible for us to explain a fact—and numerous other facts—
that we formerly were unable to explain, we are justiﬁed,
Block and Stalnaker tell us, by the principle of inference to the
best explanation, in concluding that these identities are true.
And Block and Stalnaker are saying that the same pattern of
reasoning justiﬁes a transition from psychoneural correlations
to psychoneural identities. Suppose our neurophysiology ex-
plains why neural state N
1causes neural state N2. Moreover,
we ﬁnd that N1correlates with pain and that N2 correlates
with a sense of distress. If we stop short of identifying pain
with N
1and distress with N2, we can only explain why pain
correlates with a phenomenon that causes the phenomenon
with which a sense of distress is correlated. Only by going to
the identities “pain /H11005N
1” and “sense of distress /H11005N2” can we
bring our neurophysiology to bear on the situation and explain
why pain causes a feeling of distress. This gives us the follow-
ing explanatory derivation:
(/H9258) Neurophysiology
Neural state N1causes neural state N2.
Pain /H11005N1.
Sense of distress /H11005N2.
Therefore, pain causes a sense of distress.
Again, Block and Stalnaker would urge us to accept the psycho-
neural identities “pain /H11005N
1” and “distress /H11005N2” as true on
the ground that these enable us to explain, via neurophysiol-
ogy, a fact that we would otherwise not be able to explain.
Again, the principle of inference to the best explanation would
be cited to justify the move from correlations to identities. 
That is Block and Stalnaker’s argument for psychoneural
identities, or type physicalism. So what should we think of this
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 144

--- Page 160 ---

argument? I believe it misﬁres—I believe this can be shown, in
a kind of ad hominem way, using their own remarks on the
role of identities in explanation. (My argument is not really ad
hominem, because I have endorsed a view of the role of identi-
ties very similar to theirs.) Remember an earlier quotation
from Block and Stalnaker on this issue, which we used in our
discussion of McLaughlin’s and Hill—I will restate part of it
for ease of reference:
What is actually deduced in such an explanation is a descrip-
tion wholly within the language of science of the phenomenon
to be explained. For this to answer the original explanatory
question, posed in so-called folk vocabulary, all we need to add
is the claim that the phenomenon described in scientiﬁc
language is the same ordinary phenomenon described in a dif-
ferent way.
36
According to Block and Stalnaker, therefore, the explanatory
activity, in derivation (/H9258), is over and done with at the second
line, when we have derived “N1causes N2” from neurophysi-
ology, and the only role the identities play is to enable us to re-
state the phenomenon that has already been explained, the last
line of the derivation being this restatement in the “folk” vo-
cabulary. That is to say, the identities “pain /H11005N
1” and “sense
of distress /H11005N2” serve only as rewrite rules, and they are not
implicated in the explanatory activity. All the explaining repre-
sented in the derivation occurs within neurophysiology, and
when we derive the second line from neurophysiological the-
ory, we are doing some genuine explaining. And that is the
only explaining involved here. The identities kick in only after
the explaining is ﬁnished. True, these identities do have a role
in the derivation of “Pain causes distress,”but this is not an ex-
planatory derivation; rather, it is a derivation in which we put
explanatory arguments 1 4 5
36. Block and Stalnaker, “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explana-
tory Gap,” pp. 8–9.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 145

--- Page 161 ---

1 4 6 chapter 5
“equals for equals,” and thereby redescribe in folk vocabulary
a phenomenon that has already been explained. That is Block
and Stalnaker’s own view on therole of identities in explana-
tions, and I believe it is the correct view. 
We have to conclude then that Block and Stalnaker’s appeal
to the principle of inference to the best explanation is mis-
placed. The identities they hope to validate are simply not im-
plicated in explanations of the sorts Block and Stalnaker have
in mind and cannot be the beneﬁciaries of inference to the
best explanation. And, with the McLaughlin-Hill explanatory
argument already ruled out, it is difﬁcult to imagine any ex-
planatory roles for identities that would make them eligible for
the application of the principle of inference to the best expla-
nation. As we argued, identities do not seem capable of gener-
ating explanations on their own; the best they can do is to
“transfer” explanations that have already been completed—not
from one phenomenon to another phenomenon, but from one
descriptionof a phenomenon to another descriptionof the same
phenomenon.
Another W ay of Looking 
at the T wo Explanatory Arguments
The two arguments we have considered, one by McLaughlin
and Hill and one by Block and Stalnaker, fail as explanatory
arguments, but that does not mean that they fail to make a
point or that they have nothing to teach us. I believe that the
McLaughlin-Hill argument can be viewed as a simplicity argu-
ment, and that the Block-Stalnaker argument can be seen as a
causal argument of the kind we are familiar with from else-
where. I will brieﬂy explain.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 146

--- Page 162 ---

In his presentation, McLaughlin puts the explanatory argu-
ment in a suggestive way:
[The Type Identity Thesis] implies the Correlation Thesis. ...
We maintain, on grounds of overall coherence and theoretical sim-
plicity, that the explanation of the Correlation Thesis that the
Type Identity Thesis offers is superior to the explanations 
offered by other theories of mind.
37
I think the “explanation” McLaughlin speaks of here could be
taken—and this may well be the way he takes it—to be a
philosophical explanation, or philosophical theory-building,
rather than a garden-variety scientiﬁc explanation to which
something like the rule of inference to the best explanation
might apply. The fact that McLaughlin, unlike the other
philosophers we are considering here, does not explicitly ap-
peal to inference to the best explanation is relevant here. For
this reason I believe it is not implausible to take McLaughlin
to be arguing that, of all possible stances on the mind-body
problem, type physicalism delivers the overall most coherent
and simplest ontology. 
As for the explanatory argument of Block and Stalnaker, I
believe it is perhaps best construed as a form of the familiar
causal argument for mind-body reductionism. Consider argu-
ment (/H9258) above. Block and Stalnaker take it to answer this
question: How can we explain the fact that pain causes dis-
tress? But let us put the question a little differently, without
mentioning explanation: How can we show that there is here a
causal relation between one mental event and another? How is
it possible that pain causes distress? This is the problem of
mental causation—or one form of it. The answer: If we can re-
ductively identify pain with N
1and distress with N2, we will be
explanatory arguments 1 4 7
37. McLaughlin, “In Defense of New Wave Materialsim,” pp. 319–20.
Emphasis added.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 147

--- Page 163 ---

1 4 8 chapter 5
able to see how pain causes distress, since we have from neuro-
physiology a detailed story about how N1causes N2. I am sug-
gesting this as a way of understanding what the inference (/H9258)
above shows. Viewed this way, (/H9258) is a straightforward causal
argument for reductionism, or type physicalism: If mental
kinds are identical with physical kinds, that will vindicate men-
tal causation. 
But it is important to see that this is not at all a conclusive
argument for type physicalism—for two reasons. First, even if
we assume that mental causation is real, we would have to
show that type identities are the onlyway of showing mental
causation to be possible. It may be true—I think it is true—
that type physicalism will vindicate mental causation, but it
may not be the only position on the mind-body problem that
can do this. In my view, functional reduction of the sort I have
discussed, which, unlike Block and Stalnaker’s type physical-
ism, is immune to the notorious multiple realization argu-
ment, can also ground mental causation. Second, even if we
are entitled to the conditional “Mental causation is possible
only if some form of reductionism holds,” we cannot infer that
reductionism is true. For we should not a priori rule out
epiphenomenalism and other noncausal views of the mind.
Reductionism must be earned—and mental causation, too,
must be earned—by showing that mental properties are in-
deed reducible, in a relevant sense, to physical/biological
properties. And this requires independent arguments and evi-
dence. Mental causation is a presumptive desideratum, and it
may be very high on our wish list. But our wish to save mental
causation, however sincere and righteous, cannot by itself
make reductionism true.
70572 CH05 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 148

--- Page 164 ---

6
R
Physicalism, or Something 
Near Enough
As reﬂective and self-aware creatures, we want to know what
kind of being we are, what our nature is. We also want to know
how we ﬁt into the world we live in, what our place is in this
world. But what kind of place is this world, to begin with? For
detailed knowledge of the world, we must defer to the deliver-
ances of the sciences. Only science can tell us about the origin
of life on earth, the causes and cures of cancer, the depletion of
the ozone layer, and the like. On the overall shape and makeup
of the world in essential outlines, we must depend on what
physics, our fundamental science, tells us. I believe that the
broad basic features of the world as described by modern
physics, what is intelligible and is of interest to those of us who
are not science specialists, has been relatively stable through
the ﬂux of changing physical theories, and this is what forms
the background of the debates on the mind-body problem. 
A philosophical worldview that has been inspired and fos-
tered by an appreciation of the foundational position of
physics among the sciences is physicalism. It has shaped much
of the philosophical discussion of the mind-body problem
through the twentieth century, at least in the analytic tradi-
tion, and is likely to continue to do so in the foreseeable fu-
ture. The core of contemporary physicalism is the idea that all
things that exist in this world are bits of matter and structures
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 149

--- Page 165 ---

1 5 0 chapter 6
aggregated out of bits of matter, all behaving in accordance
with laws of physics, and that any phenomenon of the world
can be physically explained if it can be explained at all. When
physicalism is accepted as a basic framework, the foremost
metaphysical question about the mind is where in the physical
world our minds and mentality ﬁt—indeed, whether minds
have a place in a physical world at all. In this chapter, I want to
discuss just where we are with the physicalist program, in
order to see to what extent physicalism’s hopes and promises
have been, or are likely to be, realized or frustrated—that is,
how much, or what kind of, physicalism we can have. As we
will see, the efforts do not succeed entirely, but I will claim
that they succeed nearly enough. But ﬁrst we need to review just
where we are with the claims and arguments so far advanced in
this book.
T aking Stock
The most fundamental tenet of physicalism concerns the on-
tology of the world. It claims that the content of the world is
wholly exhausted by matter. Material things are all the things
that there are; there is nothing inside the spacetime world that
isn’t material, and of course there is nothing outside it either.
The spacetime world is the whole world, and material things,
bits of matter and complex structures made up of bits of mat-
ter, are its only inhabitants. This doctrine is sometimes called
“ontological physicalism.”
But why should we accept ontological physicalism? Why
can’t there be things other than material things? In an earlier
chapter a causal argument was mounted against Cartesian
mental substances, minds conceived as concrete immaterial
things outside physical space in causal interaction with material
things located within physical space. We saw that if minds 
were such mental substances, they could not possibly causally
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 150

--- Page 166 ---

inﬂuence, or be inﬂuenced by, material things, and further,
they could not causally interact with one another either. That is
to say, immaterial nonspatial minds would be totally causally
impotent, and this renders them explanatorily irrelevant and
useless. Moreover, such a radically noncausal view of minds
makes it difﬁcult to understand how we could even come to
know that there are minds. Our considerations do not show
that causal relations cannot hold within a single mental sub-
stance (even Leibniz, famous for disallowing causation between
monads, allowed it within a single monad, or so I understand).
However, what has been shown, I believe, is sufﬁcient to defeat
any rationale for substance dualism. Causality requires a do-
main with a space-like structure—that is, a “space” within
which objects and events can be identiﬁed by their “loca-
tions”—and, as far as we know, the domain of physical objects
is the only domain with a structure of that kind. If this is right,
we have a causal argument for monistic physicalist ontology.
Although substance dualism has not been taken as a serious
option in mainstream philosophy of mind since the early
twentieth century, a general dualist perspective has shown it-
self to possess a surprisingly tenacious capacity for survival.
The dualism of mental and physical properties, in various
forms, has dominated the ﬁeld during the second half of the
last century, and continues to hold the allegiance of a majority
of philosophers, although it is fair to say that what Ned Block
has aptly called “antireductionist consensus,” which was ﬁrmly
in place by the mid-1970s, is no longer what it used to be. I
believe the persistence of dualism points to what strikes me as
a deeply entrenched, almost instinctive, aversion that most of
us feel toward reductionist physicalism. Most of us would like
to believe, it seems, that although we are wholly composed of
bits of matter, we are extraordinarily complex physical systems
with properties, capacities, and functions that are not merely
physical or reducible to the merely physical. We are apt to feel
that reductive physicalism, according to which thoughts and
physicalism, or near enough 1 5 1
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 151

--- Page 167 ---

1 5 2 chapter 6
feelings are mere molecular movements, cannot do justice to
the special and distinctive position that we occupy in the nat-
ural order, and that a reductionist physicalist is in self-denial, a
denial of his own distinctive and unique nature. An idea like
this is found not only in those wedded to a traditional, often
religiously inspired, conception of ourselves as persons; it 
also seems to be the driving force behind the widely shared
view that the special sciences, especially those concerning 
humans, like psychology, cognitive science, and economics, 
are autonomous and irreducible to the physical and biolog-
ical sciences. Current antireductionism as it concerns the
special sciences seems almost like a replay of the inﬂuential
doctrine in late nineteenth-century Europe that posited a fun-
damental difference between the Naturwissenschaftenand the
Geisteswissenschaften—that is, between the natural sciences and
the humane sciences.
1In any case, the long reign of nonreduc-
tive physicalism is a testimony to its appeal as a thesis about
the nature of the special sciences as well as a position on 
the mind-body problem. It promises to safeguard both the 
autonomy of the special sciences and our specialness as cog-
nizers and agents. But philosophical positions cannot live on
hopes and messages alone: they have to deliver the goods as
advertised. 
As it has turned out, nonreductive materialism could not de-
liver on mental causation—any better than Cartesian dualism
could. It could not explain, on its own terms, how mental phe-
nomena, like belief, desire, feeling, and sensation, could
causally affect the course of events in the physical world.
Mind-to-body causation is fundamental if our mentality is to
make a difference to what goes on in the world. If I want to
have the slightest causal inﬂuence on anything outside me—
to change a light bulb or start a war—I must ﬁrst move my
1. For a helpful survey of the debate, see Georg von Wright, Explanation
and Understanding(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1971), ch. 1.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 152

--- Page 168 ---

limbs or other parts of my body; somehow, my beliefs and
desires must cause the muscles in my arms and legs to con-
tract, or cause my vocal cords to vibrate. Mental causation is
fundamental to our conception of mentality, and to our view
of ourselves as agents and cognizers; any theory of mind that is
not able to accommodate mental causation must be considered
inadequate, or at best incomplete.
So how can a mental phenomenon, say, my desire for a
drink of water, manage to cause my legs to move so as to
transport my entire body to the kitchen? Earlier we have dis-
cussed in considerable detail an argument, the “superve-
nience” or “exclusion” argument, whose conclusion is that
causally efﬁcacious mental phenomena must be reducible to
physical ones, and, more broadly, that, given the closed char-
acter of the physical domain, any phenomenon that is causally
linked with a physical phenomenon must itself be a physical
phenomenon. If mental phenomena are neural processes in
the brain, there will be no special mystery about mental causa-
tion; I believe we already know the neurophysiology involved
well enough—how neural excitations in the motor cortex send
electrochemical signals down through the efferent nerve chan-
nels to the appropriate muscles, causing them to contract,
which in turn causes the limbs to move. According to property
dualism, however, mental phenomena are distinct from neural
phenomena, and it becomes a prima facie mystery by what
mechanisms, or through what intervening links, these suppos-
edly nonphysical phenomena can cause the muscles to con-
tract. At least, this much seems undeniable: If my desire is to
cause my legs to move, it must somehow make use of, or ride
piggyback on, the causal chain from my motor cortex to the
leg muscles. It just is not possible to believe that my desire
might be able to act on my legs directly, through some form of
telekinesis, or that there could be another causal path, inde-
pendent of the neural/physical causal chain, that connects the
desire to the leg movement. It seems then that if a neural
physicalism, or near enough 1 5 3
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 153

--- Page 169 ---

1 5 4 chapter 6
event in the motor cortex is the ultimate physical cause of the
leg movement, my desire must somehow cause that neural
event. But how is that possible?
Much is known about the physicochemical processes in-
volved in the ﬁring of a bundle of neural ﬁbers—how electrical
potential builds up in a neuron until it reaches a critical point
and then discharges. The rising of electric potential involves
the movement of electrically charged molecules; if some non-
physical causal agent is to cause a neuron to ﬁre, it must be
able to causally inﬂuence the motion of molecules. I assume
we know something about how molecular motions take place
inside a cell, what physical forces are active in causing these
motions, and just how the motions depend on the magnitudes
of these forces. Do we really have any conception of how some
immaterial, nonphysical force might change the motion of
even a single molecule, causing it to speed up or slow down, or
change its direction? Will brain scientists ever look for non-
physical forces, or nonphysical phenomena, to explain some
neural event for which they are having difﬁculty identifying a
physical cause? If they should decide to do that, how would
they go about it? Where and how would they look for non-
physical causes of neural events? How would they identify one
and measure its properties? 
The answer of course is that brain scientists will not look
outside the physical domain for explanations of neural phe-
nomena. They are not likely to think that it will be scientiﬁ-
cally productive to look for nonphysical, immaterial forces to
explain neural events. We expect the physical world to be
causally self-contained and explanatorily self-sufﬁcient. That
is, we suppose that if a neural event—or more broadly, a physi-
cal event—has a cause, or an explanation, then it must have a
physical cause and a physical explanation. This is the principle
of causal/explanatory closure of the physical domain. 
Some dualists may think that these considerations are
question-begging in that they assume the causal closure of the
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 154

--- Page 170 ---

physical. There are excellent, even compelling, reasons for ac-
cepting the causal and explanatory self-sufﬁciency of the physi-
cal world,
2 but rather than arguing this point, let me show you
another way of generating the problem of mental causation for
property dualists. Consider a mental event, say an occurrence
of pain. We believe—in fact, we know—that pain occurs only
because a certain neural state, call it /H9274, occurs. /H9274may differ
from organism to organism, especially in organisms belonging
to different biological species, but we do not think that there
are sensations that ﬂoat free from the brain, without being
grounded in underlying neural processes. Assume that /H9274is the
neural substrate of pain in you: If /H9274occurs, you will experience
pain, and you will not experience pain unless /H9274occurs. Con-
sider the claim that the pain caused your ﬁnger to twitch. Sup-
pose, further, that neurophysiologists have discovered a causal
chain from /H9274, the neural substrate of your pain, to the ﬁnger
twitching, establishing /H9274as its sufﬁcient physical cause. I be-
lieve the existence of such a causal chain is highly likely; we
already know a lot about physical causal processes underlying
many sensory processes. This means that your ﬁnger twitching
has two putative causes, one mental (your pain) and one phy-
sical (the pain’s neural substrate /H9274). Given that your ﬁnger
twitching, a physical event, has a full physical cause, how is a
mental cause also possible? How could one and the same event
have two distinct causal origins? Doesn’t the physical cause
threaten to preempt the supposed mental cause? This is the
problem of causal exclusion, as may be recalled. Note that in
developing this problem, we have used various highly plausible
empirical assumptions about the neurophysiology of pain
(along with some commonsensical assumptions about causal-
ity), but not the principle of physical causal closure.
physicalism, or near enough 1 5 5
2. For further discussion, see David Papineau, “The Rise of Physicalism,” in
Physicalism and Its Discontents, ed. Carl Gillett and Barry Loewer (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001).
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 155

--- Page 171 ---

1 5 6 chapter 6
It is clear that property dualism has no way of dealing with
these questions, and that, especially in view of physical causal
closure, phenomena outside the physical domain must remain
causally impotent, mere epiphenomena, at least with regard 
to physical phenomena. In 1970, Donald Davidson’s “Mental
Events”
3appeared, and this inﬂuential paper sparked the revival of
the problem of mental causation, more than three hundred years
after the problem doomed Descartes’s interactionist dualism.
What has become increasingly evident over the past thirty years
is that mental causation poses insuperable difﬁculties for all
forms of mind-body dualism—for property dualism no less than
substance dualism. Some philosophers are still gamely holding
on, trying to somehow fashion an account of mental causation
within the nonreductive scheme, but I believe that if we have
learned anything from the three decades of debate, it is the sim-
ple point that unless we bring the supposed mental causes fully
into the physical world, there is no hope of vindicating their sta-
tus as causes, and that the reality of mental causation requires re-
duction of mentality to physical processes, or of minds to brains. 
Physicalism at a Crossroads
In getting to where we are at this point, the ﬁrst choice point we
faced was where we had to decide between substance dualism,
which posits both material bodies and immaterial minds, and on-
tological physicalism, which admits only material objects. Moti-
vations for introducing entities other than material things vary—
from supposed philosophical requirements in connection with
certain issues, for example, the persistence of persons over time,
a possible survival of bodily death, and the special directness of
knowledge of one’s own mind, to religious imperatives and
mystical intimations. As we saw, however, immaterial minds,
3. In Donald Davidson, Essays on Actions and Events(Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1980); ﬁrst published in 1970.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 156

--- Page 172 ---

outside physical space, are causally cut off not only from physical
objects and events but also from other minds as well. Each im-
material mind would be a totally isolated entity; its existence is
inexplicable and its presence or absence can make no difference
to anything else. I believe this is sufﬁcient ground for rejecting
substance dualism of all kinds, or any ontology that acquiesces in
immaterial, nonphysical things. The alternative is physicalism
with an ontology countenancing only material things. There is
just one kind of substance, and it is material substance. The
physical world of spacetime is the whole world.
4
Let us suppose then that at the ﬁrst choice point we have
opted for ontological physicalism. The next choice point we
face concerns the properties of material things: Given that
only material things exist, what kinds of properties do they, or
can they, have? Speciﬁcally, can they have properties that are
not physical? That is, can they have properties that are not
dealt with in fundamental physics or reducible, in some broad
but clear sense, to fundamental physical properties? As we saw,
many thinkers have been attracted to an afﬁrmative answer to
this question, holding the view that complex physical systems
can exhibit novel, “emergent” properties that are not reducible
to the properties of their simpler constituents. Early emergen-
tists thought that even such simple physicochemical properties
as the transparency of water were emergent; now it is generally
conceded that consciousness and mentality are the best, and
perhaps the only, candidates for genuine emergence.
5 Emer-
gentism, which is now showing signs of a revival after having
been moribund for much of the second half of the twentieth
century, is a form of property dualism, the position that, in
physicalism, or near enough 1 5 7
4. What of abstract things, like numbers, properties, propositions, and the
like? I am concerned here only with the concrete world; I am setting aside the
issue of Platonic objects, although some philosophers believe that Platonism is
excluded by naturalism.
5. There have recently been various attempts to devise a notion of emer-
gence which might be usefully applied to purely physical situations (as well as
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 157

--- Page 173 ---

1 5 8 chapter 6
addition to physical properties, there are physically irreducible
domains of emergent properties, of which mental properties
are among the leading candidates.Other forms of antireduc-
tionism include Davidson’s “anomalous monism” and the early
functionalism of Hilary Putnam and Jerry Fodor. Property dual-
ism based on ontological physicalism is called nonreductive ma-
terialism (or physicalism). Emergentism, anomalous monism,
and Putnam-Fodor functionalism are the best-known examples
of nonreductive materialism.
6
What we have just seen is that this intermediate halfway house
between the two poles of substance dualism and reductionist
physicalism is a promissory note that cannot be redeemed. As we
saw, the supervenience/exclusion argument shows that property
dualism is not able to explain how mental causation is possible;
instead of saving mental causation, it ends up relegating mental
phenomena to the status of epiphenomena. Nonreductive mate-
rialism has been motivated by a desire to save mentality as some-
thing distinctive and special, and something that we value. 
Instead of saving it, it loses it by depriving it of causal powers.
The important lesson we have learned from three decades of
debate—Davidson’s “Mental Events” was published in 1970—is
this: the demands of causality do not tolerate duality of proper-
ties any more than duality of substances, and both Cartesian sub-
stance dualism and contemporary property dualism run aground
on the rocks of mental causation.
mentality). See, e.g., Paul Humphreys, “How Properties Emerge,” Philosophy of
Science64 (1997): 53–70; Alexander Rueger, “Robust Supervenience and Emer-
gence,” Philosophy of Science67 (2000): 466–89, and “Physical Emergence,
Diachronic and Synchronic,” Synthese124 (2000): 297–322; David Newman,
“Emergence and Strange Attractors,” Philosophy of Science63 (1996): 246–61;
Michael Silberstein, “Converging on Emergence,” Journal of Consciousness Studies
8 (2001): 62–98.
6. The qualiﬁer “Putnam-Fodor” is needed because functionalism of the
kind advocated by David Armstrong and David Lewis cannot be viewed as a
form of property dualism, at least not in a straightforward way.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 158

--- Page 174 ---

So property dualism is out—at least, for now. Where do we
go from here? If causality excludes dual realms of mental and
physical properties, that means that there is only one secure
causal domain, the domain of physical properties. What then
happens to mental properties? One possibility is that mental
properties are reducible to physical properties: if mental prop-
erties are reduced to physical properties, this would conserve
and legitimatize them as members of the physical domain,
thereby safeguarding their causal status. But suppose that the
mental fails to reduce: we would then be faced with the specter
of epiphenomenalism, and we must ﬁnd a way to live with
causally impotent mental properties. This may very well push
us over the edge into mental irrealism; for one might argue
that epiphenomenalism is a fate no better than irrealism and in
fact indistinguishable from it—Samuel Alexander urged that
to deprive something of causal powers is to deprive it of exis-
tence.
7 This leads to eliminativism: mental properties are ban-
ished from our ontology as causally idle “danglers” with no
purpose to serve. This is not an outcome that anyone can wel-
come; most philosophers—for example, Jerry Fodor as we will
see below—take mental causation as wholly nonnegotiable; it
must be protected at all costs. The best, or the most satisfying,
outcome would have been a vindication of mental causation
along the lines of nonreductive physicalism; that would have
allowed us to retain mentality as something that is causally ef-
ﬁcacious and yet autonomous vis-à-vis the physical domain.
But the best outcome, as we saw, is not to be had. The next
best outcome, in fact our only hope at this point if mental cau-
sation is to be saved, is physical reductionism. Physical reduc-
tion would save causal efﬁcacy for mentality, at the cost of its
autonomy. Reductionism allows only one domain, the physical
domain, but the mental may ﬁnd a home in that domain. Some
physicalism, or near enough 1 5 9
7. Samuel Alexander, Space, Time and Deity(London: Macmillan, 1927),
vol. 2, p. 8.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 159

--- Page 175 ---

1 6 0 chapter 6
will say that the reductionist option is hardly distinguishable
from eliminativism, that to reduce minds and consciousness to
patterns of electrical activity in a network of soulless neurons
is in effect to renounce them as a distinctive and valued aspect
of our being. This reaction is understandable but inappropri-
ate. There is an honest difference between elimination and
conservative reduction. Phlogiston was eliminated, not re-
duced; temperature and heat were reduced, not eliminated.
Witches were eliminated, not reduced; the gene has been re-
duced, not eliminated. We have a tendency to read “nonphysi-
cal” when we see the word “mental,” and think “nonmental”
when we see the word “physical.” This has the effect of mak-
ing the idea of physical reduction of the mental a simple verbal
contradiction, abetting the idea that physical reduction of
something we cherish as a mental item, like thought or feeling,
would turn it into something other than what it is. But this
would be the case only if by “physical” we meant “nonmental.”
We should not prejudge the issue of mind-body reduction by
building irreducibility into the meanings of our words. When
we consider the question whether the mental can be physically
reduced, it is not necessary—even if this could be done—to
begin with general deﬁnitions of mental and physical; rather,
the substantive question that we are asking, or should be ask-
ing, is whether or not things like belief, desire, emotion, and
consciousness are reducible to neural, biological, and physico-
chemical properties and processes. We can understand this
question and intelligently debate it, without subsuming these
items under some general conception of what it is for some-
thing to be mental. If “mental” is understood to imply “non-
physical,” it will then be an open question whether or not
belief, desire, sensation, perception, and the rest are mental in
that sense. And this question will replace the original question
of their physical reducibility. There is here a substantive ques-
tion which no verbal conventions or decisions should be al-
lowed to trivialize.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 160

--- Page 176 ---

In any case, our best remaining option is reductionism.
Does this mean that we are committed willy-nilly to reduc-
tionism? The answer is no: what we have established, if our
considerations have been generally correct, is a conditionalthe-
sis, “If mentality is to have a causal inﬂuence in the physical
domain—in fact, if it is to have any causal efﬁcacy at all—it
must be physically reducible.” I have not argued for reduction-
ism simpliciter; rather, I have argued that mental causation
requires reduction, and that anyone who believes in mental
causation must be prepared to endorse mind-body reduction.
We may call this “conditional reductionism.” It is important to
keep in mind that this is not reductionism tout court. More-
over, none of this says anything about the truth or plausibility
of reductionism. Whether or not the mental can be reduced to
a physical base is an independent question that must be settled
on its own merits. Those of us who believe in mental causation
should hope for a successful reduction. But again this is only a
wish; it doesn’t make reducibility real or reductionism true.
8
So we have ﬁnally come to a crossroads: Can we physically
reduce minds? Is mentality reducible in physical terms?
Reducing Minds
In raising this question about the reducibility of the mental, it
is important not to think that the mental as a totality must be
either all reducible or all irreducible. It may well be that parts
of the mental are reducible while the rest is not. It may be that
physicalism, or near enough 1 6 1
8. I have sometimes been described as a reductionist (for example, Robert
Van Gulick refers to me as a “hard core reductive materialist” in his survey ar-
ticle “Reduction, Emergence and Other Recent Options on the Mind-Body
Problem: A Philosophical Overview,” Journal of Consciousness Studies8 (2001):
1–34, p. 2. I am sure I have often written and spoken in confusing ways in the
past, but I hope this sets the record straight.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 161

--- Page 177 ---

1 6 2 chapter 6
the physicalist project can be carried through for various sub-
domains of the mental but not for all, and that physicalism can
be vindicated for much of the world but not for the whole
world. I will argue that this is in fact the case, namely that
much of the mental domain can be physicalized but not all of
it. More speciﬁcally, my view is that the qualitative characters
of conscious experience, what are now commonly called
“qualia,” are irreducible, but that we have reason to think that
the rest, or much of it anyway, is reducible. I am of course not
the ﬁrst, or only, person to hold a view like this; Joe Levine,
David Chalmers, and others have argued, quite plausibly in
my opinion, for just such a position.
9
Chalmers distinguishes between two classes of mental states,
those he calls “psychological” and those he calls “phenomenal.”
Psychological states are states that “play the right sort of 
causal role in the production of behavior,”
10 and include states
like belief, desire, memory, and perception. I will call them 
“intentional/cognitive properties.” Phenomenal states are states
with a qualitative character—or, to use a phrase popularized by
Thomas Nagel, states such that there is “something it is like”
to be in those states—like pain, itch, the visual experience of
yellow when you look at a ﬁeld of sunﬂowers, and the tactile sen-
sation you experience when you run your ﬁngers over a smooth
marble surface. On Chalmers’s view, intentional/cognitive prop-
erties are physically reducible, whereas phenomenal properties,
or “qualia,” resist reduction.
11
9. Joseph Levine, “On Leaving Out What It’s Like,” in Consciousness, ed.
Martin Davies and Glynn W. Humphreys (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993); David
Chalmers, The Conscious Mind(New York: Oxford University Press, 1996); see
especially ch. 3.
10. Chalmers, The Conscious Mind, p. 11.
11. Chalmers would put this in terms of reductive explanation, not reduc-
tion. However, his concept of reductive explanation closely corresponds to my
notion of reduction; on the functional model of reduction that I favor, reduc-
tive explanation is not separable from reduction. See chapter 4 for details.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 162

--- Page 178 ---

But what is it to “reduce” something? What needs to be
done to accomplish a physical reduction of something
mental?12 Consider the gene and how it has been reduced in
molecular biology. The concept of a gene is the concept of a
mechanism in an organism that encodes and transmits genetic
information. That, I believe, was indeed the concept that
Mendel, the founder of modern genetics, had in mind when he
spoke of “genetic factors.” Genetic factors were to be what-
ever mechanisms or processes in organisms were causally re-
sponsible for the transmission of heritable characteristics. In
short, the concept of a gene is deﬁned in terms of a causal
function, or causal role—in terms, that is, of the causal task
that must be performed by whatever it is that is to qualify as a
gene. As we will say, the concept of a gene is a “functional”
concept, and the property of being a gene is a functional prop-
erty deﬁned by a “job description.” A functional conception of
the gene deﬁnes the scientiﬁc research program: Identify the
mechanisms—say, in pea plants or fruit ﬂies or whatever—that
perform the task of transmitting heritable characteristics.
Research in molecular genetics has shown, we are told, that it
is DNA molecules that perform this task—they are the genes
we have been looking for. That is to say, the DNA molecules
are the “realizers” of the gene. Moreover, molecular genetics
provides us with an explanation of how DNA molecules man-
age to perform this complex causal work. When all this is in,
we can say that the gene has been physically reduced, and that
we now have a reductive explanation of how the process of
heredity works at the molecular level. Notice that while, as far
as we know, DNA molecules are the genes for terrestrial life,
there is no reason to presume that they are the only possible
physical mechanisms capable of performing the causal tasks as-
sociated with the concept of a gene. It might well be that in
certain extraterrestrial organisms these tasks are performed
physicalism, or near enough 1 6 3
12. Reduction was discussed earlier in greater detail; see chapters 1 and 4.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 163

--- Page 179 ---

1 6 4 chapter 6
not by DNA molecules but by molecules of another kind, say
XYZ; for them, XYZ molecules, not DNA molecules, would
be the genes. This sort of “multiple realization” must be ex-
pected, but the phenomenon of multiple realization, whether
actual or only nomologically possible, does not, as some
philosophers used to assume, represent an impediment to re-
duction or reductive explanation.
13
To summarize, then, reduction can be understood as con-
sisting of three steps: The ﬁrst is a conceptual step of inter-
preting, or reinterpreting, the property to be reduced as a
functional property, that is, in terms of the causal work it 
is supposed to perform. Once this has been done, scientiﬁc
work can begin in search of the “realizers” of the functional
property—that is, the mechanisms or properties that actually
perform the speciﬁed casual work—in the population of inter-
est to us. The third step consists in developing an explanation
at the lower, reductive level of how these mechanisms perform
the assigned causal work. When the ﬁrst step has been carried
out and the property targeted for reduction has been function-
alized, in an important sense the property has been shown to
be “reducible”—it is now a matter of scientiﬁc research to ﬁnd
the realizers. That is, if anything has the functionalized prop-
erty, it follows that it instantiates some lower-level physical
realizer, and it must in principle be possible for scientiﬁc in-
vestigation to identify it. Even if we have not identiﬁed the
actual realizer—perhaps we never will—it would make not
much difference philosophically: we know that there must be a
lower-level physical realizer, even if we don’t have a perspicu-
ous description of it in an underlying theory, and we know the
phenomenon involved to be reducible to its physical realizer,
whatever it is.This means that as far as the metaphysical
13. On this issue, see my “Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of
Reduction,” reprinted in Supervenience and Mind(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993), and Mind in a Physical World(Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1998).
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 164

--- Page 180 ---

situation is concerned the functional deﬁnability of a property is
the only issue that matters. That a property is functionalizable—
that is, it can be deﬁned in terms of causal role—is necessary
and sufﬁcient for functional reducibility. It is only when we
want to claim that the property has been reduced(for a given
system) that we need to have identiﬁed its physical realizer (for
that system).
Our question about reduction of minds, therefore, comes 
to this: Are mental properties functionalizable? Can they be de-
ﬁned or characterized in terms of their causal work? The answer,
as I have indicated, is yes and no. No for qualitative characters of
experience, or “qualia,” and yes, or probably yes, for the rest.
Why should we think that intentional/cognitive properties
like believing, desiring, and intending are functionally deﬁn-
able, in terms of the work they do? I do not believe that any-
one has produced full functional deﬁnitions for them, and it is
perhaps unlikely that we will have such deﬁnitions any time
soon. However, there are various considerations that indicate
that these properties are functional properties and should be
characterizable in terms of the causal work they do in the
overall economy of human behavior. Consider a population of
creatures, or systems, that are functionally and behaviorally
indistinguishable from us, and, in general, observationally in-
distinguishable from us. Exact indistinguishability or indis-
cernibility is unimportant; we may simply suppose that their
behaviors are largely similar to ours. They interact with their
physical environment, which we may suppose is pretty much
like ours, and interact with one another, much the same way
we do. In particular, they exhibit similar linguistic behavior; as
far as we can tell, they use language as we do for expressive
and communicative purposes. If all this is the case, it would be
incoherent to withhold states like belief, desire, knowledge,
action, and intention from these creatures. If, for example, we
grant that these creatures are language users, that alone would
physicalism, or near enough 1 6 5
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 165

--- Page 181 ---

1 6 6 chapter 6
be sufﬁcient to qualify them as creatures with thought, belief,
understanding, intentionality, meaning, and the rest. Assertion
is fundamental to speech, and a language user must be capable
of making assertions. When someone makes an assertion, he
expresses a belief. When someone asks a question or gives a
command, he is expressing a thought and a desire. A language
user is a cognitive being with full intentionality. And if we
grant agency to these creatures (how could we not, given that
they have belief and desire, and that their observable behavior
is like ours?), we will be compelled to see them as creatures with
desires, preferences, and intentions, and whose behavior and
actions can be evaluated according to the norms of rationality. 
It seems to me that we cannot avoid thinking of intentional/
cognitive states, like thought, belief, and desire, as super-
venient on behavior and other observable physical facts. We
must accept creatures that are behaviorally and functionally
like us as creatures with a mentality similar to ours—with be-
lief, desire, intentionality, will, and so on. This is one strong
reason for thinking that such mental properties are deﬁnable
and interpretable in terms of their roles in behavior causation.
Looking at the situation less globally, suppose that we are
told to create a device that perceives shapes and colors of
medium-sized objects presented to it (perception), processes
and stores the information so gained (belief, memory, knowl-
edge), and uses it to guide its actions (agency). I believe we
know how to go about designing and building machines with
such capacities; in fact, I believe simple machines with such
powers have already been manufactured. That is because these
states and processes, like perception, belief, memory, and
using information to guide action, are speciﬁable in terms of
their causal roles, or “job descriptions.” A creature, or system,
that has the capacity to do certain things in certain ways under
certain conditions is ipso facto something that perceives, re-
members, and appropriately behaves. I believe this is why
mental talk comes so naturally in describing the activities and
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 166

--- Page 182 ---

capacities of certain artifacts; we talk of a radar system “mis-
taking” a weather balloon for an approaching airliner, a chess-
playing computer as “trying to capture” an enemy pawn, and
even the humble supermarket automatic door opener as “see-
ing” or “knowing” that a customer is approaching. Mental talk
is even more natural and familiar for animals—not only dogs
and cats, but also those farther removed from us, say, mollusks
and insects and even amoebas. 
These are among the reasons for thinking that cognitive/
intentional mental properties are closely tied, conceptually and
semantically, to behavior. This does not mean that we are now,
or ever will be, in a position to produce neat functional deﬁni-
tions for complex and multifaceted capacities and properties
like belief, desire, and emotion. Logical behaviorists and func-
tionalists are widely thought to have failed to deliver such deﬁ-
nitions. But that is not crucial. I think the following two facts
are important in this context: First, partial functional analyses
of these properties in terms of their causal work, even if com-
plete analyses are not available, can get us going with the scien-
tiﬁc projects of searching for the underlying physical/ biologi-
cal mechanisms. We don’t have to know all the things that
belief does before we start work on uncovering its possible
neural mechanisms; a partial list will be enough to start us off.
The list will grow richer and more detailed, and this will pro-
vide directions for further scientiﬁc work. Second, the fact is
that even though a complete analysis of belief is not in and per-
haps never will be, we don’t think there is ultimately anything
beyond causal work vis-à-vis observable behavior that is in-
volved in belief. To be sure, beliefs can generate further beliefs;
in conjunction with desires, they can cause further desires; and
so on. However, these further mental states, too, must ulti-
mately be anchored, conceptually and epistemologically, in ob-
servable behavior. In looking for causal mechanisms that
ground beliefs, these causal connections with other mental
states must be accounted for and identiﬁed. This only means
physicalism, or near enough 1 6 7
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 167

--- Page 183 ---

1 6 8 chapter 6
that the identiﬁcation of the realizers of belief must go hand in
hand with the identiﬁcation of realizers of these other mental
states. And research results at the level of realizers may lead to
the reshaping of the higher-level mental concepts in various
ways. As far as intentional states are concerned, we are within
the domain of behavior and the physical mechanisms involved
in their production; they do not take us outside this domain.
14
Let us now turn to sensory states. Can we reduce qualitative
states of consciousness?15 Suppose we are given another engi-
neering project. This time, we are asked to design a machine
that responds to punctures and abrasions to its own skin (“tis-
sue damage”) by taking evasive maneuvers to separate itself
from the source of the damage (“escape behavior”); in addi-
tion, we are told to make this device experience pain when it
suffers damage to its skin. That is, we are asked to design into
the machine a “pain box” which, in addition to its causal work
of triggering an appropriate motor response when it suffers
damage, gives rise to a pain experience. We can, I am sure,
easily design into a machine a device that will serve as a causal
intermediary between the physical input and the behavior out-
put, but making it experience pain is a totally different affair. I
don’t think we even know where to begin. What we miss,
something that we need to know in order to design a pain-
experiencing machine, is a connection between the causal
work of the pain box and the arising of pain when the box is
activated. Why pain rather than itch or tickle? The machine
would try to ﬂee when its skin is punctured even if we had,
wittingly or unwittingly, designed itch or tickle into the box.
14. This can be considered a reply to Block and Stalnaker, who argue, in
“Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explanatory Gap,” that functional re-
duction is hopeless because functional deﬁnitions of psychological states are
not available and never will be. See chapter 4.
15. I have already argued for a negative answer (in chapter 1); here we will
brieﬂy go over the same ground but introduce a few new considerations,
though no new argument. 
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 168

--- Page 184 ---

What this shows is that we cannot distinguish pain from itch
or other sensations by their causal work; our strong intuition is
that even if pain is associated with scratching behavior (like
itch) or squirming behavior (like tickle), as long as it is felt as
pain—as long as it hurts—it is pain. Pain may be associated
with certain causal tasks, but these tasks do not deﬁne or con-
stitute pain. Pain as a sensory quale is not a functional property.
In general, qualia are not functional properties. As far as we
now know, the only way to create a system with conscious ex-
perience is to duplicate an appropriate animal or human brain.
Some philosophers have invoked the conceivability of “zom-
bies” to show that qualia are not logically supervenient on
physical/biological facts. Zombies are creatures that, though
physically (hence also functionally and behaviorally) indistin-
guishable from us, have no conscious experience. The zombie
hypothesis has been controversial;
16 less controversial is the
qualia inversion hypothesis, namely the possibility of creatures
like us, perhaps other human beings, whose quality space is in-
verted with respect to ours—who, for example, when they look
at mounds of lettuce, experience a color quale of the kind we
experience when we look at ripe tomatoes, and who, when they
look at ripe tomatoes, sense the color that we sense when we
look at lettuce. Such spectrum-inverted people would be as
physicalism, or near enough 1 6 9
16. In fact, I believe the zombie hypothesis is untenable; Chalmers-style
zombies are not conceptually possible. My reason is based on what Chalmers
calls “the paradox of phenomenal judgments.” Zombies are indistinguishable
from us in their speech behavior, and we must regard them as genuine lan-
guage users. Among the assertions they make are “My elbow hurts,” “This
mosquito bite is really itchy,” and the like; they make phenomenal assertions
of the sort we make, and do so under similar conditions. Moreover, their phe-
nomenal assertions are not easily isolated; they are integrated smoothly and
seamlessly with other parts of their discourse. To hold onto the zombie hy-
pothesis, we must apply a massive “error theory” to these creatures—namely
that all their (positive) phenomenal assertions are false. I believe this is inco-
herent. We must grant that the creatures have inner consciousness, although
the qualitative character of their consciousness remains undetermined.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 169

--- Page 185 ---

1 7 0 chapter 6
adept as we are in picking tomatoes out of mounds of lettuce
and obeying trafﬁc signals, and in general they would do just as
well as we do with any other tasks requiring discrimination of
red from green. If this is the case, color qualia do not supervene
on behavior; two perceivers who behave identically with
respect to input applied to their sensory receptors can have dif-
ferent sensory experiences. If that is true, qualia are not func-
tionally deﬁnable; they are not task-oriented properties. 
So qualia are not functionalizable, and hence physically irre-
ducible. Qualia, therefore, are the “mental residue” that can-
not be accommodated within the physical domain. This means
that global physicalism is untenable. It is not the case that all
phenomena of the world are physical phenomena; nor is it the
case that physical facts imply all the facts. There is a possible
world that is like this world in all respects except for the fact
that in that world qualia are distributed differently. I don’t
think we can show it to be otherwise.
Living with the Mental Residue
So what do we do with this mental residue? If we want to keep
mental causation, we should try to minimize its scope and im-
pact as far as possible. Can the antiphysicalist celebrate his vic-
tory? Hardly. For one thing, the mental residue encompasses
only qualitative states of consciousness, and does not touch the
intentional/cognitive domain. And it is in this domain that our
cognition and agency are situated. Second, ordinary sensory
concepts, like “pain,” “itch,” and the rest, have motivational/
behavioral aspects in addition to qualitative/sensory aspects,
and it is clear that the motivational/behavioral component of,
say, pain can be given a functional account. Third, we will do
well to remember that our conditional reductionism still stands:
If anything is to exercise causal powers in the physical domain,
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 170

--- Page 186 ---

it must be an element in the physical domain or be reducible
to it. This has two direct implications.
First, the mental residue, insofar as it resists physical reduc-
tion, remains epiphenomenal. It has no place in the causal
structure of the world and no role in its evolution and devel-
opment. Second, if we are right about the reducibility of
cognitive/intentional mental states, we have vindicated their
causal efﬁcacy and thereby largely, if not completely, solved
the problem of mental causation. Consider Fodor’s lament
over the possible loss of mental causal efﬁcacy:
if it isn’t literally true that my wanting is causally responsible
for my reaching, and my itching is causally responsible for my
scratching, and my believing is causally responsible for saying
...,  i f  none of that is literally true, then practically everything
I believe about anything is false and it’s the end of the world.
17
Three mental causes are on Fodor’s wish list: wanting, itching,
and believing. We have good news for Fodor—his world is not
coming to an end, at least not completely, because two items
on his list, wanting and believing, turn out to be in good
shape. Two out of three isn’t bad! But what can we tell Fodor
about itching? Should he care about itching, as much as about
wanting and believing? At least we can say this: If we can save
intentional/cognitive properties, we can save our status as cog-
nizers and agents. Saving itching isn’t required for saving cog-
nition or agency.
Actually, though, I believe we can go some distance toward
saving qualia, though not all the way. I have earlier noted how
two persons whose color spectra are inverted with respect to
each other can exhibit the same discriminative behavior. Brief
reﬂection shows that some important aspects of qualia are
physicalism, or near enough 1 7 1
17. Jerry Fodor, “Making Mind Matter More,” reprinted in A Theory of
Content and Other Essays(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), p. 156. First
published in 1989.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 171

--- Page 187 ---

1 7 2 chapter 6
quite directly manifestable in behavior and therefore function-
alizable. For analogy, consider trafﬁc lights: everywhere in the
world, red means stop, green means go, and yellow means
slow down. But that is only a convention, the result of a social
arrangement; we could have adopted a system according to
which red means go, green means slow down, and yellow
means stop, or any of the remaining combinations. That
would have made no difference to trafﬁc management. What
matters are the differences and similarities among colors, not
their intrinsic qualities. In fact, we could have chosen shapes
instead of colors, with circle meaning go, square meaning
stop, and so on. Discrimination is what matters; qualities dis-
criminated do not. I believe Moritz Schlick made the observa-
tion that what can be communicated about experiences is their
form, not their content. 
Suppose that we have already acknowledged that a given
perceiver can experience a range of qualia. When we present
to her a ripe tomato, we may not know, and may not care,
what the intrinsic quality of her visual experience is—what
color quale he is experiencing. Similarly, when we present to
her a bunch of spinach leaves, we may not know what quale
characterizes her visual experience. However, we can tell
whether her color quale of the tomato is the same as, or differ-
ent from, her color quale of the spinach leaves. When we next
present to her a head of lettuce, we can tell whether the quale
she is now experiencing is similar to, or different from, each of
the two color qualia she has just experienced. That is, the in-
trinsic qualities associated with qualia are, or may be, unde-
tectable, but differences and similarities between qualia, within
a single individual, are behaviorally detectable, and this opens
a way for their behavioral functionalization.
18
18. On these issues, see Sydney Shoemaker, “The Inverted Spectrum,”
Journal of Philosophy74 (1981): 357–81. What I am saying here, I believe, is in
line with Shoemaker’s view that although “absent qualia” are not possible,
qualia inversion is metaphysically possible.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 172

--- Page 188 ---

And intuitively that seems right. The fact that blue looks just
thisway to me, green looks thatway, and so on, should make 
no difference to the primary cognitive function of my visual
system—its function in the generation of information about
the physical environment of the sort that makes a difference to
my survival and ﬂourishing. Color-inverted persons, as long as
they have the capacity to make the same color discriminations,
should do as well as we do in learning about the world and cop-
ing with it. Intrinsic qualities of qualia are not functionalizable
and therefore are irreducible, and hence causally impotent.
They stay outside the physical domain, but they make no causal
difference and we won’t miss them. In contrast, certain impor-
tant relational facts about qualia, in particular their similarities
and differences, are detectable and functionalizable, and can
enjoy causal powers as full members of the physical world. But
there is a further question: Why are there such things as
qualia? Because we need them as place markers; without them
there can be no qualia differences or similarities. Without con-
tent, there can be no form, no structure. You may now ask:
Why are there just thesequalia and not other possible ones?
That remains a mystery; I do not believe that the present ap-
proach is capable of answering that question.
Where We Are at Last with 
the Mind-Body Problem
I feel that the position I have been describing here is a plausible
terminus for the mind-body debate. There are many issues that
need to be sorted out in more detail and with greater care 
and precision; among them are the functional reducibility of
cognitive/intentional states, the functionalizability of qualia
differences and similarities, whether qualia epiphenomenal-
ism is consistent with the assumed fact that the subject of
experiences is cognitively aware of them and is able to make
physicalism, or near enough 1 7 3
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 173

--- Page 189 ---

1 7 4 chapter 6
reports about them, and the question whether it is possible to
combine qualia epiphenomenalism with full causal efﬁcacy of
qualia similarities and differences. But in spite of the further
work required, I feel that the remaining work is for the most
part a mopping-up operation, and that the important outlines
of the position stand out with clarity and salience. 
So here is the position that has emerged. It begins by em-
bracing ontological physicalism. Taking mental causation seri-
ously, it also embraces conditional reductionism, the thesis that
only physically reducible mental properties can be causally efﬁ-
cacious. Are mental properties physically reducible? Yes and
no: intentional/cognitive properties are reducible, but qualita-
tive properties of consciousness, or “qualia,” are not. In saving
the causal efﬁcacy of the former, we are saving cognition and
agency. Moreover, we are not losing sensory experiences alto-
gether: qualia similarities and differences can be saved. What
we cannot save are their intrinsic qualities—the fact that yellow
looks like this, that ammonia smells like that, and so on. But, I
say, this isn’t losing much, and when we think about it, we
should have expected it all along. 
The position is, as we might say, a slightly defective
physicalism—physicalism manqué but not by much. I believe
that this is as much physicalism as we can have, and that there
is no credible alternative to physicalism as a general world-
view. Physicalism is not the whole truth, but it is the truth near
enough, and near enough should be good enough.
70572 CH06 GGS  1/10/05  1:16 PM  Page 174

--- Page 190 ---

/Rswasheferences
R
Alexander, Samuel. Space, Time and Deity, vol. 2 (London: Macmillan,
1927).
Anscombe, Elizabeth. Causality and Determination(Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1971). Reprinted in Causation, ed. Ernest
Sosa and Michael T ooley (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Baker, Lynne Rudder. Persons and Bodies: A Constitution View(Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Bickle, John. Psychoneural Reduction: The New Wave(Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1998).
Block, Ned. “Do Causal Powers Drain Away?” Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research67 (2003): 133–50.
Block, Ned, Owen Flanagan, and Güven Güzeldere, eds. The Nature
of Consciousness(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997).
Block, Ned, and Robert Stalnaker. “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism,
and the Explanatory Gap,” Philosophical Review108 (1999): 1–46.
Bontly, Thomas D. “The Supervenience Argument Generalizes,”
Philosophical Studies109 (2002): 75–96.
Broad, C. D. The Mind and Its Place in Nature(London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1925).
Bromberger, Sylvain. “Why-Questions,” in Mind and Cosmos, ed. Robert
Colodny (Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press, 1966).
Causey, Robert L. “Attribute-Identities in Microreductions,” Journal
of Philosophy69 (1972): 407–22.
Chalmers, David J. The Conscious Mind(Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996).
Chisholm, Roderick, M. Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edition (Prentice-
Hall, NJ: Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1977).
Churchland, Paul. The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul: A Philosoph-
ical Journey into the Brain(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).
70572 REF GGS  1/10/05  1:17 PM  Page 175

--- Page 191 ---

1 7 6 references
Cottingham, John, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch, eds. The
Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985).
Crick, Francis. The Astonishing Hypothesis(New York: Scribner, 1994). 
Crisp, Thomas M, and T ed A. Warﬁeld. “Kim’s Master Argument,”
Noûs35 (2001): 304–16.
Davidson, Donald. “Mental Events,” reprinted in his Essays on Actions
and Events(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1980).
First published in 1970.
Dennett, Daniel C. “Quining Qualia,” in Consciousness in Contempo-
rary Science, ed. A. J. Marcel and E. Bisiach (Oxford: Clarendon,
1988). Reprinted in Ned Block et al. 1997.
Faust, C. H., and T. H. Johnson, eds. Jonathan Edwards(New York:
American Book Co., 1935).
Feigl, Herbert. “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical,’” inMinnesota Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2 (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1958).
Fodor, Jerry A. “Special Sciences—or the Disunity of Science as a
Working Hypothesis,” Synthese27 (1974): 97–115.
———. “Making Mind Matter More,” in A Theory of Content and
Other Essays(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990).
Foster, John. “Psychophysical Causal Relations,” American Philosophi-
cal Quarterly5 (1968): 64–70.
———. The Immaterial Self(London: Routledge, 1991).
———. “A Brief Defense of the Cartesian View,” in Soul, Body, and Sur-
vival, ed. Kevin Corcoran (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001).
Garber, Daniel. “Understanding Interaction: What Descartes Should
Have T old Elisabeth,” in Descartes Embodied(Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001).
Gillett, Carl. “Does the Argument from Realization Generalize? Re-
sponses to Kim,” Southern Journal of Philosophy39 (2001): 79–98.
Grice, H. P. “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, supplementary vol. 35 (1961): 121–52.
Harman, Gilbert. “The Inference to the Best Explanation,” Philosoph-
ical Review74 (1966): 88–95.
Hasker, William. The Emergent Self(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1999).
Heil, John. From an Ontological Point of View(Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2003).
70572 REF GGS  1/10/05  1:17 PM  Page 176

--- Page 192 ---

Hill, Christopher. Sensations(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991).
Hill, Christopher, and Brian McLaughlin. “There Are Fewer Things
in Reality Than Are Dreamt of in Chalmers’ Philosophy,” Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Research59 (1999): 445–54.
Horgan, T erence. “Nonreductive Physicalism and the Explanatory
Autonomy of Psychology,” in Naturalism: A Critical Appraisal, ed.
Stephen J. Wagner and Richard Warner (Notre Dame, IN: Notre
Dame University Press, 1993).
Humphreys, Paul. “How Properties Emerge,” Philosophy of Science64
(1997): 53–70.
Huxley, T. H. Lessons in Elementary Physiology(London: The Macmillan
Co., 1866).
James, William. The Principles of Psychology(Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1981). First published in 1890.
Kenny, Anthony. Descartes(New York: Random House, 1968).
———, tr. and ed. Descartes’ Philosophical Letters(Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1963).
Kim, Jaegwon, “Causation, Nomic Subsumption, and the Concept of
Event,” Journal of Philosophy70 (1973): 217–36. Reprinted in Kim,
Supervenience and Mind.
———. “Epiphenomenal and Supervenient Causation,” Midwest Stud-
ies in Philosophy9 (1984): 257–70. Reprinted in Kim, Supervenience
and Mind.
———. “Mechanism, Purpose, and Explanatory Exclusion,” Philosoph-
ical Perspectives3 (1989): 77–108. Reprinted in Kim, Supervenience
and Mind.
———. “‘Downward Causation’ in Emergentism and Nonreductive
Materialism,” in Emergence or Reduction?, ed. Ansgar Beckermann,
Hans Flohr, and Jaegwon Kim (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992).
———. “Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction,”
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research52 (1992): 1–26. Reprinted
in Kim, Supervenience and Mind.
———. Supervenience and Mind(Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1993).
———. Mind in a Physical World(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1998)
———. “Making Sense of Emergence,” Philosophical Studies95
(1999): 3–36.
references 1 7 7
70572 REF GGS  1/10/05  1:17 PM  Page 177

--- Page 193 ---

1 7 8 references
———. “Hempel, Explanation, Metaphysics,” Philosophical Studies94
(1999): 1–20.
———. “The Layered Model: Metaphysical Considerations,” Philo-
sophical Explorations5 (2002): 2–20.
———. “Being Realistic about Emergence,” in The Emergence of
Emergence, ed. Paul Davies and Philip Clayton (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, forthcoming).
Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity(Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1980).
Latham, Noa. “Substance Physicalism,” in Physicalism and Its Discon-
tents, ed. Carl Gillett and Barry Loewer (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2001).
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. New Essays on Human Understanding, tr. and
ed. Peter Remnant and Jonathan Bennett (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981).
Levine, Joseph. “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly64 (1983): 354–61.
———. “On Leaving Out What It’s Like,” in Consciousness, ed. 
Martin Davies and Glyn W. Humphreys (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993).
———. Purple Haze(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Loar, Brian. “Phenomenal States,” Philosophical Perspectives4 (1990),
81–108.
Loeb, Louis E. From Descartes to Hume(Ithaca, NY, and London:
Cornell University Press, 1981).
Loewer, Barry. “Comments on Jaegwon Kim’s Mind in a Physical
World,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research65 (2002): 655–62.
Lowe, E. J. “Physical Causal Closure and the Invisibility of Mental
Causation,” in Physicalism and Mental Causation, ed. Sven Walter
and Heinz-Dieter Heckmann (Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic,
2003).
Marras, Ausonio. “Critical Notice of Mind in a Physical World,” Cana-
dian Journal of Philosophy30 (2000): 137–60.
McLaughlin, Brian P. “The Rise and Fall of British Emergentism,” in
Emergence or Reduction? ed. Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr, and
Jaegwon Kim (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992).
———. “Varieties of Supervenience,” in Supervenience: New Essays,
ed. Elias Savellos and Ümit Yalçin (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1995).
70572 REF GGS  1/10/05  1:17 PM  Page 178

--- Page 194 ---

———. “In Defense of New Wave Materialism: A Response to Hor-
gan and Tienson,” in Physicalism and Its Discontents, ed. Carl Gillett
and Barry Loewer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Melnyk, Andrew. A Physicalist Manifesto(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003).
Mendelson, Elliott. Introduction to Mathematical Logic(Princeton, NJ:
D. Van Nostrand, 1964).
Merricks, Trenton. Objects and Persons(Oxford: Clarendon, 2001).
Morgan, C. Lloyd. Emergent Evolution(London: Williams & 
Norgate, 1923).
Nagel, Ernest. The Structure of Science(New York: Harcourt, Brace
and World, 1961).
Nagel, Thomas. “What Is It Like T o Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review
83 (1974): 435–50.
Newman, David. “Emergence and Strange Attractors,” Philosophy of
Science63 (1996): 246–61.
Noordhof, Paul. “Micro-Based Properties and the Supervenience
Argument,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society99 (1999): 109–14.
O’Connor, Timothy. Persons and Causes(Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001).
———. “Causality, Mind, and Free Will,” in Soul, Body and Survival,
ed. Kevin Corcoran (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001).
O’Neill, Eileen. “Mind-Body Interaction and Metaphysical Consis-
tency: A Defense of Descartes,” Journal of the History of Philosophy
25 (1987): 227–45.
Oppenheim, Paul, and Hilary Putnam. “Unity of Science as a Work-
ing Hypothesis,” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958).
Papineau, David. “The Rise of Physicalism,” in Physicalism and Its
Discontents, ed. Carl Gillett and Barry Loewer (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001).
———. Thinking about Consciousness(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002).
Pavlov, Ivan. Experimental Psychology and Other Essays(New York:
Philosophical Library, 1957).
Pereboom, Derk. “Robust Nonreductive Physicalism,” Journal of Phi-
losophy99 (2002): 499–531.
Putnam, Hilary. “Minds and Machines,” in Mind, Language, and Real-
ity(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975).
references 1 7 9
70572 REF GGS  1/10/05  1:17 PM  Page 179

--- Page 195 ---

1 8 0 references
——. “The Nature of Mental States,” in Philosophical Papers, vol. 2 (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975). First published in 1967.
Rey, Georges. “A Question about Consciousness,” in Perspectives on
Mind, ed. Herbert Otto and James Tuedio (Norwell, MA: Kluwer,
1988). Reprinted in Ned Block, et al. 1997.
Rozemond, Marleen. Descartes’s Dualism(Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1998).
Rueger, Alexander. “Robust Supervenience and Emergence,” Philoso-
phy of Science67 (2000): 466–89.
———. “Physical Emergence, Diachronic and Synchronic,” Synthese
124 (2000): 297–322.
Schaffer, Jonathan. “Is There a Fundamental Level?” Noûs37 (2003):
498–517.
Searle, John R. “Consciousness, the Brain and the Connection Prin-
ciple: A Reply,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research55 (1995):
217–32.
Shoemaker, Sydney. “The Inverted Spectrum,” Journal of Philosophy
74 (1981): 357–81.
Silberstein, Michael. “Converging on Emergence,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies8 (2001): 62–98.
Smart, J. J. C. “Sensations and Brain Processes,” Philosophical Review
68 (1959): 141–56.
Sosa, Ernest. “Mind-Body Interaction and Supervenient Causation,”
Midwest Studies in Philosophy9 (1984): 271–81.
van Fraassen, Bas. Laws and Symmetry(Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1989).
Van Gulick, Robert. “Reduction, Emergence and Other Recent Op-
tions on the Mind-Body Problem: A Philosophical Overview,”
Journal of Consciousness Studies8 (2001): 1–34.
von Wright, G. H. Explanation and Understanding(Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell University Press, 1971).
Watson, Richard. The Downfall of Cartesianism 1673–1712(The
Hague, Holland: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966).
———. Cogito, Ergo Sum: The Life of René Descartes(Boston: David R.
Godine, 2002).
Williamson, Timothy. Knowledge and Its Limits(Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2000).
Wilson, Jessica. “Supervenience-Based Formulations of Physicalism,”
forthcoming in Noûs.
70572 REF GGS  1/10/05  1:17 PM  Page 180

--- Page 196 ---

/Iswashndex
R
agency, 9; and mental causation, 9,
171, 174
Alexander, Samuel, 13, 103, 159
anomalous monism, 125, 158
Anscombe, Elizabeth, 18
antireductionism, 152, 158. See also
physicalism, nonreductive
antireductionist consensus, 151
Aquinas, Thomas, 66
Aristotle, 66
Armstrong, David, 111n, 112, 158n
Baker, Lynne Rudder, 61n, 89n
Bickle, John, 56n
Block, Ned, 27n, 32, 46, 52, 54, 61,
123, 133, 138, 151, 168n; on
causal drainage argument, 57–59,
63–69; on explanatory argument,
139–48; on multiple composition,
57–59; and reductive explanation,
113–20
Bohm, David, 67
Bontly, Thomas D., 53n
bridge law, 22–23, 96, 98–100,
104–5, 107; requirement of, 23,
98–99. See also reduction, Nagel
(bridge-law)
Broad, C. D., 13–14, 103, 104, 104n
Bromberger, Sylvain, 139n
Burge, Tyler, 53n
causal argument for physicalism,
124–25, 146–48
causal closure, 15–16, 65, 67; and
dualism, 16; and physical
determinism, 16n; of the physical
domain, 15–16, 43, 49–50,
153–56; strong, 50–52
causal drainage argument, 57–69
causal exclusion, principle of, 17, 42;
problem of, 155
causal pairing problem. See pairing
problem
causal seepage, 57, 59–60
causation, and contiguity, 86;
downward, 40, 44; higher-level,
38, 53–54; horizontal, 36;
Humean, 83n, 86; mind-to-body
(mental-to-physical), 40, 152;
mind-to-mind (mental-to-mental),
40, 80–84; and pairing problem,
78–79; same-level, 40; and space,
85–88, 91; supervenient, 62; of
supervenient properties, 20
Causey, Robert L., 23n
Chalmers, David, 27n, 93, 97,
108–10, 112, 121, 162
Chisholm, Roderick M., 66
Churchland, Paul, 97n
cognitive/intentional property. 
See intentional/cognitive property
70572 INDEX GGS  1/10/05  1:18 PM  Page 181

--- Page 197 ---

1 8 2 index
consciousness, 10–13; “hard
problem” of, 94, 100, 121; and the
intrinsic good, 11; phenomenal/ 
qualitative, 11; problem of, 7,
11–12, 29. See also quale, qualia
constitution, 61
constraint (R), 105–8, 111, 115
correlation, versus identity, 136–38,
141–44; psychoneural, 124, 126,
129, 131, 137, 144; psychophysical,
127–29; scientiﬁc explanation of,
134; thesis of, 127–28, 131, 147;
correlation thesis, 127–28, 131, 147
Crick, Francis, 140
Crisp, Thomas, 47, 49–50
Davidson, Donald, 23, 55n, 125,
156, 158
Dennett, Daniel C., 11n
Descartes, René, 8–9, 16, 35, 71, 80,
83, 97, 156; and mental causation,
73–78, 86–88, 90–91
determination, 61; mereological, 36;
micro-macro, 36; vertical, 36
determination/generation, 17–18
determinative/generative exclusion,
17–18; principle of, 17
double (dual)-aspect theory, 8, 16,
127, 130
drainage argument. See causal
drainage argument
dualism, 71, 156; Cartesian, 71–73,
152; “folk,” 72; interactionist, 16,
71, 73, 156; ontological, 71;
property, 20–22, 151, 153,
155–59; substance, 8–9, 91–92,
124, 151, 156–58
Edwards, Jonathan, 36–39, 41n, 44,
63–64
Edwards’s dictum, 36, 39
eliminativism, 159–60
Elisabeth of Bohemia, Princess, 73
emergentism, 13–14, 35, 100, 103–4,
119, 124, 127, 130, 138, 140,
157–58; and mind-body
supervenience, 14
epiphenomenalism, 70, 87, 
123–24, 127, 130, 148, 159;
methodological, 11
epistemic gap, 94, 116. See also
explanatory gap
exclusion. See causal exclusion;
determinative/generative
exclusion
exclusion argument, 19–21, 32, 153,
158. See also supervenience
argument
explanation, 61, 104, 106, 130, 134;
of correlation by identity, 131,
134–36; deductive-nomological
model of, 106; as derivation,
134–35. See also explanatory
argument for physicalism;
inference to the best explanation;
reductive explanation
explanatory argument for
physicalism, 123–25; Block and 
Stalnaker’s, 139–46; Hill’s and
McLaughlin’s, 126–39
explanatory ascent, 107, 109, 110, 
113
explanatory gap, 93–94, 100, 116,
120–21, 138–40; and functional
reduction, 111–12, 118; and
identity reduction, 116–18,
138–40; and Nagel (bridge-law)
reduction, 99–100. See also
epistemic gap
Feigl, Herbert, 14, 121, 137, 139
Fodor, Jerry A., 23, 95–96, 158–59,
171
Foster, John, 77n, 79n
70572 INDEX GGS  1/10/05  1:18 PM  Page 182

--- Page 198 ---

functional property, 163–64, 169. 
See also functionalization
functional reduction. See reduction,
functional
functionalism, 14, 158; and mind-
body supervenience, 14
functionalization, functional
deﬁnition, 24, 101–2; partial, 167;
and reducibility, 164–65. See also
reduction, functional
Garber, Daniel, 73n, 75n, 77n
Gassendi, Pierre, 8n
generalization argument, 52–56
Gillett, Carl, 53n
Grice, H. P., 81n
Harman, Gilbert, 126, 128
Hasker, William, 70n
Heil, John, 53n
Hempel, Carl G., 111
Hill, Christopher, 27n, 113, 120,
123–24, 140, 145–46; and
explanatory argument, 
126–39
Horgan, Terence, 63n
Hume, David, 82, 86, 107
Humphreys, Paul, 158n
Huxley, T. H., 94, 94n.3, 100, 119
identity, 113, 115–16, 119, 127, 
131, 133; versus correlation,
136–38, 141–44; explainability 
of, 139n.31; and explanatory 
gap, 111–12, 118; explanatory
role of, 116, 117n, 132–33, 136,
141–42, 145–46; Kripkean, 113;
logical rules of, 135; psychoneural
(mind-body), 114, 119, 124, 131,
137–38, 140, 142, 144; and
reductive explanation, 114–15,
118; as rewrite rule in explanation,
115, 132–34, 145–46; scientiﬁc,
141. See also reduction, identity
immaterial mind (soul), 71–72, 84–85,
150–51, 156; and mind-to-mind
causation, 84; nonspatiality of, 76,
78, 80, 87; and space, 88–90. 
See alsosoul; mental substance
inference to the best explanation,
126–31, 141, 144, 146–47
intentional/cognitive property, 162,
171; and language user, 165–66;
reducibility of, 27, 165–68, 174;
as supervenient on behavior, 166;
saving causal efﬁcacy of, 171
Jackson, Frank, 27n
James, William, 12–13, 27–29, 72,
94, 100
Kenny, Anthony, 74–76, 87
Koch, Christof, 140
Kripke, Saul, 113
Latham, Noa, 92n
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 8, 16,
84, 88, 91
level, 52–53, 59, 104, 106; 
micro-macro, 36
Levine, Joseph, 27n, 93, 107n.20,
109–11, 121, 162
Lewis, David, 111n, 158n
Loar, Brian, 121–22
Loeb, Louis E., 75, 78, 83
Loewer, Barry, 38n
Lowe, E. J., 43n
macrocausation, 56; and microcausal
relation, 56
macro-micro supervenience, 40, 59
macroproperty, 36, 57
Malebranche, Nicolas, 8, 91
Marras, Ausonio, 59, 61
index 1 8 3
70572 INDEX GGS  1/10/05  1:18 PM  Page 183

--- Page 199 ---

1 8 4 index
materialism, nonreductive, 152, 158.
See also physicalism, nonreductive
McGinn, Colin, 27n
McLaughlin, Brian, 14n, 27n, 33n,
68n, 113, 120, 123–24, 140; and
explanatory argument, 126–39,
145–47
Melnyk, Andrew, 124n
Mendelson, Elliott, 135n
mental causation, 35, 38, 148, 153,
159; and consciousness, 29;
problem of, 7, 8–10, 15, 21–22,
29, 147, 156, 161; importance 
of, 9–10, 171; and mind-body
reduction, 22, 25–27, 29, 54–55,
159–61; and property dualism,
152–56, 158; saving, 9–10, 171–73;
and substance dualism, 8–9,
73–77, 78–85
mental irrealism, 159. See also
eliminativism
mental residue, 170–71
mental substance, 78, 150. See also
immaterial mind (soul)
Merricks, Trenton, 56n
micro-based property, 57–58, 60;
total, 59–60
microproperty, 37
mind-body dependence, 34, 38. 
See also supervenience, mind-body
mind-body dualism. See dualism
mind-body (brain) identity theory,
121, 123. See also physicalism,
type
mind-body problem, 7, 31, 121, 129,
142, 149, 152, 173
mind-body supervenience. See
supervenience
Morgan, C. Lloyd, 13, 103
multiple composition, 57–59;
argument from, 57–59; and
multiple realization, 58
multiple realizability, 24–25, 55, 129,
164; and irreducibility, 23, 25,
55–56, 96–97, 164
Nagel, Ernest, 22, 98, 99n
Nagel, Thomas, 31n, 94, 162
neural correlate, 26, 93
neural substrate, 26, 93
Newman, David, 158n
nomological dangler, 137
nonreductive physicalism. See
physicalism, nonreductive
Noordhof, Paul, 53n
O’Connor, Timothy, 70n, 92n
O’Neill, Eileen, 75n
Ockham’s razor, 125
ontological physicalism. See
physicalism, ontological
Oppenheim, Paul, 65n
overdetermination, the problem of,
32, 62; as an option, 46–52
pairing problem, 78–79, 85–86; 
and causal chain, 82–85; and
counterfactuals, 83–84; Hume’s
solution to, 86; and immaterial
(Cartesian) souls, 79–84; and
intentional relations, 80–81; and
mind-to-mind causation, 80, 84;
and space, 80, 82
pairing relation, 79; intentional
relation as, 81–82; spatial relation 
as, 79
Papineau, David, 43n, 125, 155n
Pavlov, Ivan, 12
Pereboom, Derk, 61n
phenomenal property, 162. See also
quale, qualia
physicalism, 9, 31, 35, 95, 149–50,
162, 174; causal argument for
124–25, 146–48; explanatory
70572 INDEX GGS  1/10/05  1:18 PM  Page 184

--- Page 200 ---

argument for 123–25; minimal,
13; nonreductive, 21, 33–35, 63,
64, 152, 158, 159; ontological, 71,
150, 156–57, 174; reductionist
(reductive), 14, 151–52, 158;
simplicity argument for 124–26,
146; slightly defective, 174; type,
14, 121, 123–24, 126, 128, 130,
142, 144, 147–48
prediction, 103, 111; inductive, 104;
theoretical, 104; and Kripkean
identity, 115
property dualism. See dualism,
property; physicalism,
nonreductive
psychology, and mental causation, 10
Putnam, Hilary, 23, 65n, 140, 158
quale, qualia, 11, 169, 172; difference
and similarity of, 172–74;
epiphenomenalism of, 174;
functionalizability of, 170, 172; as
intrinsic qualities, 172–74;
inversion of, 27, 129, 169–70; as
mental residue, 170; reducibility
of, 27, 162, 165, 168–70, 174;
saving, 171–74. See also epistemic
gap; explanatory gap
realizer, 24–27, 101–2, 163–64, 168;
versus correlate/substrate, 26
reduction, 34, 54–56, 67–68, 94–98,
106, 159, 163–65; conservative,
160; functional, 24–25, 27–29,
101–2, 112–13, 148, 164–65;
global, 25; via identity, 23–24, 
29, 113–120; local, 25; 
mind-body, 97, 159–60; Nagel 
(bridge-law), 22–25, 96, 98–102,
105; physical, 160, 163; and 
reductive explanation, 98, 112,
118–19
reductionism, 22, 55, 71, 95, 148,
159–61; conditional, 161, 170, 174;
mind-body, 22, 71; physical, 159
reductive explanation, 94–98, 103–8,
111–12, 114, 133; and reduction,
98, 112, 118–19; requirement
(constraint) on, 105–6
Rey, Georges, 11n
Rozemond, Marleen, 75n
Rueger, Alexander, 158n
Schaffer, Jonathan, 60n
Schlick, Moritz, 172
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 7
Searle, John R., 48n
Shoemaker, Sydney, 172n
Silberstein, Michael, 158n
simplicity argument for physicalism,
124–26, 146
Smart, J.J.C., 14, 34, 121–22, 125,
142; on identity versus
correlation, 136–39
Sosa, Ernest, 62n
soul, 71–73; impenetrability of, 90.
See also immaterial mind (soul);
mental substance
special science, 152; autonomy 
of, 152
spectrum inversion, 169. See also
quale, qualia, inversion of
Spinoza, Baruch, 8, 16
Stalnaker, Robert, 123, 133, 138,
168n; on explanatory argument,
139–48; on reductive explanation,
113–20
substance dualism. See dualism,
Cartesian; dualism, substance
supervenience argument, 19–21, 32,
39–44, 64–65, 153, 158;
fundamental idea of, 36–38; stage
1 of, 39–41; stage 2 of, 41–44. 
See also exclusion argument
index 1 8 5
70572 INDEX GGS  1/10/05  1:18 PM  Page 185

--- Page 201 ---

1 8 6 index
supervenience/exclusion 
argument, 13, 19–21. See also
supervenience argument;
exclusion argument
supervenience, mind-body, 
13–15, 33, 38, 93; macro-micro,
40, 59
trans-ordinal law, 104–5, 107. See also
bridge law
type identity thesis, 127–28, 131,
147. See also physicalism, type
union of mind and body, 77–78
van Fraassen, Bas, 131n
Van Gulick, Robert, 161n
von Wright, Georg, 152n
Warﬁeld, Ted, 47, 49–50
Watson, Richard A., 73, 73n.5
Williamson, Timothy, 128n
Wilson, Jessica, 35n
zombie, 27, 129, 169
70572 INDEX GGS  1/10/05  1:18 PM  Page 186
