=== PAGE 1 ===

Chapter 2
Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination
(1981)
William C. Wimsatt
Philosophy ought to imitate the successful sciences in its
methods, so far as to proceed only from tangible premises which
can be subjected to careful scrutiny, and to trust rather to the
multitude and variety of its arguments than to the
conclusiveness of any one. Its reasoning should not form a chain
which is no stronger than its weakest link, but a cable whose
ﬁbers may be so slender , provided they are sufﬁciently numerous
and intimately connected
Peirce [1868] 1936, p. 141
Our truth is the intersection of independent lies
Levins 1966, p. 423
The use of multiple means of determination to “triangulate” on the existence and
character of a common phenomenon, object, or result has had a long tradition in
science but has seldom been a matter of primary focus. As with many traditions, it
is traceable to Aristotle, who valued having multiple explanations of a phenomenon,
and it may also be involved in his distinction between special objects of sense and
common sensibles. It is implicit though not emphasized in the distinction between
primary and secondary qualities from Galileo onward. It is arguably one of sev-
eral conceptions involved in Whewell’s method of the “consilience of inductions”
(Laudan 1971) and is to be found in several places in Peirce.
Indeed, it is to be found widely among the writings of various scientists and
philosophers but, remarkably, seems almost invariably to be relegated to footnotes,
parenthetical remarks, or suggestive paragraphs that appear without warning and
From M. Brewer and B. Collins, eds., (1981); Scientiﬁc Inquiry in the Social Science s (a festschrift
for Donald T. Campbell), San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 123–162.
W.C. Wimsatt (B)
Department of Philosophy and Conceptual and Historical Studies of Science,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Center for Philosophy of Science, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA
e-mail: wwim@uchicago.edu
61L. Soler et al. (eds.), Characterizing the Robustness of Science , Boston Studies
in the Philosophy of Science 292, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2759-5_2,
C⃝ Springer Science+Business Media B.V . 2012


=== PAGE 2 ===

62 W.C. Wimsatt
vanish without further issue. While I will point to a number of different applications
of multiple determination which have surfaced in the literature, Donald Campbell
has done far more than anyone else to make multiple determination a central focus
of his work and to draw a variety of methodological, ontological, and epistemologi-
cal conclusions from its use (see Campbell 1958, 1966, 1969a, 1977; Campbell and
Fiske 1959; Cook and Campbell 1979). This theme is as important a contribution
as his work on evolutionary epistemology; indeed, it must be a major unappreci-
ated component of the latter: multiple determination, because of its implications
for increasing reliability, is a fundamental and universal feature of sophisticated
organic design and functional organization and can be expected wherever selection
processes are to be found.
Multiple determination—or robustness, as I will call it—is not limited in its rel-
evance to evolutionary contexts, however. Because of its multiplicity of uses, it is
implicit in a variety of criteria, problem-solving procedures, and cognitive heuris-
tics which have been widely used by scientists in different ﬁelds, and is rich in
still insufﬁciently studied methodological and philosophical implications. Some of
these I will discuss, some I will only mention, but each contains fruitful directions
for future research.
2.1 Common Features of Concepts of Robustness
The family of criteria and procedures which I seek to describe in their various uses
might be called robustness analysis. They all involve the following procedures:
1. To analyze a variety of independent derivation, identiﬁcation, or measurement
processes.
2. To look for and analyze things which are invariant over or identical in the
conclusions or results of these processes.
3. To determine the scope of the processes across which they are invariant and the
conditions on which their invariance depends.
4. To analyze and explain any relevant failures of invariance.
I will call things which are invariant under this analysis “robust,” extending the
usage of Levins ( 1966, p. 423), who ﬁrst introduced me to the term and idea and
who, after Campbell, has probably contributed most to its analysis (see Levins 1966,
1968).
These features are expressed in very general terms, as they must be to cover the
wide variety of different practices and procedures to which they apply. Thus, the
different processes in clause 1 and the invariances in clause 2 may refer in different
cases to any of the following:


=== PAGE 3 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 63
a. Using different sensory modalities to detect the same property or entity (in the
latter case by the detection of spatiotemporal boundaries which are relatively
invariant across different sensory modalities) (Campbell 1958, 1966).
b. Using different experimental procedures to verify the same empirical relation-
ships or generate the same phenomenon (Campbell and Fiske 1959).
c. Using different assumptions, models, or axiomatizations to derive the same result
or theorem (Feynman 1965;L e v i n s1966; Glymour 1980).
d. Using the agreement of different tests, scales, or indices for different traits, as
measured by different methods, in ordering a set of entities as a criterion for the
“validity” (or reality) of the constructed property (or “construct”) in terms of
which the orderings of entities agree (Cronbach and Meehl 1955; Campbell and
Fiske 1959).
e. Discovering invariance of a macrostate description, variable, law, or regularity
over different sets of microstate conditions, and also determining the microstate
conditions under which these invariances may fail to hold (Levins 1966, 1968;
Wimsatt 1976a, b, 1980b).
f. Using matches and mismatches between theoretical descriptions of the same
phenomenon or system at different levels of organization, together with Leibniz’s
law (basically that if two things are identical, no mismatches are allowed), to
generate new hypotheses and to modify and reﬁne the theories at one or more of
the levels (Wimsatt 1976a, b, 1979).
g. Using failures of invariance or matching in a through f above to calibrate or
recalibrate our measuring apparatus (for a, b or f) or tests (for d), or to establish
conditions (and limitations on them) under which the invariance holds or may
be expected to fail, and (for all of the above) to use this information to guide the
search for explanations as to why the invariances should hold or fail (Campbell
1966, 1969a; Wimsatt 1976a, b).
h. Using matches or mismatches in different determinations of the value of theoret-
ical parameters to test and conﬁrm or inﬁrm component hypotheses of a complex
theory (Glymour 1980) and, in a formally analogous manner, to test and localize
faults in integrated circuits.
One may ask whether any set of such diverse activities as would ﬁt all these items
and as exempliﬁed in the expanded discussion below are usefully combined under
the umbrella term robustness analysis. I believe that the answer must be yes, for
two reasons. First, all the variants and uses of robustness have a common theme in
the distinguishing of the real from the illusory; the reliable from the unreliable; the
objective from the subjective; the object of focus from artifacts of perspective; and,
in general, that which is regarded as ontologically and epistemologically trustworthy
and valuable from that which is unreliable, ungeneralizable, worthless, and ﬂeeting.
The variations of use of these procedures in different applications introduce different
variant tools or consequences which issue from this core theme and are explicable
in terms of it. Second, all these procedures require at least partial independence of


=== PAGE 4 ===

64 W.C. Wimsatt
the various processes across which invariance is shown. And each of them is subject
to a kind of systematic error leading to a kind of illusory robustness when we are
led, on less than deﬁnitive evidence, to presume independence and our presumption
turns out to be incorrect. Thus, a broad class of fallacious inferences in science can
be understood and analyzed as a kind of failure of robustness.
Nonetheless, the richness and variety of these procedures require that we go
beyond this general categorization to understand robustness. To understand fully
the variety of its applications and its central importance to scientiﬁc methodol-
ogy, detailed case studies of robustness analysis are required in each of the areas
of science and philosophy where it is used.
2.2 Robustness and the Structure of Theories
In the second of his popular lectures on the character of physical law, Feynman
(1965) distinguishes two approaches to the structure of physical theory: the Greek
and the Babylonian approaches. The Greek (or Euclidean) approach is the familiar
axiomatic one in which the fundamental principles of a science are taken as axioms,
from which the rest are derived as theorems. There is an established order of impor-
tance, of ontological or epistemological priority, from the axioms out to the farthest
theorems. The “Greek” theorist achieves postulational economy or simplicity by
making only a small number of assumptions and deriving the rest—often reducing
the assumptions, in the name of simplicity or elegance, to the minimal set neces-
sary to derive the given theorems. The “Babylonian,” in contrast, works with an
approach that is much less well ordered and sees a theoretical structure that is much
more richly connected:
So the ﬁrst thing we have to accept is that even in mathematics you can start in different
places. If all these various theorems are interconnected by reasoning there is no real way to
say “These are the most fundamental axioms,” because if you were told something different
instead you could also run the reasoning the other way. It is like a bridge with lots of
members, and it is overconnected; if pieces have dropped out you can reconnect it another
way. The mathematical tradition of today is to start with some particular ideas which are
chosen by some kind of convention to be axioms, and then to build up the structure from
there. What I have called the Babylonian idea is to say, “I happen to know this, and I happen
to know that, and maybe I know that; and I work everything out from there. Tomorrow I
may forget that this is true, but remember that something else is true, so I can reconstruct it
all again. I am never quite sure of where I am supposed to begin or where I am supposed to
end. I just remember enough all the time so that as the memory fades and some of the pieces
fall out I can put the thing back together again every day” (Feynman 1965, pp. 46–47).
This rich connectivity has several consequences for the theoretical structure and
its components. First, as Feynman ( 1965, pp. 54–55) observes, most of the funda-
mental laws turn out to be characterizable and derivable in a variety of different
ways from a variety of different assumptions: “One of the amazing characteristics
of nature is the variety of interpretational schemes which is possible. It turns out that
it is only possible because the laws are just so, special and delicate ... . If you mod-
ify the laws much you ﬁnd that you can only write them in fewer ways. I always


=== PAGE 5 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 65
ﬁnd that mysterious, and I do not understand the reason why it is that the correct
laws of physics seem to be expressible in such a tremendous variety of ways. They
seem to be able to get through several wickets at the same time.” Although Feynman
nowhere explicitly says so, his own choice of examples and other considerations that
will emerge later suggest another ordering principle for fundamentality among laws
of nature: The more fundamental laws will be those that are independently derivable
in a larger number of ways . I will return to this suggestion later.
Second, Feynman also observes that this multiple derivability of physical laws
has its advantages, for it makes the overall structure much less prone to collapse:
At present we believe that the laws of physics have to have the local character and also the
minimum principle, but we do not really know. If you have a structure that is only partly
accurate, and something is going to fail, then if you write it with just the right axioms maybe
only one axiom fails and the rest remain, you need only change one little thing. But if you
write it with another set of axioms they may all collapse, because they all lean on that one
thing that fails. We cannot tell ahead of time, without some intuition, which is the best way
to write it so that we can ﬁnd out the new situation. We must always keep all the alternative
ways of looking at a thing in our heads; so physicists do Babylonian mathematics, and pay
but little attention to the precise reasoning from ﬁxed axioms (Feynman 1965, p. 54).
This multiple derivability not only makes the overall structure more reliable but
also has an effect on its individual components. Those components of the structure
which are most insulated from change (and thus the most probable foci for conti-
nuity through scientiﬁc revolutions) are those laws which are most robust and, on
the above criterion, most fundamental. This criterion of fundamentality would thus
make it natural (though by no means inevitable) that the most fundamental laws
would be the least likely to change. Given that different degrees of robustness ought
to confer different degrees of stability, robustness ought to be a promising tool for
analyzing scientiﬁc change. Alternatively, the analysis of different degrees of change
in different parts of a scientiﬁc theory may afford a way of detecting or measuring
robustness.
I wish to elaborate and illustrate the force of Feynman’s remarks arguing for the
Babylonian rather than the Greek or Euclidean approach by some simple consider-
ations suggested by the statistical theory of reliability. (For an excellent review of
work in reliability theory, see Barlow and Proschan 1975, though no one has, to my
knowledge, applied it in this context.)
A major rationale for the traditional axiomatic view of science is to see it as an
attempt to make the structure of scientiﬁc theory as reliable as possible by starting
with, as axioms, the minimal number of assumptions which are as certain as possible
and operating on them with rules which are as certain as possible (deductive rules
which are truth preserving). In the attempt to secure high reliability, the focus is on
total elimination of error, not on recognizing that it will occur and on controlling its
effects: it is a structure in which, if no errors are introduced in the assumptions and
if no errors are made in choosing or in applying the rules, no errors will occur. No
effort is spared in the attempt to prevent these kinds of errors from occurring. But it
does not follow that this is the best structure for dealing with errors (for example, by
minimizing their effects or making them easier to ﬁnd) if they do occur. In fact, it is


=== PAGE 6 ===

66 W.C. Wimsatt
not. To see how well it handles errors that do occur, let us try to model the effect of
applying the Greek or Euclidean strategy to a real (error-prone) theory constructed
and manipulated by real (fallible) operators.
For simplicity, assume that any operation, be it choosing an assumption or apply-
ing a rule, has a small but ﬁnite probability of error, p
0. (In this discussion, I will
assume that the probability of error is constant across different components and
operations. Qualitatively similar results obtain when it is not.) Consider now the
deductive derivation of a theorem requiring m operations. If the probabilities of
failure in these operations are independent, then the probability of a successful
derivation is just the product of the probabilities of success, (1 – p0), at each opera-
tion. Where ps stands for the probability of failing at this complex task ( ps because
this is a serial task), then we have for the probability of success, (1 − ps):
(1 − ps) = (1 − p0)m
No matter how small p0 is, as long as it is ﬁnite, longer serial deductions (with
larger values of m) have monotonically decreasing probabilities of successful com-
pletion, approaching zero in the limit. Fallible thinkers should avoid long serial
chains of reasoning . Indeed, we see here that the common metaphor for deductive
reasoning as a chain is a poor one for evaluating probability of failure in reasoning.
Chains always fail at their weakest links, chains of reasoning only most probably so.
When a chain fails, the release in tension protects other parts of the chain. As
a result, failures in such a chain are not independent, since the occurrence of one
failure prevents other failures. In this model, however, we are assuming that fail-
ures are independent of each other, and we are talking about probability of failure
rather than actual failure. These differences result in a serious disanalogy with the
metaphor of the argument as a chain. A chain is only as strong as the weakest link,
but it is that strong; and one often hears this metaphor as a rule given for evaluating
the reliability of arguments (see, for example, the quote from C.S. Peirce that begins
this chapter). But a chain in which failure could occur at any point is always weaker
than (in that it has a higher probability of failure than) its weakest link, except if the
probability of failure everywhere else goes to zero. This happens when the weakest
link in a chain breaks, but not when one link in an argument fails.
Is there any corrective medicine for this cumulative effect on the probability of
error, in which small probabilities of error in even very reliable components cumu-
latively add up to almost inevitable failure? Happily there is. With independent
alternative ways of deriving a result, the result is always surer than its weakest
derivation. (Indeed, it is always surer than its strongest derivation.) This mode of
organization—with independent alternative modes of operation and success if any
one works—is parallel organization, with its probability of failure, p
p. Since failure
can occur if and only if each of the m independent alternatives fails (assume, again,
with identical probabilities p0):
pp = pm
0


=== PAGE 7 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 67
But p0 is presumably always less than 1; thus, for m > 1, pp is always
less than p0. Adding alternatives (or redundancy, as it is often called) always
increases reliability, as von Neumann ( 1956) argued in his classic paper on build-
ing reliable automata with unreliable components. Increasing reliability through
parallel organization is a fundamental principle of organic design and reliability
engineering generally. It works for theories as well as it does for polyploidy, pri-
mary metabolism, predator avoidance, microprocessor architecture, Apollo moon
shots, test construction, and the structure of juries.
Suppose we start, then, with a Babylonian (or Byzantine?) structure—a mul-
tiply connected, poorly ordered scientiﬁc theory having no principles singled out
as axioms, containing many different ways of getting to a given conclusion and,
because of its high degree of redundancy, relatively short paths to it (see Feynman
1965, p. 47)—and let it be redesigned by a Euclidean. In the name of elegance,
the Euclidean will look for a small number of relatively powerful assumptions from
which the rest may be derived. In so doing, he will eliminate redundant assumptions.
The net effects will be twofold: (1) With a smaller number of assumptions taken
as axioms, the mean number of steps in a derivation will increase, and can do so
exponentially. This increased length of seriation will decrease reliability along any
path to the conclusion. (2) Alternative or parallel ways of getting to a given conclu-
sion will be substantially decreased as redundant assumptions are removed, and this
decrease in “parallation” will also decrease the total reliability of the conclusion.
Each of these changes increases the unreliability of the structure, and both of
them operating together produce a cumulative effect—if errors are possible, as I
have supposed. Not only is the probability of failure of the structure greater after
it has been Euclideanized, but the consequences of failure become more severe:
with less redundancy, the failure of any given component assumption is likely to
inﬁrm a larger part of the structure. I will elaborate on this point shortly. It has not
been studied before now (but see Glymour 1980) because of the dominance of the
Cartesian Euclidean perspective and because of a key artifact of ﬁrst-order logic.
Formal models of theoretical structures characteristically start with the assump-
tion that the structures contain no inconsistencies. As a normative ideal, this is ﬁne;
but as a description of real scientiﬁc theories, it is inadequate. Most or all scien-
tiﬁc theories with which I am familiar contain paradoxes and inconsistencies, either
between theoretical assumptions or between assumptions and data in some combi-
nation. (Usually these could be resolved if one knew which of several eminently
plausible assumptions to give up, but each appears to have strong support; so the
assumptions—and the inconsistencies—remain.) This feature of scientiﬁc theories
has not until now (with the development of nonmonotonic logic) been modeled,
because of the fear of total collapse. In ﬁrst-order logic, anything whatsoever fol-
lows from a contradiction; so systems which contain contradictions are regarded as
useless.
But the total collapse suggested by ﬁrst-order logic (or by highly Euclidean struc-
tures with little redundancy) seems not to be a characteristic of scientiﬁc theories.
The thing that is remarkable about scientiﬁc theories is that the inconsistencies
are walled off and do not appear to affect the theory other than very locally—for


=== PAGE 8 ===

68 W.C. Wimsatt
things very close to and strongly dependent on one of the conﬂicting assumptions.
Robustness provides a possible explanation, perhaps the best explanation, for this
phenomenon.
When an inconsistency occurs, results which depend on one or more of the
contradictory assumptions are inﬁrmed. This infection is transitive; it passes to
things that depend on these results, and to their logical descendants, like a string
of dominoes—until we reach something that has independent support. The indepen-
dent support of an assumption sustains it, and the collapse propagates no further. If
all deductive or inferential paths leading from a contradiction pass through robust
results, the collapse is bounded within them, and the inconsistencies are walled off
from the rest of the network. For each robust result, one of its modes of support is
destroyed; but it has others, and therefore the collapse goes no further. Whether this
is the only mechanism by which this isolation of contradictions could be accom-
plished, I do not know, but it is a possible way, and scientiﬁc constructs do appear to
have the requisite robustness. (I am not aware that anyone has tried to formalize or to
simulate this, though Stuart A. Kauffman’s work on “forcing structures” in binary,
Boolean switching networks seems clearly relevant. See, for example, Kauffman
1971, where these models are developed and applied to gene control networks.)
2.3 Robustness, Testability, and the Nature of Theoretical Terms
Another area in which robustness is involved (and which is bound to see further
development) is Clark Glymour’s account of testing and evidential relations in the-
ories. Glymour argues systematically that parts of a theoretical structure can be and
are used to test other parts of the theory, and even themselves. (His name for this
is bootstrapping.) This testing requires the determination of values for quantities of
the theory in more than one way: “If the data are consistent with the theory, then
these different computations must agree [within a tolerable experimental error] in
the value they determine for the computed quantity; but if the data are inconsistent
with the theory, then different computations of the same quantity may give different
results. Further and more important, what quantities in a theory may be computed
from a given set of initial data depends both on the initial data and on the structure
of the theory” (Glymour 1980, p. 113).
Glymour argues later (pp. 139–140) that the different salience of evidence to dif-
ferent hypotheses of the theory requires the use of a variety of types of evidence to
test the different component hypotheses of the theory. Commenting on the possi-
bility that one could fail to locate the hypothesis whose incorrectness is producing
an erroneous determination of a quantity or, worse, mislocating the cause of the
error, he claims: “The only means available for guarding against such errors is to
have a variety of evidence so that as many hypotheses as possible are tested in as
many different ways as possible. What makes one way of testing relevantly different
from another is that the hypotheses used in one computation are different from the
hypotheses used in the other computation. Part of what makes one piece of evidence
relevantly different from another piece of evidence is that some test is possible from


=== PAGE 9 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 69
the ﬁrst that is not possible from the second, or that, in the two cases, there is some
difference in the precision of computed values of theoretical quantities” (Glymour
1980, p. 140).
A given set of data and the structure of the theory permit a test of a hypothesis (or
the conjunction of a group of hypotheses) if and only if they permit determination of
all of the values in the tested entity in such a way that contradictory determinations
of at least one of these values could result (in the sense that it is not analytically ruled
out). This requires more than one way of getting at that value (see Glymour 1980,
p. 307). To put it in the language of the present chapter, only robust hypotheses are
testable. Furthermore, a theory in which most components are multiply connected
is a theory whose faults are relatively precisely localizable. Not only do errors not
propagate far, but we can ﬁnd their source quickly and evaluate the damage and
what is required for an adequate replacement. If this sounds like a design policy for
an automobile, followed to facilitate easy diagnostic service and repair, I can say
only that there is no reason why our scientiﬁc theories should be less well designed
than our other artifacts.
The same issues arise in a different way in Campbell’s discussions (Campbell
and Fiske 1959; Campbell 1969a, b, 1977; Cook and Campbell 1979) of single or
deﬁnitional versus multiple operationalism. Deﬁnitional operationalism is the view
that philosophers know as operationalism, that the meaning of theoretical terms is
to be deﬁned in terms of the experimental operations used in measuring that theoret-
ical quantity. Multiple means of determining such a quantity represents a paradox
for this view—an impossibility, since the means is deﬁnitive of the quantity, and
multiple means multiple quantities. Campbell’s multiple operationalism is not oper-
ationalism at all in this sense but a more tolerant and eclectic empiricism, for he sees
the multiple operations as contingently associated with the thing measured. Being
contingently associated, they cannot have a deﬁnitional relation to it; consequently,
there is no barrier to accepting that one (robust) quantity has a number of different
operations to get at it, each too imperfect to have a deﬁnitional role but together
triangulating to give a more accurate and complete picture than would be possible
from any one of them alone.
Campbell’s attack on deﬁnitional operationalism springs naturally from his falli-
bilism and his critical realism. Both of these forbid a simple deﬁnitional connection
between theoretical constructs and measurement operations: “One of the great
weaknesses in deﬁnitional operationalism as a description of best scientiﬁc practice
was that it allowed no formal way of expressing the scientist’s prepotent aware-
ness of the imperfection of his measuring instruments and his prototypic activity
of improving them” (Campbell 1969a, p. 15). For a realist the connection between
any measurement and the thing measured involves an often long and indirect causal
chain, each link of which is affected and tuned by other theoretical parameters.
The aim is to make the result insensitive to or to control these causally relevant
but semantically irrelevant intermediate links: “What the scientist does in practice
is to design the instrument so as to minimize and compensate for the stronger of
these irrelevant forces. Thus, the galvanometer needle is as light as possible, to
minimize inertia. It is set on jeweled bearings to minimize friction. It may be used


=== PAGE 10 ===

70 W.C. Wimsatt
in a lead-shielded and degaussed room. Remote inﬂuences are neglected because
they dissipate at the rate of l/d2, and the weak and strong nuclear forces dissipate
even more rapidly. But these are practical minimizations, recognizable on theoretical
grounds as incomplete” ( 1969a, pp. 14–15).
The very same indirectness and fallibility of measurement that rule out
deﬁnitional links make it advantageous to use multiple links: “[W] e have only other
invalid measures against which to validate our tests; we have no ‘criterion’ to check
them against... . A theory of the interaction of two theoretical parameters must be
tested by imperfect exempliﬁcations of each ... . In this predicament, great inferen-
tial strength is added when each theoretical parameter is exempliﬁed in 2 or more
ways, each mode being as independent as possible of the other, as far as the theoret-
ically irrelevant components are concerned. This general program can be designated
multiple operationalism” (Campbell 1969a, p. 15).
Against all this, then, suppose one did have only one means of access to a given
quantity. Without another means of access, even if this means of access were not
made deﬁnitional, statements about the value of that variable would not be inde-
pendently testable. Effectively, they would be as if deﬁned by that means of access.
And since the variable was not connected to the theory in any other way, it would be
an unobservable, a ﬁfth wheel: anything it could do could be done more directly by
its operational variable. It is, then, in Margenau’s apt phrase, a peninsular concept
(Margenau 1950, p. 87), a bridge that leads to nowhere.
Philosophers often misleadingly lump this “peninsularity” and the existence of
extra axioms permitting multiple derivations together as redundancy. The implica-
tion is that one should be equally disapproving of both. Presumably, the focus on
error-free systems leads philosophers to regard partially identical paths (the paths
from a peninsular concept and from its “operational variable” to any consequence
accessible from either) and alternative independent paths (robustness, bootstrapping,
or triangulation) as equivalent—because they are seen as equally dispensable if one
is dealing with a system in which errors are impossible. But if errors are possible, the
latter kind of redundancy can increase the reliability of the conclusion; the former
cannot.
A similar interest in concepts with multiple connections and a disdain for the triv-
ially analytic, singly or poorly connected concept is to be found in Putnam’s ( 1962)
classic paper “The Analytic and the Synthetic.” Because theoretical deﬁnitions are
multiply connected law-cluster concepts, whose meaning is determined by this mul-
tiplicity of connections, Putnam rejects the view that such deﬁnitions are stipulative
or analytic. Though for Putnam it is theoretical connections, rather than operational
ones, which are important, he also emphasizes the importance of a multiplicity of
them: “Law-cluster concepts are constituted not by a bundle of properties as are the
typical general names [cluster concepts] like ‘man’ and ‘crow,’ but by a cluster of
laws which, as it were, determine the identity of the concept. The concept ‘energy’
is an excellent sample ... . It enters into a great many laws. It plays a great many
roles, and these laws and inference roles constitute its meaning collectively, not
individually. I want to suggest that most of the terms in highly developed sciences
are law-cluster concepts, and that one should always be suspicious of the claim that


=== PAGE 11 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 71
a principle whose subject term is a law-cluster concept is analytic. The reason that it
is difﬁcult to have an analytic relationship between law-cluster concepts is that ...
any one law can be abandoned without destroying the identity of the law-cluster
concept involved” (p. 379).
Statements that are analytic are so for Putnam because they are singly connected,
not multiply connected, and thus trivial: “Thus, it cannot ‘hurt’ if we decide always
to preserve the law ‘All bachelors are unmarried’ ... because bachelors are a kind
of synthetic class. They are a ‘natural kind’ in Mill’s sense. They are rather grouped
together by ignoring all aspects except a single legal one. One is simply not going
to ﬁnd any ... [other] laws about such a class” (p. 384).
Thus, the robustness of a concept or law—its multiple connectedness within
a theoretical structure and (through experimental procedures) to observational
results—has implications for a variety of issues connected with theory testing and
change, with the reliability and stability of laws and the component parts of a theory,
with the discovery and localization of error when they fail, the analytic-synthetic
distinction, and accounts of the meaning of theoretical concepts. But these issues
have focused on robustness in existing theoretical structures. It is also important in
discovery and in the generation of new theoretical structures.
2.4 Robustness, Redundancy, and Discovery
For the complex systems encountered in evolutionary biology and the social sci-
ences, it is often unclear what is fundamental or trustworthy. One is faced with a
wealth of partially conﬂicting, partially complementary models, regularities, con-
structs, and data sets with no clear set of priorities for which to trust and where
to start. In this case particularly, processes of validation often shade into processes
of discovery—since both involve a winnowing of the generalizable and the reliable
from the special and artifactual. Here too robustness can be of use, as Richard Levins
suggests in the passage which introduced me to the term:
Even the most ﬂexible models have artiﬁcial assumptions. There is always room for doubt
as to whether a result depends on the essentials of a model or on the details of the sim-
plifying assumptions. This problem does not arise in the more familiar models, such as
the geographical map, where we all know that contiguity on the map implies contiguity in
reality, relative distances on the map correspond to relative distances in reality, but color
is arbitrary and a microscopic view of the map would only show the ﬁbers of the paper on
which it is printed. But in the mathematical models of population biology, it is not always
obvious when we are using too high a magniﬁcation.
Therefore, we attempt to treat the same problem with several alternative models, each
with different simpliﬁcations, but with a common biological assumption. Then, if these
models, despite their different assumptions, lead to similar results we have what we can call
a robust theorem which is relatively free of the details of the model. Hence, our truth is the
inter section of independent lies (Levins 1966, p. 423).
Levins is here making heuristic use of the philosopher’s criterion of logical truth
as true in all possible worlds. He views robustness analysis as “sampling from a
space of possible models” (1968, p. 7). Since one cannot be sure that the sampled


=== PAGE 12 ===

72 W.C. Wimsatt
models are representative of the space, one gets no guarantee of logical truth but,
rather, a heuristic (fallible but effective) tool for discovering empirical truths which
are relatively free of the details of the various speciﬁc models.
Levins talks about the robustness of theorems or phenomena or consequences
of the models rather than about the robustness of the models themselves. This is
necessary, given his view that any single model makes a number of artifactual
(and therefore nonrobust) assumptions. A theory would presumably be a concep-
tual structure in which many or most of the fundamental theorems or axioms are
relatively robust, as is suggested by Levins’ statement (1968, p. 7) “A theory is a
cluster of models, together with their robust consequences.”
If a result is robust over a range of parameter values in a given model or over a
variety of models making different assumptions, this gives us some independence
of knowledge of the exact structure and parameter values of the system under study:
a prediction of this result will remain true under a variety of such conditions and
parameter values. This is particularly important in scientiﬁc areas where it may be
difﬁcult to determine the parameter values and conditions exactly.
Robust theorems can thus provide a more trustworthy basis for generalization of
the model or theory and also, through their independence of many exact details,
a sounder basis for predictions from it. Theory generalization is an important
component of scientiﬁc change, and thus of scientiﬁc discovery.
Just as robustness is a guide for discovering trustworthy results and generaliza-
tions of theory, and distinguishing them from artifacts of particular models, it helps
us to distinguish signal from noise in perception generally. Campbell has furnished
us with many examples of the role of robustness and pattern matching in visual per-
ception and its analogues, sonar and radar. In an early paper, he described how the
pattern and the redundancy in a randomly pulsed radar signal bounced off V enus
gave a new and more accurate measurement of the distance to that planet (Campbell
1966).
The later visual satellite pictures of Mars and its satellite Deimos have provided
an even more illuminating example, again described by Campbell ( 1977)i nt h e
unpublished William James Lectures (lecture 4, pp. 89 and 90). The now standard
procedures of image enhancement involve combining a number of images, in which
the noise, being random, averages out; but the signal, weak though usually present,
adds in intensity until it stands out. The implicit principle is the same one repre-
sented explicitly in von Neumann’s ( 1956) use of “majority organs” to ﬁlter out
error: the combination of parallel or redundant signals with a threshold, in which it
is assumed that the signal, being multiply represented, will usually exceed threshold
and be counted; and the noise, being random, usually will fall below threshold and
be lost. There is an art to designing the redundancy so as to pick up the signal and
to setting the threshold so as to lose the noise. It helps, of course, if one knows what
he is looking for. In this case of the television camera centered on Mars, Deimos
was a moving target and—never being twice in the same place to add appropriately
(as were the static features of Mars)—was consequently ﬁltered out as noise. But
since the scientists involved knew that Deimos was there, they were able to ﬁx the
image enhancement program to ﬁnd it. By changing the threshold (so that Deimos


=== PAGE 13 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 73
and some noise enter as—probably smeared—signal), changing the sampling rate
or the integration area (stopping Deimos at the effectively same place for two or
more times), or introducing the right kind of spatiotemporal correlation function (to
track Deimos’s periodic moves around Mars), could restore Deimos to the pictures
again. Different tunings of the noise ﬁlters and different redundancies in the signal
were exploited to bring static Mars and moving Deimos into clear focus.
We can see exactly analogous phenomena in vision if we look at a moving fan or
airplane propeller. We can look through it (ﬁltering it out as noise) to see something
behind it. Lowering our threshold, we can attend to the propeller disk as a colored
transparent (smeared) object. Cross-speciﬁc variation in ﬂickerfusion frequency
indicates different sampling rates, which are keyed to the adaptive requirements
of the organism (see Wimsatt 1980a, pp. 292–297). The various phenomena asso-
ciated with periodic stroboscopic illumination (apparent freezing and slow rotation
of a rapidly spinning object) involve detection of a lagged correlation. Here, too,
different tunings pick out different aspects of or entities in the environment. This
involves a use of different heuristics, a matter I will return to later.
I quoted Glymour earlier on the importance of getting the same answer for the
value of quantities computed in two different ways. What if these computations
or determinations do not agree? The result is not always disastrous; indeed, when
such mismatches happen in a sufﬁciently structured situation, they can be very
productive.
This situation could show that we were wrong in assuming that we were detect-
ing or determining the same quantity; but (as Campbell 1966, was the ﬁrst to point
out), if we assume that we are determining the same quantity but “through a glass
darkly,” the mismatch can provide an almost magical opportunity for discovery.
Given imperfect observations of a thing-we-know-not-what, using experimental
apparatus with biases-we-may-not-understand, we can achieve both a better under-
standing of the object (it must be, after all, that one thing whose properties can
produce these divergent results in these detectors) and of the experimental appara-
tus (which are, after all, these pieces that can be affected thus divergently by this
one thing).
The constraint producing the information here is the identiﬁcation of the object of
the two or more detectors. If two putatively identical things are indeed identical, then
any property of one must be a property of the other. We must resolve any apparent
differences either by giving up the identiﬁcation or locating the differences not in the
thing itself but in the interactions of the thing with different measuring instruments.
And this is where we learn about the measuring instruments. Having then acquired
a better knowledge of the biases of the measuring instruments, we are in a better
position not only to explain the differences but also, in the light of them, to give a
newly reﬁned estimate of the property of the thing itself. This procedure, a kind of
“means-end” analysis (Wimsatt 1976a;S i m o n1969) has enough structure to work
in any given case only because of the enormous amount of background knowledge
of the thing and the instruments which we bring to the situation. What we can learn
(in terms of localizing the source of the differences) is in direct proportion to what
we already know.


=== PAGE 14 ===

74 W.C. Wimsatt
This general strategy for using identiﬁcations has an important subcase in reduc-
tive explanation. I have argued extensively (Wimsatt 1976a, part II, 1976b, 1979)
that the main reason for the productiveness of reductive explanation is that interlevel
identiﬁcations immediately provide a wealth of new hypotheses: each property of
the entity as known at the lower level must be a property of it as known at the upper
level, and conversely; and usually very few of these properties from the other level
have been predicated of the common object. The implications of these predictions
usually have fertile consequences at both levels, and even where the match is not
exact, there is often enough structure in the situation to point to a revised identiﬁca-
tion, with the needed reﬁnements. This description characterizes well the history of
genetics, both in the period of the localization of the genes on chromosomes (1883–
1920) and in the ﬁnal identiﬁcation of DNA as the genetic material (1927–1953).
(For the earlier period see, for example, Allen 1979; Moore 1972; Darden 1974;
Wimsatt 1976a, part II. For the later period see Olby 1974.) Indeed, the overall
effect of these considerations is to suggest that the use of identities in a structured
situation for the detection of error may be the most powerful heuristic known and
certainly one of the most effective in generating scientiﬁc hypotheses.
Also signiﬁcant in the connection between robustness and discovery is
Campbell’s ( 1977) suggestion that things with greater entitativity (things whose
boundaries are more robust) ought to be learned earlier. He cites suggestive support
from language development for this thesis, which Quine’s ( 1960) views also tend to
support. I suspect that robustness could prove to be an important tool in analyzing
not only what is discovered but also the order in which things are discovered.
There is some evidence from work with children (Omanson 1980a, b) that com-
ponents of narratives which are central to the narrative, in that they are integrated
into its causal and its purposive or intentional structure, are most likely to be remem-
bered and least likely to be abstracted out in summaries of the story. This observation
is suggestively related both to Feynman’s ( 1965, p. 47) remark quoted above, relat-
ing robustness to forgetting relationships in a multiply connected theory, and to
Simon’s (1969) concept of a blackboard work space, which is maintained between
successive attempts to solve a problem and in which the structure of the problem
representation and goal tree may be subtly changed through differential forget-
ting. These suggest other ways in which robustness could affect discovery processes
through differential effects on learning and forgetting.
2.5 Robustness, Objectiﬁcation, and Realism
Robustness is widely used as a criterion for the reality or trustworthiness of the thing
which is said to be robust. The boundaries of an ordinary object, such as a table, as
detected in different sensory modalities (visually, tactually, aurally, orally), roughly
coincide, making them robust; and this is ultimately the primary reason why we
regard perception of the object as veridical rather than illusory (see Campbell 1958,
1966). It is a rare illusion indeed which could systematically affect all of our senses
in this consistent manner. (Drug induced hallucinations and dreams may involve


=== PAGE 15 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 75
multimodal experience but fail to be consistent through time for a given subject, or
across observers, thus failing at a higher level to show appropriate robustness.)
Our concept of an object is of something which exempliﬁes a multiplicity of
properties within its boundaries, many of which change as we move across its
boundary. A one-dimensional object is a contradiction in terms and usually turns
out to be a disguised deﬁnition—a legal or theoretical ﬁction. In appealing to the
robustness of boundaries as a criterion for objecthood, we are appealing to this mul-
tiplicity of properties (different properties detected in different ways) and thus to a
time-honored philosophical notion of objecthood.
Campbell ( 1958) has proposed the use of the coincidence of boundaries under
different means of detection as a methodological criterion for recognizing entities
such as social groups. For example, in a study of factors affecting the reproductive
cycles of women in college dormitories, McClintock ( 1971, and in conversation)
found that the initially randomly timed and different-length cycles of 135 women
after several months became synchronized into 17 groups, each oscillating syn-
chronously, in phase and with a common period. The members of these groups
turned out to be those who spent most time together, as determined by sociolog-
ical methods. After the onset of synchrony, group membership of an individual
could be determined either from information about her reproductive cycle or from
a sociogram representing her frequency of social interaction with other individu-
als. These groups are thus multiply detectable. This illustrates the point that there is
nothing sacred about using perceptual criteria in individuating entities. The products
of any scientiﬁc detection procedure, including procedures drawn from different
sciences, can do as well, as Campbell suggests: “In the diagnosis of middle-sized
physical entities, the boundaries of the entity are multiply conﬁrmed, with many
if not all of the diagnostic procedures conﬁrming each other. For the more ‘real’
entities, the number of possible ways of conﬁrming the boundaries is probably
unlimited, and the more our knowledge expands, the more diagnostic means we
have available. ‘Illusions’ occur when conﬁrmation is attempted and found lacking,
when boundaries diagnosed by one means fail to show up by other expected checks”
(1958, pp. 23–24).
Illusions can arise in connection with robustness in a variety of ways. Campbell’s
remark points to one important way: Where expectations are derived from one
boundary, or even more, the coincidence of several boundaries leads us to pre-
dict, assume, or expect that other relevant individuating boundaries will coincide.
Perhaps most common, given the reductionism common today, are situations in
which the relevant system boundary is in fact far more inclusive than one is led
to expect from the coincidence of a number of boundaries individuating an object
at a lower level. Such functional localization fallacies are found in neurophysiol-
ogy, in genetics, in evolutionary biology (with the hegemony of the selﬁsh gene
at the expense of the individual or the group; see Wimsatt 1980b), in psychology,
and (where it is a fallacy) with methodological individualism in the social sciences.
In all these cases the primary object of analysis—be it a gene, a neuron, a neural
tract, or an individual—may well be robust, but its high degree of entitativity leads
us to hang too many boundaries and explanations on it. Where this focal entity


=== PAGE 16 ===

76 W.C. Wimsatt
is at a lower level, reductionism and robustness conspire to lead us to regard the
higher-level systems as epiphenomenal. Another kind of illusion—the illusion that
an entity is robust—can occur when the various means of detection supposed to be
independent are not in fact. (This will be discussed further in the ﬁnal section of
this chapter.) Another kind of illusion or paradox arises particularly for function-
ally organized systems. This illusion occurs when a system has robust boundaries,
but the different criteria used to decompose it into parts produce radically differ-
ent boundaries. When the parts have little entitativity compared to the system, the
holist’s war cry (that the whole is more than the sum of the parts) will have a
greater appeal. Elsewhere (Wimsatt 1974), I have explored this kind of case and its
consequences for the temptation of antireductionism, holism, or, in extreme cases,
vitalisms or ontological dualisms.
Robustness is a criterion for the reality of entities, but it also has played and
can play an important role in the analysis of properties. Interestingly, the distinction
between primary and secondary qualities, which had a central role in the philoso-
phy of Galileo, Descartes, and Locke, can be made in terms of robustness. Primary
qualities—such as shape, ﬁgure, and size—are detectable in more than one sen-
sory modality. Secondary qualities—such as color, taste, and sound—are detectable
through only one sense. I think it is no accident that seventeenth-century philoso-
phers chose to regard primary qualities as the only things that were “out there”—in
objects; their cross-modal detectability seemed to rule out their being products of
sensory interaction with the world. By contrast the limitation of the secondary qual-
ities to a single sensory modality seemed naturally to suggest that they were “in
us,” or subjective. Whatever the merits of the further seventeenth-century view that
the secondary qualities were to be explained in terms of the interaction of a per-
ceiver with a world of objects with primary qualities, this explanation represents
an instance of an explanatory principle which is widely found in science (though
seldom if ever explicitly recognized): the explanation of that which is not robust in
terms of that which is robust . (For other examples see Wimsatt 1976a, pp. 243–249;
Feynman 1965).
Paralleling the way in which Levins’ use of robustness differs from Feynman’s,
robustness, or the lack of it, has also been used in contexts where we are unsure
about the status of purported properties, to argue for their veridicality or artifactu-
ality, and thus to discover the properties in terms of which we should construct our
theories. This is the proposal of the now classic and widely used methodological
paper of Campbell and Fiske ( 1959). Their convergent validity is a form of robust-
ness, and their criterion of discriminant validity can be regarded as an attempt to
guarantee that the invariance across test methods and traits is not due to their insen-
sitivity to the variables under study. Thus, method bias, a common cause of failures
of discriminant validity, is a kind of failure of the requirement for robustness that
the different means of detection used are actually independent, in this case because
the method they share is the origin of the correlations among traits.
Campbell and Fiske point out that very few theoretical constructs (proposed
theoretical properties or entities) in the social sciences have signiﬁcant degrees of
convergent and discriminant validity, and they argue that this is a major difference


=== PAGE 17 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 77
between the social and natural or biological sciences—a difference which generates
many of the problems of the social sciences. (For a series of essays which in effect
claim that personality variables are highly context dependent and thus have very
little or no robustness, see Shweder 1979a, b, 1980.)
While the natural and biological sciences have many problems where similar
complaints could be made (the importance of interaction effects and context depen-
dence is a key indicator of such problems), scientists in these areas have been
fortunate in having at least a large number of cases where the systems, objects, and
properties they study can be effectively isolated and localized, so that interactions
and contexts can be ignored.
2.6 Robustness and Levels of Organization
Because of their multiplicity of connections and applicable descriptions, robust
properties or entities tend to be (1) more easily detectable, (2) less subject to illusion
or artifact, (3) more ex planatorily fruitful , and (4) predictively richer than nonro-
bust properties or entities. With this set of properties, it should be small wonder that
we use robustness as a criterion for reality. It should also not be surprising that—
since we view perception (as evolutionary epistemologists do) as an efﬁcient tool
for gathering information about the world—robustness should ﬁgure centrally in
our analysis of perceptual hypotheses and heuristics (in Section 2.4 and in Section
2.7). Finally, since ready detectability, relative insensitivity to illusion or artifact,
and explanatory and predictive fruitfulness are desirable properties for the compo-
nents of scientiﬁc theories, we should not be surprised to discover that robustness
is important in the discovery and description of phenomena (again, see Section 2.4)
and in analyzing the structure of scientiﬁc theories (see Section 2.2).
One of the most ubiquitous phenomena of nature is its tendency to come in levels.
If the aim of science, to follow Plato, is to cut up nature at its joints, then these lev-
els of organization must be its major vertebrae. They have become so major, indeed,
that our theories tend to follow these levels, and the language of our theories comes
in strata. This has led many linguistically inclined philosophers to forgo talk of
nature at all, and to formulate problems—for example, problems of reduction—in
terms of “analyzing the relation between theoretical vocabularies at different lev-
els.” But our language, as Campbell ( 1974) would argue, is just another (albeit
very important) tool in our struggle to analyze and to adapt to nature. In an ear-
lier paper (Wimsatt 1976a, part III), I applied Campbell’s criteria for entiﬁcation to
argue that entities at different levels of organization tend to be multiply connected
in terms of their causal relations, primarily with other entities at their own level,
and that they, and the levels they comprise, are highly robust. As a result, there are
good explanatory reasons for treating different levels of organization as dynami-
cally, ontologically, and epistemologically autonomous. There is no conﬂict here
with the aims of good reductionistic science: there is a great deal to be learned about
upper-level phenomena at lower levels of organization, but upper-level entities are


=== PAGE 18 ===

78 W.C. Wimsatt
not “analyzed away” in the process, because they remain robustly connected with
other upper level entities, and their behavior is explained by upper-level variables.
To see how this is so, we need another concept—that of the sufﬁcient parameter ,
introduced by Levins ( 1966, pp. 428 and 429):
It is an essential ingredient in the concept of levels of phenomena that there exists a set of
what, by analogy with the sufﬁcient statistic, we can call sufﬁcient parameters deﬁned on
ag i v e nl e v e l... which are very much fewer than the number of parameters on the lower
level and which among them contain most of the important information about events on
that level.
The sufﬁcient parameters may arise from the combination of results of more limited
studies. In our robust theorem on niche breadth we found that temporal variation, patch-
iness of the environment, productivity of the habitat, and mode of hunting could all have
similar effects and that they did this by way of their contribution to the uncertainty of the
environment. Thus uncertainty emerges as a sufﬁcient parameter.
The sufﬁcient parameter is a many-to-one transformation of lower-level phenomena.
Therein lies its power and utility, but also a new source of imprecision. The many-to-one
nature of “uncertainty” prevents us from going backwards. If either temporal variation or
patchiness or low productivity leads to uncertainty, the consequences of uncertainty alone
cannot tell us whether the environment is variable, or patchy, or unproductive. Therefore,
we have lost information.
A sufﬁcient parameter is thus a parameter, a variable, or an index which, either for
most purposes or merely for the purposes at hand, captures the effect of signiﬁcant
variations in lower-level or less abstract variables (usually only for certain ranges of
the values of these variables) and can thus he substituted for them in the attempt to
build simpler models of the upper-level phenomena.
Levins claims that this notion is a natural consequence of the concept of levels of
phenomena, and this is so, though it may relate to degree of abstraction as well as
to degree of aggregation. (The argument I will give here applies only to levels gen-
erated by aggregation of lower-level entities to form upper-level ones.) Upper-level
variables, which give a more “coarse-grained” description of the system, are much
smaller in number than the lower-level variables necessary to describe the same
system. Thus, there must be, for any given degree of resolution between distin-
guishable state descriptions, far fewer distinguishable upper-level state descriptions
than lower-level ones. The smaller number of distinguishable upper-level states
entails that for any given degree of resolution, there must be many-one mappings
between at least some lower-level and upper-level state descriptions with many
lower-level descriptions corresponding to a single upper-level description. But then,
those upper-level state descriptions with multiple lower-level state descriptions are
robust over changes from one of these lower-level descriptions to another in its set.
Furthermore, the stability of (and possibility of continuous change in) upper-level
phenomena (remaining in the same macrostate or changing by moving to neighbor-
ing states) places constraints on the possible mappings between lower-level and
upper-level states: in the vast majority of cases neighboring microstates must map
without discontinuity into the same or neighboring macrostates; and, indeed, most
local microstate changes will have no detectable macrolevel effects. This fact gives
upper-level phenomena and laws a certain insulation from (through their invariance


=== PAGE 19 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 79
over: robustness again!) lower-level changes and generates a kind of explanatory
and dynamic (causal) autonomy of the upper-level phenomena and processes, which
I have argued for elsewhere (Wimsatt 1976a, pp. 249–251, 1976b).
If one takes the view that causation is to be characterized in terms of manipu-
lability (see, for example, Gasking 1955; Cook and Campbell 1979), the fact that
the vast majority of manipulations at the microlevel do not make a difference at
the macrolevel means that macrolevel variables are almost always more causally
efﬁcacious in making macrolevel changes than microlevel variables. This gives
explanatory and dynamic autonomy of the upper-level entities, phenomena, laws,
and relations, within a view of explanation which is sensitive to problems of com-
putational complexity and the costs and beneﬁts we face in offering explanations.
As a result, it comes much closer than the traditional hypotheticodeductive view to
being able to account for whether we explain a phenomenon at one level and when
we choose to go instead to a higher or lower level for its explanation (see Wimsatt
1976a, part III, and 1976b, particularly sections 4, 5, 6, and the appendix.)
The many-one mappings between lower- and upper-level state descriptions men-
tioned above are consistent with correspondences between types of entities at lower
and upper levels but do not entail them. There may be only token-token mappings
(piece-meal mappings between instances of concepts, without any general mappings
between concepts), resulting in the upper-level properties being supervenient on
rather than reducible to lower-level properties (Kim 1978; Rosenberg 1978). The
main difference between Levins’ notion of a sufﬁcient parameter and the notion
of supervenience is that the characterization of supervenience is embedded in an
assumed apocalyptically complete and correct description of the lower and upper
levels. Levins makes no such assumption and deﬁnes the sufﬁcient parameter in
terms of the imperfect and incomplete knowledge that we actually have of the
systems we study. It is a broader and less demanding notion, involving a relation
which is inexact, approximate, and admits of both unsystematic exceptions (requir-
ing a ceteris paribus qualiﬁer) and systematic ones (which render the relationship
conditional).
Supervenience could be important for an omniscient Laplacean demon but not for
real, fallible, and limited scientists. The notion of supervenience could be regarded
as a kind of ideal limiting case of a sufﬁcient parameter as we come to know more
and more about the system, but it is one which is seldom if ever found in the models
of science. The concept of a sufﬁcient parameter, by contrast, has many instances
in science. It is central to the analysis of reductive explanation (Wimsatt 1976a, b,
pp. 685–689, 1979) and has other uses as well (Wimsatt 1980a, section 4).
2.7 Heuristics and Robustness
Much or even most of the work in philosophy of science today which is not closely
tied to speciﬁc historical or current scientiﬁc case studies embodies a metaphysical
stance which, in effect, assumes that the scientist is an omniscient and computation-
ally omnipotent Laplacean demon. Thus, for example, discussions of reductionism


=== PAGE 20 ===

80 W.C. Wimsatt
are full of talk of “in principle analyzability” or “in principle deducibility,” where
the force of the “in principle” claim is held to be something like “If we knew a
total description of the system at the lower level, and all the lower-level laws, a
sufﬁciently complex computer could generate the analysis of all the upper-level
terms and laws and predict any upper-level phenomenon.” Parallel kinds of assump-
tions of omniscience and computational omnipotence are found in rational decision
theory, discussions of Bayesian epistemology, automata theory and algorithmic
procedures in linguistics and the philosophy of mind, and the reductionist and
foundationalist views of virtually all the major ﬁgures of twentieth-century logical
empiricism. It seems almost to be a corollary to a deductivist approach to problems
in philosophy of science (see Wimsatt 1979) and probably derives ultimately from
the Cartesian vision criticized earlier in this chapter.
I have already written at some length attacking this view and its application to
the problem of reduction in science (see Wimsatt 1974, 1976a, pp. 219–237, 1976b,
1979, 1980b, section 3; and also Boyd 1972). The gist of this attack is threefold:
(1) On the “Laplacean demon” interpretation of “in principle” claims, we have no
way of evaluating their warrant, at least in science. (This is to be distinguished
from cases in mathematics or automata theory, where “in principle” claims can be
explicated in terms of the notion of an effective procedure.) (2) We are in any case
not Laplacean demons, and a philosophy of science which could have normative
force only for Laplacean demons thus gives those of us who do not meet these
demanding speciﬁcations only counterfactual guidance. That is, it is of no real use
to practicing scientists and, more strongly, suggests methods and viewpoints which
are less advantageous than those derived from a more realistic view of the scientist
as problem solver (see Wimsatt 1979). (3) An alternative approach, which assumes
more modest capacities of practicing scientists, does provide real guidance, better
ﬁts with actual scientiﬁc practice, and even (for reductive explanations) provides a
plausible and attractive alternative interpretation for the “in principle” talk which so
many philosophers and scientists use frequently (see Wimsatt 1976a, part II; 1976b,
pp. 697–701).
An essential and pervasive feature of this more modest alternative view is the
replacement of the vision of an ideal scientist as a computationally omnipotent
algorithmizer with one in which the scientist as decision maker, while still highly
idealized, must consider the size of computations and the cost of data collection, and
in other very general ways must be subject to considerations of efﬁciency, practical
efﬁcacy, and cost-beneﬁt constraints. This picture has been elaborated over the last
twenty-ﬁve years by Herbert Simon and his coworkers, and their ideal is “satisﬁcing
man,” whose rationality is bounded, by contrast with the unbounded omniscience
and computational omnipotence of the “economic man” of rational decision theory
(see Simon 1955, reprinted as chapter 1 of Simon 1979; see also Simon 1969, 1973).
Campbell’s brand of fallibilism and critical realism from an evolutionary perspective
also place him squarely in this tradition.
A key feature of this picture of man as a boundedly rational decision maker is
the use of heuristic principles where no algorithms exist or where the algorithms
that do exist require an excessive amount of information, computational power,


=== PAGE 21 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 81
or time. I take a heuristic procedure to have three important properties (see also
Wimsatt 1980b, section 3): (1) By contrast with an algorithmic procedure (here
ignoring probabilistic automata), the correct application of a heuristic procedure
does not guarantee a solution and, if it produces a solution, does not guarantee that
the solution is correct. (2) The expected time, effort, and computational complex-
ity of producing a solution with a heuristic procedure is appreciably less (often by
many orders of magnitude for a complex problem) than that expected with an algo-
rithmic procedure. This is indeed the reason why heuristics are used. They are a
cost-effective way, and often the only physically possible way, of producing a solu-
tion. (3) The failures and errors produced when a heuristic is used are not random
but systematic. I conjecture that any heuristic, once we understand how it works,
can be made to fail. That is, given this knowledge of the heuristic procedure, we
can construct classes of problems for which it will always fail to produce an answer
or for which it will always produce the wrong answer. This property of systematic
production of wrong answers will be called the bias of the heuristic.
This last feature is exceedingly important. Not only can we work forward from
an understanding of a heuristic to predict its biases, but we can also work backward
from the observation of systematic biases as data to hypothesize the heuristics which
produced them; and if we can get independent evidence (for example, from cognitive
psychology) concerning the nature of the heuristics, we can propose a well-founded
explanatory and predictive theory of the structure of our reasoning in these areas.
This approach was implicitly (and sometimes explicitly) followed by Tversky and
Kahneman (1974), in their analysis of fallacies of probabilistic reasoning and of the
heuristics which generate them (see also Shweder 1977, 1979a, b, 1980, for further
applications of their work; and Mynatt, Doherty, and Tweney 1977, for a further
provocative study of bias in scientiﬁc reasoning). The systematic character of these
biases also allows for the possibility of modiﬁcations in the heuristic or in its use to
correct for them (see Wimsatt 1980b, pp. 52–54).
The notion of a heuristic has far greater implications than can be explored in this
chapter. In addition to its centrality in human problem solving, it is a pivotal concept
in evolutionary biology and in evolutionary epistemology. It is a central concept in
evolutionary biology because any biological adaptation meets the conditions given
for a heuristic procedure. First, it is a commonplace among evolutionary biologists
that adaptations, even when functioning properly, do not guarantee survival and pro-
duction of offspring. Second, they are, however, cost-effective ways of contributing
to this end. Finally, any adaptation has systematically speciﬁable conditions, deriv-
able through an understanding of the adaptation, under which its employment will
actually decrease the ﬁtness of the organism employing it, by causing the organism
to do what is, under those conditions, the wrong thing for its survival and repro-
duction. (This, of course, seldom happens in the organism’s normal environment,
or the adaptation would become maladaptive and be selected against.) This fact is
indeed systematically exploited in the functional analysis of organic adaptations. It
is a truism of functional inference that learning the conditions under which a system
malfunctions, and how it malfunctions under those conditions, is a powerful tool
for determining how it functions normally and the conditions under which it was


=== PAGE 22 ===

82 W.C. Wimsatt
designed to function. (For illuminating discussions of the problems, techniques, and
fallacies of functional inference under a variety of circumstances, see Gregory 1958;
Lorenz 1965; V alenstein1973; Glassman 1978.)
The notion of a heuristic is central to evolutionary epistemology because
Campbell’s (1974, 1977) notion of a vicarious selector, which is basic to his con-
ception of a hierarchy of adaptive and selective processes spanning subcognitive,
cognitive, and social levels, is that of a heuristic procedure. For Campbell a vicar-
ious selector is a substitute and less costly selection procedure acting to optimize
some index which is only contingently connected with the index optimized by the
selection process it is substituting for. This contingent connection allows for the
possibility—indeed, the inevitability—of systematic error when the conditions for
the contingent concilience of the substitute and primary indices are not met. An
important ramiﬁcation of Campbell’s idea of a vicarious selector is the possibility
that one heuristic may substitute for another (rather than for an algorithmic pro-
cedure) under restricted sets of conditions, and that this process may be repeated,
producing a nested hierarchy of heuristics. He makes ample use of this hierarchy in
analyzing our knowing processes (Campbell 1974). I believe that this is an appropri-
ate model for describing the nested or sequential structure of many approximation
techniques, limiting operations, and the families of progressively more realistic
models found widely in progressive research programs, as exempliﬁed in the devel-
opment of nineteenth-century kinetic theory, early twentieth-century genetics, and
several areas of modern population genetics and evolutionary ecology.
To my mind, Simon’s work and that of Tversky and Kahneman have opened up a
whole new set of questions and areas of investigation of pragmatic inference (and its
informal fallacies) in science, which could revolutionize our discipline in the next
decade. (For a partial view of how studies of reduction and reductionism in science
could be changed, see Wimsatt 1979.) This change in perspective would bring phi-
losophy of science much closer to actual scientiﬁc practice without surrendering a
normative role to an all-embracing descriptivism. And it would reestablish ties with
psychology through the study of the character, limits, and biases of processes of
empirical reasoning. Inductive procedures in science are heuristics (Shimony 1970),
as are Mill’s methods and other methods for discovering causal relations, building
models, and generating and modifying hypotheses.
Heuristics are also important in the present context, because the procedures for
determining robustness and for making further application of these determinations
for other ends are all heuristic procedures. Robustness analysis covers a class of
powerful and important techniques, but they are not immune to failures. There are
no magic bullets in science, and these are no exception.
Most striking of the ways of failure of robustness analysis is one which produces
illusions of robustness: the failure of the different supposedly independent tests,
means of detection, models, or derivations to be truly independent. This is the basis
for a powerful criticism of the validity of IQ scales as signiﬁcant measures of intel-
ligence (see McClelland 1973). Failures of independence are not easy to detect and
often require substantial further analysis. Without that, such failures can go unde-
tected by the best investigators for substantial lengths of time. Finally, the fact that


=== PAGE 23 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 83
different heuristics can be mutually reinforcing, each helping to hide the biases of
the others (see Wimsatt 1980b, sections 5 and 8), can make it much harder to detect
errors which would otherwise lead to discovery of failures of independence. The
failure of independence in its various modes, and the factors affecting its discovery,
emerges as one of the most critical and important problems in the study of robustness
analysis, as is indicated by the history of the group selection controversy.
2.8 Robustness, Independence, and Pseudorobustness:
A Case Study
In recent evolutionary biology (since Williams’ seminal work in 1966), group selec-
tion has been the subject of widespread attack and general suspicion. Most of the
major theorists (including W.D. Hamilton, John Maynard Smith, and E.O. Wilson)
have argued against its efﬁcacy. A number of mathematical models of this phe-
nomenon have been constructed, and virtually all of them (see Wade 1978) seem to
support this skepticism. The various mathematical models of group selection sur-
veyed by Wade all admit of the possibility of group selection. But almost all of
them predict that group selection should only very rarely be a signiﬁcant evolution-
ary factor; that is, they predict that group selection should have signiﬁcant effects
only under very special circumstances—for extreme values of parameters of the
models—which should seldom be found in nature. Wade undertook an experimen-
tal test of the relative efﬁcacy of individual and group selection—acting in concert
or in opposition in laboratory populations of the ﬂour beetle, Tribolium. This work
produced surprising results. Group selection appeared to be a signiﬁcant force in
these experiments, one capable of overwhelming individual selection in the opposite
direction for a wide range of parameter values. This ﬁnding, apparently contradict-
ing the results of all of the then extant mathematical models of group selection, led
Wade (1978) to a closer analysis of these models, with results described here.
All the models surveyed made simplifying assumptions, most of them different.
Five assumptions, however, were widely held in common; of the twelve models
surveyed, each made at least three of these assumptions, and ﬁve of the models
made all ﬁve assumptions. Crucially, for present purposes, the ﬁve assumptions are
biologically unrealistic and incorrect, and each independently has a strong negative
effect on the possibility or efﬁcacy of group selection. It is important to note that
these models were advanced by a variety of different biologists, some sympathetic
to and some skeptical of group selection as a signiﬁcant evolutionary force. Why,
then, did all of them make assumptions strongly inimical to it? Such a coincidence,
radically improbable at best, cries out for explanation: we have found a systematic
bias suggesting the use of a heuristic.
These assumptions are analyzed more fully elsewhere (Wade 1978; Wimsatt
1980b). My discussion here merely summarizes the results of my earlier analysis,
where (in Section 2.5) I presented a list of nine reductionistic research and modeling
strategies. Each is a heuristic in that it has systematic biases associated with it, and
these biases will lead to the wrong answer if the heuristic is used to analyze certain


=== PAGE 24 ===

84 W.C. Wimsatt
kinds of systems. It is the use of these heuristics, together with certain “perceptual”
biases (deriving from thinking of groups as “collections of individuals” rather than
as robust entities analogous to organisms), that is responsible for the widespread
acceptance of these assumptions and the almost total failure to notice what an unre-
alistic view they give of group selection. Most of the reductionistic heuristics lead
to a dangerous oversimpliﬁcation of the environment being studied and a dangerous
underassessment of the effects of these simpliﬁcations. In the context of the per-
ceptual bias of regarding groups as collections of individuals (or sometimes even of
genes), the models tend systematically to err in the internal and relational structure
they posit for the groups and in the character of processes of group reproduction and
selection.
The ﬁrst assumption, that the processes can be analyzed in terms of selection
of alternative alleles at a single locus, is shown to be empirically false by Wade’s
own experiments, which show conclusively that both individual and group selec-
tion is proceeding on multilocus traits. (For an analysis of the consequences of
treating a multilocus trait erroneously as a single-locus trait, see Wimsatt 1980b,
section 4) The ﬁfth assumption, that individual and group selections are opposed
in their effects, also becomes untenable for a multilocus trait (see Wimsatt 1980b,
section 7).
The second assumption is equivalent to the time-honored assumption of pan-
mixia, or random mating within a population, but in the context of a group selection
model it is equivalent to assuming a particularly strong form of blending inheri-
tance for group inheritance processes. This assumption is factually incorrect and, as
Fisher showed in 1930, effectively renders evolution at that level impossible. The
third assumption is equivalent to assuming that groups differ in their longevity but
not in their reproductive rates. But, as all evolutionary biologists since Darwin have
been aware, variance in reproductive rate has a far greater effect on the intensity of
selection than variance in longevity. So the more signiﬁcant component was left out
in favor of modeling the less signiﬁcant one. (The second and third assumptions are
discussed in Wimsatt 1980b, section 7.) The fourth assumption is further discussed
and shown to be incorrect in Wade ( 1978).
The net effect is a set of cumulatively biased and incorrect assumptions, which,
not surprisingly, lead to the incorrect conclusion that group selection is not a signif-
icant evolutionary force. If I am correct in arguing that these assumptions probably
went unnoticed because of the biases of our reductionistic research heuristics, a
striking analogy emerges. The phenomenon appeared to be a paradigmatic exam-
ple of Levinsian robustness. A wide variety of different models, making different
assumptions, appeared to show that group selection could not be efﬁcacious. But the
robustness was illusory, because the models were not independent in their assump-
tions. The commonality of these assumptions appears to be a species of method
bias, resulting in a failure of discriminant validity (Campbell and Fiske 1959). But
the method under consideration is not the normal sort of test instrument that social
scientists deal with. Instances of the method are reductionistic research heuristics,
and the method is reductionism. For the purposes of problem solving, our minds can
be seen as a collection of methods, and the particularly single-minded are unusually


=== PAGE 25 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 85
prone to method bias in their thought processes. This conclusion is ultimately just
another conﬁrmation at another level of something Campbell has been trying to
teach us for years about the importance of multiple independent perspectives.
References
Allen, G.E. 1979. Thomas Hunt Morgan: The Man and his Science . Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Barlow, R.E., and F. Proschan. 1975. The Mathematical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing .
New Y ork: Wiley.
Boyd, R. 1972. “Determinism, Laws, and Predictability in Principle.” Philosophy of Science
39:431–50.
Campbell, D.T. 1958. “Common Fate, Similarity, and Other Indices of the Status of Aggregates of
Persons as Social Entities.” Behavioral Science 3:14–25.
Campbell, D.T. 1966. “Pattern Matching as an Essential in Distal Knowing.” In T h eP s y c h o l o g yo f
Egon Brunswik, edited by K.R. Hammond, 81–106. New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Campbell, D.T. 1969a. “Deﬁnitional V ersus Multiple Operationalism.” Reprinted in Methodology
and Epistemology for Social Science , edited by E.S. Overman. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1988.
Campbell, D.T. 1969b. “Prospective: Artifact and Control.” In Artifact in Behavioral Research ,
edited by R. Rosenthal and R. Rosnow, 351–82. New Y ork: Academic.
Campbell, D.T. 1974. “Evolutionary Epistemology.” In The Philosophy of Karl Popper , edited by
P .A. Schilpp, 412–63. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Campbell, D.T. 1977. Descriptive Epistemology: Psychological, Sociological, and Evolutionary .
William James Lectures, Harvard University. Reprinted in Methodology and Epistemology for
Social Science, edited by E.S. Overman. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Campbell, D.T., and D.W. Fiske. 1959. “Convergent and Discriminant V alidation by the Multitrait–
Multimethod Matrix.” Psychological Bulletin 56:81–105.
Cook, T.D., and D.T. Campbell. 1979. Quasi Experimentation: Design and Analysis for Field
Settings. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Cronbach, L.J., and P .E. Meehl. 1955. “Construct V alidity in Psychological Tests.” Psychological
Bulletin 52:281–302.
Darden, L. 1974. “Reasoning in Scientiﬁc Change: The Field of Genetics at its Beginnings.”
Unpublished Doctoral diss., Committee on the Conceptual Foundations of Science, University
of Chicago.
Feynman, R.P . 1965.The Character of Physical Law . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fisher, R.A. 1930. The Genetic Theory of Natural Selection . New Y ork: Clarendon Press.
Gasking, D.A.T. 1955. “Causation and Recipes.” Mind 64:479–87.
Glassman, R.B. 1978. “The Logic of the Lesion Experiment and its Role in the Neural Sciences.”
In Recovery from Brain Damage: Research and Theory , edited by S. Finger, 3–31. New Y ork:
Plenum.
Glymour, C. 1980. Theory and Evidence . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gregory, R.L. (l958) “Models and the localization of function in the central nervous system.” In
National Physical Laboratory, Symposium No. 10. Mechanization of Thought Processes, vol. 2,
H.M.S., reprinted in his (1974) Concepts and Mechanisms of Perception, Duckworth, 566–83.
Kauffman, S.A. 1971. “Gene Regulation Networks: A Theory of their Structure and Behavior.”
In Current Topics in Developmental Biology , edited by A. Moscona and A. Monroy, vol. 6,
145–82. New Y ork: Academic Press.
Kim, J. 1978. “Supervenience and Nomological Incommensurables.” American Philosophical
Quarterly 15:149–56.
Laudan, L. 1971. “William Whewell on the Consilience of Inductions.” The Monist 55:368–91.


=== PAGE 26 ===

86 W.C. Wimsatt
Levins, R. 1966. “The Strategy of Model Building in Population Biology”. American Scientist
54:421–31.
Levins, R. 1968. Evolution in Changing Environments. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lorenz, K.Z. 1965. Evolution and Modiﬁcation of Behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Margenau, H. 1950. The Nature of Physical Reality . New Y ork: McGrawHill.
McClelland, D.D. 1973. “Testing for Competence Rather Than for Intelligence.” American
Psychologist 29:107.
McClintock, M.K. 1971. “Menstrual Synchrony and Suppression.” Nature 229:244–5.
Moore, J.A. 1972. Heredity and Development. 2nd ed. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Mynatt, C.R., M.E. Doherty, and R.D. Tweney. 1977. “Conﬁrmation Bias in a Simulated
Research Environment: An Experimental Study of Scientiﬁc Inference.” Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 29:85–95.
Olby, R. 1974. The Path to the Double Helix . Seattle, W A: University of Washington Press.
Omanson, R.C. 1980a. The Narrative Analysis: Identifying Central, Supportive and Distracting
Content. Unpublished manuscript.
Omanson, R.C. 1980b. “The Effects of Centrality on Story Category Saliency: Evidence for
Dual Processing.” Paper presented at 88th annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Montreal, September 1980.
Peirce, C.S. 1936. “Some Consequences of Four Incapacities.” In Collected Papers of Charles
Sanders Peirce , edited by C. Hartshorne and P . Weiss, vol. 5. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. (Originally published 1868.)
Putnam, H. 1962. “The Analytic and the Synthetic.” In Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy
of Science , edited by H. Feigl and G. Maxwell, vol. 3, 358–97. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Quine, W.V .O. 1960.Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosenberg, A. 1978. “The Supervenience of Biological Concepts.” Philosophy of Science
45:368–86.
Shimony, A. 1970. “Statistical Inference.” InThe Nature and Function of Scientiﬁc Theories, edited
by R.G. Colodny, 79–172. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Shweder, R.A. 1977. “Likeness and Likelihood in Everyday Thought: Magical Thinking in
Judgements About Personality.” Current Anthropology 18:637–48; reply to discussion, 652–8.
Shweder, R.A. 1979a. “Rethinking Culture and Personality Theory. Part I.” Ethos 7:255–78.
Shweder, R.A. 1979b. “Rethinking Culture and Personality Theory. Part II.” Ethos 7:279–311.
Shweder, R.A. 1980. “Rethinking Culture and Personality Theory. Part III.” Ethos 8:60–94.
Simon, H. (1955). “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
69:99–118.
Simon, H.A. 1969. The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simon, H.A. 1973. “The Structure of Ill–Structured Problems.” Artiﬁcial Intelligence 4:181–201.
Simon, H.A. 1979. Models of Thought. New Haven, CT: Y ale University Press.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1974. “Decision Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.”
Science 185:1124–31.
V alenstein, E. 1973.Brain Control. New Y ork: Wiley.
von Neumann, J. 1956. “Probabilistic Logic and the Synthesis of Reliable Organisms from
Unreliable Components.” In Automata Studies , edited by C.E. Shannon and J. McCarthy,
43–98. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wade, M.J. 1978. “A Critical Review of the Models of Group Selection.” Quarterly Review of
Biology 53(3):101–14.
Williams, G.C. 1966. Adaptations and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary
Thought. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wimsatt, W.C. 1974. “Complexity and Organization.” In Proceedings of the Meetings of the
Philosophy of Science Association, 1972 , edited by K.F. Schaffner and R.S. Cohen, 67–86.
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel.


=== PAGE 27 ===

2 Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination (1981) 87
Wimsatt, W.C. 1976a. “Reductionism, Levels of Organization, and the Mind-Body Problem.” In
Consciousness and the Brain: Scientiﬁc and Philosophical Strategies , edited by G.G. Globus,
G. Maxwell, and I. Savodnik, 199–267. New Y ork: Plenum.
Wimsatt, W.C. 1976b. “Reductive Explanation: A Functional Account.” In Proceedings of the
Meetings of the Philosophy of Science Association, 1974 ,e d i t e db yC . A .H o o k e r ,G .P e a r s e ,
A.C. Michalos, and J.W. van Evra, 671–710. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel.
Wimsatt, W.C. 1979. “Reduction and Reductionism.” In Current Problems in Philosophy of
Science, edited by P .D. Asquith and H. Kyburg, Jr., 352–77. East Lansing, MI: Philosophy
of Science Association.
Wimsatt, W.C. 1980a. “Randomness and Perceived Randomness in Evolutionary Biology.”
Synthese 43(3):287–329.
Wimsatt, W.C. 1980b. “Reductionistic Research Strategies and Their Biases in the Units of
Selection Controversy.” In Scientiﬁc Discovery , edited by T. Nickles, 213–59. Historical and
scientiﬁc case studies, vol. 2. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel.
