=== PAGE 1 ===

Software in the natural world: A computational approach to hierarchical emergence
Fernando E. Rosas, 1, 2, 3, 4,∗ Bernhard C. Geiger, 5, 6 Andrea I Luppi, 7
Anil K. Seth, 1, 2 Daniel Polani, 8 Michael Gastpar, 9 and Pedro A.M. Mediano 10, 11
1Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
2Sussex Centre for Consciousness Science and Sussex AI, University of Sussex
3Center for Psychedelic Research and Centre for Complexity Science,
Department of Brain Science, Imperial College London
4Center for Eudaimonia and Human Flourishing, University of Oxford
5Know-Center GmbH, Graz, Austria
6Signal Processing and Speech Communication Laboratory, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
7Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University
8Department of Computer Science, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK
9School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
10Department of Computing, Imperial College London
11Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London
Understanding the functional architecture of complex systems is crucial to illuminate their inner
workings and enable effective methods for their prediction and control. Recent advances have in-
troduced tools to characterise emergent macroscopic levels; however, while these approaches are
successful in identifying when emergence takes place, they are limited in the extent they can de-
termine how it does. Here we address this important limitation by developing a computational
approach to emergence, which characterises macroscopic processes in terms of their computational
capabilities. Concretely, we articulate a view on emergence based on how software works, which
is rooted on a mathematical formalisation of how macroscopic processes can express self-contained
informational, interventional, and computational properties. This framework reveals a hierarchy of
nested self-contained processes that determines what computations take place at what level, which
in turn delineates the functional architecture of a complex system. This approach is illustrated on
paradigmatic models from the statistical physics and computational neuroscience literature, which
are shown to exhibit macroscopic processes that are akin to software in human-engineered systems.
Overall, this framework enables a deeper understanding of the multi-level structure of complex sys-
tems, revealing specific ways in which they can be efficiently simulated, predicted, and controlled.
I. INTRODUCTION
Complex systems — such as the global economy, the
global weather, and the human brain — are composed
of many elements whose intricate dynamical interac-
tions give rise to distinct phenomena at various spatio-
temporal scales [1, 2]. For example, the interaction be-
tween the synaptic activity of individual neurons can give
rise to mesoscopic oscillatory patterns involving entire
brain regions [3], which in turn exhibit distinct coupling
patterns at a macroscopic, whole-brain level that are im-
plicated in distinct cognitive functions [4]. Crucially, phe-
nomena at certain scales may not be relevant for identi-
fying what is relevant for another; for instance, particle
physics may not be relevant for neuroscience despite neu-
rons being made of particles.
In order to successfully understand, predict, and con-
trol such complex systems, it is crucial to be able to char-
acterise their functional architecture — i.e., to identify
the relevant macroscopic spatio-temporal levels and de-
lineate the activity that ‘makes a difference’ for each of
them. Unfortunately, such characterisation is often done
in ad-hoc ways, as finding rigorous, principled, and gen-
∗ email: f.rosas@sussex.ac.uk
eral methods is highly non-trivial [2, 5]. Importantly, this
is not just a problem of lack of data or insufficient system
specification: as the opacity of deep learning models dra-
matically illustrates [6, 7], even a full description of the
microscopic components and their interactions may not
facilitate the identification of when and where emergent
phenomena may take place.
Providing a rigorous characterisation of the functional
architecture of multi-level complex systems remains an
important, yet unsolved challenge. A promising line
of investigation has developed general methods to iden-
tify and characterise macroscopic levels with emergent
properties [8–12]. These works provide new information-
theoretic tools for researchers to rigorously frame conjec-
tures about emergence on a wide range of dynamical pro-
cesses, and statistical tools to test these conjectures on
data. Despite being only recently developed, the practi-
cal efficacy of these approaches has already been demon-
strated in a number of empirical investigations [13–18].
However, as promising as these developments are in
providing effective methods to determine when emer-
gence takes place, they are limited in the degree they
can specify how this happens. For example, existing
methods might be able to determine whether the dynam-
ics of a recurrent neural network have emergent charac-
ter via the calculation of specific information-theoretic
quantities. However, these approaches could not specify
arXiv:2402.09090v2  [nlin.AO]  5 Jun 2024


=== PAGE 2 ===

2
which exactly are the underlying dynamical properties
facilitating this, or how these properties are distributed
across the various spatio-temporal scales of the system.
Answering those questions is critical to deepen our un-
derstanding of how those systems work, and under what
conditions they may break down.
Here we address these open questions by investigat-
ing emergence from a computational perspective, com-
plementing information-theoretic methods with princi-
ples of theoretical computer science — more specifically,
automata theory [19] and computational mechanics [20].
Concretely, we investigate emergence by operationalising
three ways in which a macroscopic process can be self-
contained: informational, causal, and computational clo-
sure — which correspond to optimal prediction of spon-
taneous dynamics, exhaustive capability to perform in-
terventions, and containment of computational process-
ing (respectively). By developing these notions within
a unified mathematical framework, this approach estab-
lishes formal foundations to reason about the emergence
of self-contained effective macroscopic theorieswithin mi-
croscopic stochastic dynamical processes, which are akin
to software in human-engineered systems in their abil-
ity to that carry out computations independently of the
substrate they are implemented in.
The results facilitated by our framework specify the
conditions under which systems give rise to informa-
tional, causal, and computational closed macroscopic lev-
els, and clarify the relationships between these proper-
ties. Furthermore, our framework reveals how compu-
tationally closed levels are hierarchically organised into
a lattice of nested computational structures ordered by
coarse-graining relationships. This lattice constitutes a
blueprint for the functional architecture of a complex sys-
tem, which describes what computations take place at
what level. Additionally, our results establish links with
the theory of lumpable time series [21], which open the
door for efficient algorithms to estimate these properties
in real-world applications. The power and scope of this
approach is illustrated in various case studies, includ-
ing diffusion processes, spin models, random walks on
networks, agent-based models, and neural systems that
model processes of memory consolidation and retrieval.
Our framework deepens our understanding of the multi-
level dynamics of these systems, revealing specific ways
in which they can be efficiently predicted and controlled.
Moreover, its generality and broad applicability opens
the way for a wide range of future theoretical develop-
ments and practical applications.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First
Section II provides background information, and then
Section III gives an intuitive overview of the proposed
framework. After this, Section IV presents a number of
case studies to showcase the proposed framework. Fi-
nally, Section V outlines the main implications of our
findings, and discusses related work. A complete expo-
sition of the formal theory supporting our framework is
provided in the Appendix.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. The ‘software-ness’ of software
Here we investigate systems whose macroscopic lev-
els posses a certain degree of causal ‘self-containment’
with respect to their microscopic instantiation, which we
describe as emergent. Under this view, phenomena tak-
ing place at an emergent macroscopic level depend solely
on other phenomena at the same level, without being
causally affected by more fine-grained distinctions ob-
served at microscopic levels. To illustrate these ideas,
consider a simple scenario where a computer is running a
script that executes the command c=a+b. Crucially, the
value assigned to the variable c depends on the values as-
signed to a and b, but does not depend on peculiarities of
the physical substrate over which the program is running
(e.g. the spin of the electrons that make the transistors,
etc). This relative autonomy from its substrate is a key
feature of what software is: software is always ‘running
on top’ of hardware while having some ‘life of its own’ —
following its own rules irrespective of many details of the
substrate over which it is instantiated.
Following this line of thinking, one can say that a
system is running software when it has a macroscopic
scale that is causally closed with respect to lower scales.
Technically speaking, causal closure takes place when
interventions at a set of macroscopic (i.e. aggregated,
coarse-grained) variables are sufficient to guarantee spe-
cific outcomes on other macroscopic variables. Conse-
quently, ‘programs’ can be understood as specific (sets
of) relations between macroscopic variables that do not
depend on specific microscale instantiations — in fact,
one can imagine many different microscale instantiations
with precisely equivalent macroscopic behaviour. In the
case of the computer script considered above, the value
assigned to the variable c only depends on the value pre-
viously assigned to a and b, and not on details of the
physical instantiation of those variables in terms of tran-
sistors and other hardware aspects. Hence, causal clo-
sure implies that events that happen at a macroscale are
‘shielded’ from how they are instantiated at a microscopic
level — i.e. from their implementation.
The distinction of software/hardware has been instru-
mental in the development of our modern technologi-
cal world [22]. Distinguishing software from hardware
is what allows designers to create programs that can be
implemented over an variety of different physical sub-
strates. From a philosophical perspective, the notions
of software and causal closure are related to the princi-
ple of ‘multiple realisability’ [23, 24], which states that
there being many different microscopic ways to realise a
specific macroscopic function, and the idea of ‘substrate
independence’ [25], which highlights that some functions
may be agnostic with respect to the substrate over which
they are implemented (e.g. carbon vs silicon). From a
scientific perspective, these notions are related to the
idea of minimal model explanations , which aims to ex-


=== PAGE 3 ===

3
plain a phenomenon via a minimal set of macroscopic
features that remain stable after perturbations to their
microscopic details [26].
While the idea of software was conceived in the con-
text of device design, an interesting question arises as to
whether natural, non-engineered systems could be use-
fully described in terms of hardware-software distinc-
tions. For example, under what conditions is it reason-
able to say that different natural systems (e.g. different
living organisms of the same species) are running the
same software? Also, would it be reasonable to think of
the human brain as running software over neural hard-
ware [25, 27][28]?
Arguments can be made, based on evolutionary and
thermodynamic considerations, for why and to what de-
gree biological systems may display software-like, macro-
scopic levels that are causally closed. Living organisms
perform actions (i.e. interventions over their environ-
ments and themselves) in order to guarantee their sur-
vival. However, some interventions are more feasible to
implement than others — e.g., while it is almost im-
possible to intervene on the momentum of a particular
molecule in a glass of water, it is much easier to increase
its mean temperature together with all other molecules
in the glass. Causally closed systems are those for which
macroscopic interventions are efficacious in controlling
their macroscopic scale. Hence, one can say that sys-
tems are as if running software to the extent they are
controllable at a particular scale at a reasonable ther-
modynamic cost. Building on similar arguments, causal
closure has often been regarded by theoretical biologists
as a necessary — albeit not sufficient — condition for the
subsistence of living systems [29–31].
In this paper we argue for a pragmatic approach
to these issues, as our motivation is the development
of analytical methods to turn these ideas into empir-
ical questions that can be investigated quantitatively.
While causal closure is certainly a necessary condition
for software-like processes to exist, in this paper we ex-
plore the consequences of taking this condition to be also
sufficient. Indeed, our framework reveals that causal clo-
sure is closely connected with a notion of computational
closure, which opens — as our theory shows — fertile av-
enues to analyse multi-level physical processes with the
tools of theoretical computer science.
B. From causality to computation
Above we described the nature of software from the
perspective of interventions and causal closure, and sug-
gested how it can be used for investigating natural sys-
tems. However, while such approach would allow us to
determine if a system is running software or not in terms
of causal relations, it does not facilitate a direct way to
describe this in terms of computations. One of the cen-
tral aims of this paper is to illuminate the computational
implications of causal closure.
Causal states
e0
e1
0 1 1 0 1 0 1
0 0 1 1 0 1 0
1 1 0 1 0 0 1
Xt+1 Xt+2 Xt+3
FIG. 1. Illustration of causal states . Causal states are
sets of of trajectories which bear equal predictions for the
future evolution of the system, as defined by the equivalence
relationship in Eq. (1).
To attain this, our approach takes inspiration and
builds upon the rich literature of computational mechan-
ics — a framework for the study of stochastic dynami-
cal processes from a computational perspective [20, 32–
34]. Specifically, computational mechanics studies pat-
terns and statistical regularities observed in time series
data by asking quantitative questions such as: how much
historical information does the system store, where is
that information stored, and how is it processed to gen-
erate future behaviour [35–37]? The answers to those
questions, according to computational mechanics, can
be found in the states and transitions of so-called ‘ ϵ-
machines’ [32, 37, 38].
Computational mechanics introduces ϵ-machines as op-
timal (i.e. complete and minimimal) representations of a
computational ‘engine’ that can generate the patterns
observed in data. Such representation can be built by
grouping past trajectories according to their forecasted
futures into so-called causal states (see Figure 1). More
precisely, the causal states of a time series X = {Xt}t∈N
are the equivalence classes of past trajectories ⃗xt :=
(. . . , xt−1, xt) that are established by the following equiv-
alence relationship:
⃗xt ≡ϵ ⃗x′
t iff p(⃗xL
t+1| ⃗xt) = p(⃗xL
t+1| ⃗x′
t) ∀⃗xL
t+1, L ∈ N,
(1)
where ⃗xL
t+1 = (xt+1, . . . , xt+1+L) and p(a|b) denotes the
probability of a given b [40]. Hence, the causal states are
given by a mapping ϵ which coarse-grains past trajecto-
ries ⃗X t, thereby generating a new time series of causal
states E = {Et}t∈N with Et = ϵ( ⃗X t). Formally, the ϵ-
machine of X is defined as the pair ( ϵ, T x
e,e′), where ϵ is
the above mapping to causal states and T x
e,e′ is a collec-
tion of transition probabilities of the form
T x
e,e′ = P{Et = e′, Xt = x|Et−1 = e} . (2)


=== PAGE 4 ===

4
Et−1
Xt
Et
Xt+1
Et+1
Xt+2
. . .. . .
Mechanism
Observations
...
e0
e1
e2 e3
e4
x0,x1
x0
x1
x0
x0
x1
x1
x0
x1
Inputs
{x0, x1}
States
{e0, e1, e2, e3, e4}
a1) b1)
a2) b2)
FIG. 2. The two faces of ϵ-machines. Illustration of the dual interpretation of ϵ-machines that establish a bridge between
causality and computation. a) Causal face: View of ϵ-machines as the effective mechanism driving the system, acting ‘behind
the scenes’ to generate observable data (a1). Technically, this corresponds to interpreting it as a hidden Markov process
— i.e., dynamics that take place on variables Et on a latent state-space, while generating the observable data Xt (a2). b)
Computational face. Alternative view of ϵ-machines as discrete automata, where the data corresponds to inputs given by
a user driving the system between different states (b1). Technically, this corresponds to seeing it as a discrete automata with
states ek, whose deterministic transitions are governed by the input data xi (b2). Note that (a1) focuses on variables (e.g.
Xt, Et), while (b2) portraits the states that those variables can take (e.g. x0, e0). Fig. (a1) is adapted from Ref. [39].
Hence, the causal states correspond to a kind of infor-
mation bottleneck [33]: ϵ is the coarsest coarse-graining
of past trajectories ⃗xt that retains full predictive power
over future variables (i.e. I( ⃗X t; ⃗X L
t+1) = I(Et; ⃗X L
t+1) for
all L ∈ N). Additionally, the causal states have Markov
dynamics, and by ‘Markovianising’ the process this forces
the effective states of the process to become explicit.
In summary, the ϵ-machine provides the simplest com-
putational mechanism capable of giving rise to the sys-
tem’s dynamics. Hence, the ϵ-machine of a process can
be regarded as its effective theory — akin to its equations
of motion [36]. It is important, nonetheless, to note that
the causal states provide counterfactual guarantees only
if the system at hand is fully observed, or equivalently,
if the conditional probabilities that describe X are re-
spected by interventions [41]. In the case of partially ob-
served scenarios, causal states ought to be understood in
the Granger sense, i.e. as states of maximal non-mediated
predictive ability [42], and as such, the best possible at-
tempt to identify the causal drivers given the available
knowledge.
A key contribution of computational mechanics is es-
tablishing a bridge between causality and computation,
which is rooted in two alternative perspectives that can
be used to interpret what ϵ-machines are (see Figure 2):
a) From a causal perspective, ϵ-machines can be con-
ceived as Markov processes taking place at a hid-
den, latent space [43], corresponding to the under-
lying mechanism at work ‘under the hood.’ From
this view, the system is driven by the dynamics of
causal states, and the data that one measures is a
consequence of the transitions between them.
b) From a computational perspective, ϵ-machines can
be thought of as deterministic automata — i.e. (fi-
nite or infinite) state machines whose transitions
are fully determined by an input sequence [44]. De-
terministic automata are a paradigmatic example
of computational systems (typically used to drive
vending machines, elevators, and traffic lights),
where a string of inputs is used to drive the system
through a sequence of internal states [45]. Under
this view, the input driving the automata is the ob-
served data, and the dynamics over causal states is
the result of those.
These two quite distinct views are both consistent with
what a ϵ-machine formally is, and their duality opens a
principled link between principles of causality and com-
putation [46].
III. A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO
EMERGENCE
After setting the background and clarifying founda-
tional ideas, this section presents the ideas at the core
of our proposed framework in an intuitive manner. The


=== PAGE 5 ===

5
exposition provides links to formal definitions and theo-
rems in the Appendix, where the theory is presented with
full technical detail. The ideas discussed here are then
illustrated by a number of case studies in Section IV.
A. What drives the macro? A story of two
machines
Our approach starts by combining computational me-
chanics [20, 33] and an interventionist view on causa-
tion [47] to investigate the causality of macroscopic phe-
nomena. Concretely, let us consider a dynamical process
Xt and a coarse-grained, macroscopic process Zt = f(Xt)
derived from it, and ask: what are the causes of events
in Zt?
We address this question by building on the principle
that a cause of an effect is singled out by the minimal
set of distinctions that make a difference for that level.
Concretely, by taking inspiration from ϵ-machines (see
Section II B and Definition 1), our approach is to iden-
tify the minimal set of distinctions between past trajec-
tories of X that lead to different potential outcomes in
the future of Z. Mathematically, we build a new com-
putational mechanics ‘machine’ based on the following
equivalence relationship (see Definition 2):
⃗xt ≡υ ⃗x′
t iff p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) = p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗x′
t) ∀⃗zL
t+1, L ∈ N.
In contrast with Eq. (1), the resulting equivalence classes
are based on the prediction of the future ofZ, and not the
future of X. This gives rise to another, usually simpler
set of distinctions in the past trajectories of X (i.e. a dif-
ferent set of causal states), which we call the υ-machine
— with upsilon the greek equivalent to the latin u (al-
though when combined with other letters it sounds like
i), referring to ‘underlying’ for reasons explained below.
The causal states of the υ-machine are given by a map-
ping υ which coarse-grains ⃗X t, thereby generating a new
time series U = {Ut}t∈N with Ut = υ( ⃗X t). Analogously
than for the ϵ-machine, our results show that the causal
states of the υ-machine to be an optimal information bot-
tleneck — concretely, υ is the coarsest coarse-graining of
past trajectories ⃗xt that retains full predictive power over
the future of Z (see Proposition 1).
With this construction, each macroscopic process Zt =
f(Xt) now possesses two associated machines (see Fig-
ure 3): its υ-machine (with causal states Ut) that de-
termines the states of X that make a difference for the
future of Z (Definition 2), and its ϵ-machine (with causal
states E′
t) that corresponds to the set of distinctions
within the past of Z that make a difference for its own
evolution (Definition 1). Note that the ϵ-machine of Z is
often different from the ϵ-machine of the underlying mi-
croscopic process X (with causal states Et). These three
machines are related as follows. On the one hand, the
υ-machine of Z is usually more powerful than its own
ϵ-machine (see Lemma 2), as it is not restricted to what
can be observed from the macroscopic level, but also can
. . . , Zt−1, Zt Zt+1, Zt+2, . . .
E′
t
. . . , Xt−1, Xt Xt+1, Xt+2, . . .
Et
Ut
Macro process
Micro process
FIG. 3. The various machines associated with a macro-
scopic process . Diagram of the relationship between the
different machines associated with a macroscopic process Z
and its corresponding microscopic process X. The ϵ-machines
with causal states Et and E′
t correspond to the optimal pre-
diction of the future of X and Z, respectively, using data
from the same level. In contrast, the υ-machine with causal
states Ut provides optimal prediction of the future of Z us-
ing data from X, hence using the minimal amount of micro
information for optimally predicting the future of the macro.
access what is at the microscopic level — as illustrated
in Figure 3. On the other hand, the υ-machine of Z is
usually weaker than the ϵ-machine of X, as the former
only accounts for what is relevant for predicting Z.
Seen under this light, one can conclude that the υ-
machine of Z capture its ‘genuine cause’ (or at least its
best estimation based on the information available from
the micro level), while its own ϵ-machine is the best pos-
sible reconstruction of the causal states Ut using only
what is available at the level of Z. That being said,
please note that while the causal states Et and Ut are
coarse-grainings of ⃗X t and E′
t is a coarse-graining of ⃗Z t,
their relationship can be highly non-trivial (see Coun-
terexamples 1 and 2).
B. Causal and information closure
What happens if a macroscopic process Zt = f(Xt) is
such that both its ϵ-machines and υ-machines are equiv-
alent (i.e. if there exists a bijection between the states
of the ϵ- and υ-machines)? If that is the case, then all
the distinctions in the past trajectories of X that make a
difference (i.e. the causal states of the macroscopic pro-
cess, given by its υ-machine) can be effectively accessed
from the macroscopic level. Pragmatically, this implies
that all interventions that make a difference for Z can
be implemented at the level of Z without checking ‘mi-
croscopic details’ related to how it is implemented by X.
Put simply, this means that the differences that make a
difference for Zt are actually macroscopic differences. In
this sense, it is fair to say thatZt is causing its own future
— or more precisely, that all the causes of Zt are within
its own level, and not below in a microscale. Building
on these observations, we take this condition (i.e. the


=== PAGE 6 ===

6
equivalence between the ϵ-machine and υ-machine of a
macroscopic process Z) as a formal definition of causal
closure (Definition 3), and hence, following the discus-
sion in Section II A, we say that such are software-like
processes running over their corresponding microscopic
instantiations.
A somehow related notion is the idea of information
closure, which focuses on prediction instead of causa-
tion. Information closure was first introduced as a way
to quantify the degree of autonomy of an organism with
respect to its environment [48], and was then extended to
explore the degree to which a macroscopic level depends
on its underlying microscale [49]. This, in turn, has been
used to investigate emergence [12], understanding it as
macroscopic processes which can optimally predict them-
selves. Concretely, a macroscopic process Z can be said
to be informationally closed with respect to the micro-
scopic process X if the following condition is satisfied
(see Definition 4):
I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1) ∀L ∈ N, (3)
where I is Shannon’s mutual information, which quanti-
fies the amount of predictive information linking its argu-
ments [50]. This condition implies that knowledge about
the micro-scale does not enhance the predictability of the
macro-scale process above the self-predictive power of the
process over itself. This makes the macro-scale ‘informa-
tionally sufficient’ to predict itself, making it unnecessary
to refer to the micro-scale [51].
What is the precise relationship between causal and
informational closure? Information closure only requires
that one is able to predict the same amount of infor-
mation from micro or macro, which may sound weaker
than requiring that the actual structure of the underly-
ing machines to be equivalent. Perhaps surprisingly, a
first consequence of our framework (Theorem 1) proves
that information and causal closure are equivalent for
any macroscopic process Zt = g( ⃗X t). That said, it is
important to note that causal closure (as defined here)
only provides counterfactual guarantees if the system de-
scribed by X is fully observed; otherwise, it ought to
be understood in the Granger sense, i.e. as a best guess
given the available knowledge (see the related discussion
in Section II B).
C. Computational closure and renormalisation
After establishing a rigorous definition of causal clo-
sure, identifying it with our intuitions of software, and
clarifying its relationship with information closure, our
next step is to investigate its properties in terms of com-
putational principles. For this, we leverage the duality of
ϵ-machines as both state-space models and as determin-
istic automata (see Figure 2b) as follows.
As discussed in Section II B, automata use sequences
of input symbols to generate transitions between their in-
ternal states, and hence it is natural to ask: what would
1
1 1
0 0
0
FIG. 4. Example of computational closure . Illustration
where micro causal states are shown as small golden nodes
and macro causal states are represented as big pale-yellow
nodes. Transitions of micro causal states are represented as
simple arrows responding to three possible inputs: two inputs
denoted by a and b (not shown) trigger transitions within the
same macro state, and one input denoted byc (not show) trig-
gers a transition to a new macro state. The coarse-graining
f(a) = f(b) = 0 and f(c) = 1 generate deterministic dynam-
ics for the macro states represented by double arrows, whereas
0 makes the state to remain and 1 makes a transition to the
next state.
happen if — due to e.g. noise or compression — one
only has access to coarse-grained versions of the input
symbols? In general, the transitions of an automata un-
der coarse-grained symbols are not anymore determinis-
tic, which breaks its internal structure. However, under
some circumstances it is possible to recover determinis-
tic transitions by considering coarse-grained states — a
condition that we call computational closure. More for-
mally, computational closure applies to coarse-grainings
of input symbols of an automaton for which there ex-
ists a corresponding coarse-graining of states such that
the resulting transitions — between coarse-grained states
following the coarse-grained symbols — are again deter-
ministic (Definition 5). Put simply, computational clo-
sure takes place when a new deterministic automaton
can be obtained by coarse-graining both the states of the
original automaton and its input alphabet (see Figure 4).
To build some intuition about computational closure,
let’s consider a simple example: imagine a finite-state
machine that actually consists of two independent ma-
chines, so its state is the vector of the states of each
individual machine, and its input alphabet is the Carte-
sian product of the individual alphabets. It is clear that
in this case different parts of the inputs satisfy the defi-
nition of computational closure, as different parts of the
input are processed separately. The definition of com-
putational closure generalises this to cases of machines


=== PAGE 7 ===

7
a) b)
Macro level
Coarse-graining
Meso level
Coarse-graining
Micro level
Macro
Meso
Micro
FIG. 5. Multilevel analysis via ϵ-machines. a) Optimal automata can be built at different levels of coarse-graining of
observed data. Each automaton accounts for the resulting patterns taking place at that scale. b) If the considered levels of
description are computationally closed, then the automata of higher levels are coarse-grainings of the ones of levels below. This
process of coarse-graining of machines reveals the computations taking place at each of those levels.
that are nested, where part of the information can be
processed autonomously but another part cannot.
Computational closure have a natural characterisation
for the case of ϵ-machines (see Figure 5). Let’s consider a
microscopic process X and a coarse-graining Z, and de-
note by Et and E′
t the causal states of the ϵ-machines of
them, respectively. Then, the ϵ-machine of a macroscopic
process Z is computationally closed if there is a coarse-
graining mapping f ∗ such that E′
t = f ∗(Et). In effect,
if that is the case, then E′
t are coarse-grained states of
the automata with states Et, and Z provides a coarse-
graining of the input symbols X. Interestingly, com-
putational closure implies that the operations of coarse-
graining and calculating the ϵ-machine are interchange-
able, or equivalently, that the following diagram com-
mutes:
Z
EX
E′ϵ′
ϵ
f f∗
(Input sequence)
Real space
(Causal states)
Mechanism space
where f and f ∗ are coarse-graining operations and ϵ and
ϵ′ are the coarse-grainings that lead to the causal states
of the corresponding ϵ-machines. Therefore, computa-
tionally closed levels can be said to carry out a specific
portion of the computations of the whole process — the
part that remains after coarse-graining the ϵ-machine of
the base level.
An attractive aspect of computational closure is that
it can be understood from a renormalisation theory [52]
perspective as follows. The ϵ-machines of the micro-
and macroscropic processes can be seen as the ‘theory’,
or model, that best explains the statistical patterns ob-
served at each level. Hence, the question we are consider-
ing can be reframed as asking how can one obtain an ef-
fective theory to explain the patterns observed in coarse-
grained data. The commuting diagram above says that, if
computational closure holds, then effective theories to ex-
plain macro levels can be found simply by coarse-graining
the theory that explains the level below [53]. Therefore,
macroscopic levels that are computationally closed can be
thoroughly described without relying on the full micro-
scopic theory, but using solely a simpler, coarse-grained
version of it. Conversely, the part of the computations
that take place at a computationally closed level can
be extracted by an appropriate coarse-graining of the
theory/ϵ-machine of the microscopic level. Please note
that this is certainly not true for arbitrary macroscopic
processes, whose ϵ-machines are often incompatible —
and hence incomparable — with the one of the micro
(for a minimal example, see Counterexample 1).
D. Causal closure, computational closure, and
lumpability
At this point one may wonder: what is the relation
between computational and causal closure? Our second


=== PAGE 8 ===

8
TABLE I. Summary of main concepts
Term Explanation
Micro level Basic time-series
Macro level A coarse-graining of a micro process
ϵ-machine Model of a process built on
the history at the same level
υ-machine Model of a process built on
the history at a level below
Causal states Hidden states of ϵ- or υ-machines
Information
closure
When best predictions of macro
can be done from the same macro
Causal closure When ϵ- and υ-machines coincide
Computational
closure
When ϵ-machine of macro is a
coarse-graining of ϵ-machine of micro
Lumpability The ability of a Markov process to remain
Markovian after being coarse-grained
main result (Theorem 2) reveals that, for macroscopic
processes of the form Zt = f(Xt), information closure
implies computational closure [54]. This result may be
surprising, as computational closure sounds more restric-
tive than information/causal closure. The reason why
computational closure does not imply information/causal
closure is that whereas the former is based on sufficiency,
the latter also requires necessity. In effect, while for com-
putational closure it is enough if the causal states of the
macro are compatible with the causal states at the micro
(i.e., induce a coarser equivalence class), causal closure
also requires every relevant causal state at the micro to
be accessible from the macro. Hence, a computationally
closed coarse-graining may nonetheless be coarser than
the partition induced by its υ-machine, and hence fail to
guarantee causal closure. For a minimal example of this,
see Counterexample 4.
Theorem 2 is important, as it provides a computa-
tional interpretation for causally closed systems — i.e., to
macroscopic processes that can be described as software-
like. Indeed, this result shows that systems that exhibit
software-like macroscopic processes are characterised by
having a portion of the computations that are carried
out autonomously from the rest of the system, which can
be efficiently controlled. Hence, our framework puts the
arguments developed in Section II A on a rigorous theo-
retical footing, while providing quantitative tools to in-
vestigate them in concrete, empirical data.
The relationship between causal and computational
closure is further clarified by our final theoretical re-
sult, which relates these notions with weak and strong
lumpability. Lumpability pertains to the study of how
the memory of a stochastic process is affected after it
is coarse-grained. More specifically, a memoryless (i.e.
Markovian) process is lumpable if it has a coarse-graining
that gives rise to equally memoryless dynamics — be-
ing strongly lumpable if this only depends on the tran-
sition probabilities, and weakly lumpable if this only
holds for specific initial conditions (see Definition 7 and
Ref. [21]). This type of inquiry leads to a question: which
coarse-grainings of causal states give rise to ϵ-machines
of macroscopic processes of the original process? Our
framework shows (Theorem 3) that weakly lumpable
coarse-grainings of causal states are enough to guarantee
this, but the resulting levels may satisfy computational
but not information/causal closure. In contrast, coarse-
grainings that are strongly lumpable are guaranteed
to give rise to the ϵ-machine of causal/informationally
closed macroscopic processes. These results imply that
causal/informational closure is a more ‘robust’ property
than computational closure, as the latter can be dis-
rupted by deviations from the stationary distribution
while the former cannot.
In summary, lumpability identifies necessary and suffi-
cient conditions for a microscopic process to have emer-
gent macroscopic processes: a microscopic process has
causally/informationally closed levels if and only if its
causal states are strongly lumpable. By doing this, The-
orem 3 also opens the door to the discovery of emer-
gent levels in systems of interest. In effect, this theorem
also allows us to leverage the rich literature of numerical
methods that has been developed to empirically discov-
ering lumpable partitions of a Markov chain. Thanks to
this link, those methods can be readily used to empow-
ering data-driven discovery of emergent coarse-grainings
— with the trick of applying them not in ‘real space’
but on the space of causal states. Algorithms for finding
lumpable partitions are discussed in Section 7.
E. The hierarchy of emergent computational levels
The findings discussed above have a number of impor-
tant consequences. First, the collection of all causally
closed coarse-grainings can be shown to be hierarchically
organised as a lattice — more precisely, they form a sub-
lattice of the lattice of all coarse-grainings. Moreover, the
fact that for spatial coarse-grainings information closure
implies computational closure (discussed in the previous
subsection) means that the collection of ϵ-machines of all
informationally closed spatial coarse-grainings are also
hierarchically organised in another lattice : a lattice of
strongly-lumpable coarse-grainings of ϵ-machines, whose
finest element is the ϵ-machine of the micro level and its
coarsest is an ϵ-machine with a single state.
This sequence of three compatible hierarchies is impor-
tant, as the mapping from one lattice to the next provide
a more refined and simpler view of the multi-level struc-
ture of the system of interest (see Figure 6). Indeed, the
lattice of all coarse-grainings grows super-exponentially
with the number of values a process can take, and focus-


=== PAGE 9 ===

9
Real space Theory space
All coarse-grainings Causally closed
processes
Strongly lumpable
ϵ-machines
FIG. 6. The multiple hiearchies describing multi-level computations in a complex system. Left: Lattice of all
possible coarse-grainings, here illustrated for the case of a process that can take five possible values. Center: Sub-lattice of
only those coarse-grainings that are causally/informationally closed. Right: Lattice of strongly-lumpable coarse-grainings of the
ϵ-machine of the microscopic level. Only the last lattice provides a minimal blueprint that highlights the distinct computational
processes, and distinguishes which computations take place at what level.
ing only on causally closed processes provides a first im-
portant simplification. Furthermore, the mapping from
the lattice of all causally-closed processes is found to
be sometimes many-to-one, as different coarse-grainings
may have an equivalent ϵ-machine. This ‘degeneration’
of the mapping gives rise to the notion of computational
equivalence (Definition 6), which correspond to coarse-
grainings that map into the same ϵ-machines and hence
are effectively carrying out the same computations, even
if they look different.
Let us further explore the benefits of focusing on the
hierarchy of strongly lumpable coarse-grainings of the
ϵ-machine instead of the hierarchy of causally closed
coarse-grainings. Causal/information closure can take
place in processes that are not causally-driven; for ex-
ample, if Xt = ( Yt, Wt) with Wt being just noise
(i.e., an i.i.d. process), then g(Xt) = Wt satisfies
causal/informational closure while having no real causal
structure. Our approach identifies such coarse-graining
as being computationally trivial, being mapped to the
top of the lattice of ϵ-machines and hence being compu-
tationally equivalent to the constant coarse-graining (i.e.
the mapping g( ⃗xt) = 1 for all trajectories ⃗xt, whose ϵ-
machine has a single causal state). More generally, the
lattice of causally closed coarse-grainings fails to recog-
nise levels that are computationally equivalent. For ex-
ample, if Xt = (Ut, Vt) with Ut and Vt being two copies
of the same process (i.e. Ut = ϕ(Vt) with ϕ a bijection),
then both g1(Xt) = Ut and g2(Xt) = Vt may be regarded
as two distinct emergent levels — while they should be
considered to be copies of the same process.
The above examples illustrate how an analysis based
solely on causal/informational closure can potentially
overestimate the effective number of different emergent
macro-scales that a system of interest may have. Indeed,
it is the hierarchy of strongly lumpable coarse-grainings
of the ϵ-machines, and not the other ones, what deter-
mines what computations are taking place where by re-
vealing which levels are running which software. For this
reason, we propose to regard the hierarchy of strongly
lumpable coarse-grainings of the ϵ-machine provide as the
natural blueprint of the functional architecture of a com-
plex system.
Let us illustrate the power of the hierarchy of ϵ-
machines as a guiding blueprint in a simple analysis. For
this, let’s consider a microscopic process X, a causally
closed macroscopic process Z, and the trivial constant
coarse-graining 1 (which assigns the number 1 to all pos-
sible states of the micro process). These three processes
form a totally ordered set in ‘real space’ with X below,
1 above, and Z between (indeed, 1 is always a — rather
trivial — coarse-graining of Z too). How does the result-
ing hiearchy of ϵ-machines of these processes look like?
Despite of the specific properties of X and Z, an analysis


=== PAGE 10 ===

10
based on the ϵ-machines reveals that the computations
done by Z can be described as falling into one of four
possible scenarios (see Figure 7):
a) Non-trivial computation different from microscale :
the ϵ-machine of Zt is non-trivial (i.e. different from
the ϵ-machine of 1), and also different from the one
of Xt.
b) Non-trivial computation equivalent to microscale :
the ϵ-machine of Zt is non-trivial, but is equal to
the one of Xt.
c) Trivial computation different from microscale : ϵ-
machine of Zt is trivial and different from the one
of Xt.
d) Trivial computation equivalent to microscale: Xt is
i.i.d., so there are no actual computations taking
place in it or any of its coarse-grainings.
Please note that while the lattice of coarse-grainings in
‘real space’ is always the same, the lattice of the corre-
sponding ϵ-machines clearly illuminates the character of
the computations being done.
In summary, our theory reveals that it is the hierarchy
of strongly lumpable causal states, and not the one of
causally/informationally closed spatial coarse-grainings,
what provides the most illuminating blueprint of the
software-like processes running over a give microscopic
layer at which different computations take place. By
grouping together all computationally equivalent pro-
cesses, the lattice of the resulting ϵ-machines is generally
simpler than the other lattices, and provides a more ac-
curate representation of the computations happening at
different levels. These ideas are illustrated in a series of
case studies presented in the next section.
IV. CASE STUDIES
This section presents a number of examples that help
to illustrate, exemplify, and develop further intuitions
about our theory. The investigated systems include var-
ious paradigmatic models of complexity including cellu-
lar automata, diffusion processes, Ising models, random
walks over networks, and recurrent neural networks.
A. Invariant quantities
Let us start by considering a system whose microscopic
evolution is described by the time series X, and has a
scalar coarse-graining Zt = f(Xt) such that Zt = Zt0 for
all t — i.e., Z is constant for all values of t, being an
invariant property of X. Such invariants may, or may
not, depend on initial condition. A direct calculation
1
Zt
Xt
1
Zt
Xt
1
Zt
Xt
1
Zt
Xt
a) b)
c) d)
FIG. 7. Possible computational architectures of an
emergent macroscopic level . Our theory shows that the
computations carried out by a causally closed process Z with
respect to a microscopic process X and the trivial coarse-
graining 1 can be categorised within four groups, illustrated
here. The computations are the same as the ones at the mi-
croscale if the ϵ-machine of X and Z are equivalent (as in
b and d), and are trivial if the ϵ-machines of Z and 1 are
equivalent (as in c and d). At the left of each subplot is the
lattice of coarse-grainings in real space, which is the same for
the four cases; at the right is the lattice of corresponding ϵ-
machines in theory space, which better illustrates the effective
computational structure of the system.
shows that invariants are informationally closed, as
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t) = H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t) − H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗X t)
= H(Zt0 |Zt0) − H(Zt0 | ⃗X t)
= 0 .
Invariants may be computationally trivial (i.e. compu-
tationally equivalent to a constant coarse-graining, as in
classes (c) or (d) in Fig. 7) or not (i.e. classes (a) or (b)),
depending on their entropy. Specifically, a Markov pro-
cess has invariants that are computationally non-trivial
when the state space of the Markov chain can be divided
in regions such that the process can move between states
within individual regions but not between states of differ-
ent regions (i.e., if the Markov chain is reducible). If that
is the case, the identity of each isolated group is a non-
trivial invariant, and the corresponding coarse-graining
looks like a Markov chain that only has self-transitions.
In contrast, a computationally trivial invariant is a way
of describing the part of the phase space that is not ac-


=== PAGE 11 ===

11
a) Rule 90
09/11/2023, 16:19 1D Elementary Cellular Automata
https://elife-asu.github.io/wss-modules/modules/1-1d-cellular-automata/ 1/4
CA Rule:  Size: 
    
Set initial cells:  
1D Elementary Cellular Automata (1D
ECA)
Introductio
to the 1D
ECA
Simulator
09/11/2023, 16:19 1D Elementary Cellular Automata
https://elife-asu.github.io/wss-modules/modules/1-1d-cellular-automata/ 1/4
CA Rule:  Size: 
    
Set initial cells:  
1D Elementary Cellular Automata (1DECA)
Introductioto the 1DECASimulator
Macro
Micro
b) Rule 150
09/11/2023, 16:17 1D Elementary Cellular Automata
https://elife-asu.github.io/wss-modules/modules/1-1d-cellular-automata/ 1/4
CA Rule:  Size: 
    
Set initial cells:  
1D Elementary Cellular Automata (1D
ECA)
Introductio
to the 1D
ECA
Simulator
09/11/2023, 16:17 1D Elementary Cellular Automata
https://elife-asu.github.io/wss-modules/modules/1-1d-cellular-automata/ 1/4
CA Rule:  Size: 
    
Set initial cells:  
1D Elementary Cellular Automata (1DECA)
Introductioto the 1DECASimulator
Macro
Micro
FIG. 8. Conserved quantities in elementary cellular automata. Illustration of the computations associated to different
types of conserved quantities. a) Rule 60 forces configurations to have even parity. Hence, the parity is a conserved quantity
which is computationally trivial, akin to case (c) in Figure 7. b) In contrast, rule 150 keeps the parity of the initial condition.
Hence, while the parity is also a conserved quantity for these dynamics, the computations associated with it are non-trivial,
akin to case (a) in Figure 7.
cessible. For example, if Zt = f(Xt) = c is a constant
coarse-graining, that means that all micro-states X ′
t such
that f(X ′
t) ̸= c cannot occur.
Let us illustrate these ideas in an concrete example
based on cellular automata (see Figure 8). Consider an
elementary cellular automaton whose state of itsn binary
cells at time t is denoted by Xt = (X(1)
t , . . . , X(n)
t ) [55].
Let’s focus on the so-called ‘rule 150’, whose temporal
evolution is equivalent to a triple xor logic gate:
X(k)
t+1 ≡ X(k−1)
t + X(k)
t + X(k+1)
t (mod 2) (4)
for 2 ≤ k ≤ n − 1. For the sake of symmetry, let’s also
impose circular conditions, so that X(1)
t+1 ≡ X(n)
t + X(1)
t +
X(2)
t (mod 2) and X(n)
t+1 ≡ X(n−1)
t + X(n)
t + X(1)
t (mod 2).
It can be shown (e.g. via direct numerical evaluation)
that this system is stationary under the uniform dis-
tribution on the 2 n possible states. This implies that
I(Xt; Xt−1) = H(Xt+1) = n, where the first equality is
a consequence of the fact that the automaton’s evolution
is deterministic.
Consider now a coarse-graining that returns the parity
of a given state, i.e. Zt ≡Pn
k=1 X(k)
t (mod 2). A direct
calculation shows that this is a conserved quantity of the
dynamics of rule 150, as
Zt+1 ≡
nX
k=1
X(k)
t+1 (mod 2) (5)
≡
nX
k=1
3X(k)
t (mod 2) (6)
≡
nX
k=1
X(k)
t (mod 2) (7)
≡ Zt . (8)
Moreover, it can be seen that H(Zt) = 1, as the par-
ity of the state can be 0 or 1 with equal probability if
X is initialised at the uniform distribution. Therefore,
while the microscopic system computes n bits, Zt only
computes one — in this case, in the form of information
storage [56]. This shows that this invariant is not trivial
and also not equal to the microstate, hence corresponding
to class (a) in Fig. 7.
For a contrast, let us consider another elementary cel-
lular automata: number 60, whose rule of evolution is
equivalent to a single xor
X(k)
t+1 ≡ X(k)
t + X(k+1)
t (mod 2). (9)
It can be shown that, for this case, the parity Zt ≡Pn
k=1 X(k)
t (mod 2) is always even, i.e. that Zt = 0.


=== PAGE 12 ===

12
This makes Z an invariant whose associated computa-
tion, however, is trivial, representing class (c) in Fig. 7.
This also reveals, as argued above, that certain micro-
scopic states are not reached by the dynamics — namely,
the states with odd parity (see Figure 8).
B. Ehrenfest diffusion model
Let us now study a computationally closed quantity
that is not invariant. For this, let us consider the
Ehrenfest model [21, §7.3], which is a popular diffu-
sion model in statistical mechanics. This model describes
the behaviour of a gas in a container made of two in-
terconnected chambers (see Fig. 9a). The state of the
n molecules of the gas at time t is described by a n-
dimensional binary vector Xt = (X(1)
t , . . . , X(n)
t ), where
X(k)
t ∈ { 0, 1} determines in which of the two chambers
the k-th molecule is located. The dynamics of the gas
are then established as follows:
• At each timepoint, one of the n molecules is chosen
randomly with equal probability.
• With probability q, move the chosen particle to the
other chamber. Otherwise, leave the molecule in
its current chamber.
The system has two parameters: the total number of
particles n, and q ∈ [0, 1] that regulates how easy is for
molecules to move between the two chambers. Hence, if
there are z ∈ { 0, . . . , n} particles in the first chamber,
there is a probability of z/n of choosing one of them.
Therefore, one can find that there are three possible
actions: (i) move a molecule from the first to the sec-
ond chamber with probability qz/n, (ii) move a particle
from the second to the first chamber with probability
q(n − z)/n, or (iii) leave the particles the way they are
with probability 1 − q. These dynamics on X are equiv-
alent to a random walk (i.e., a Markov chain) on the
edges of an n-dimensional cube, as each step involves at
modifying the state along not more than one dimension.
Let us now consider the following coarse-graining:
Zt =
nX
k=1
X(k)
t , (10)
which tracks the number of molecules in each partition.
At each timepoint, Zt can either increase by 1, decrease
by 1, or stay the same; however, for n ≫ 1 there is a
trend for Zt to move towardsn/2, which makes the model
a useful testbed to study thermalisation processes [57].
It can be shown that Z is a (time-homogeneous)
Markov chain [21], which implies that only the number of
particles — and not their identities — in each chamber
matters for the evolution of Zt. The finite state machine
equivalent of Z is given in Figure 9b. Moreover, it can be
shown [21, p. 170] that Z is a Markov chain irrespective
of the initial distribution of X — i.e. that it is strongly
Xt = (0,0,1,0,1, . . . ,1)
Zt = ∑ X k
t n − Zt
zz − 10 z + 1 n···
···
···
···
q(n−z−1)
n
qz
n
q(n−z)
n
q(z+1)
n1 − q 1 − q 1 − q 1 − q 1 − q
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000
10
20
30
Time
Zt
a)
b)
c)
FIG. 9. Ehrenfest diffusion model. a) The model con-
siders particles contained in two connected chambers. The
microscopic description of the system ( Xt) is a binary vector
that specifies in which container is each particle, while the
macroscopic description (Zt) is the number of particles in the
left chamber. b) Illustration of the finite state machine de-
scription of the ϵ-machine corresponding to the macroscopic
variable. c) One realisation of the dynamics of the macro-
scopic process of a system of n = 40 particles, which naturally
oscillates around n/2.
lumpable (see Definition 7). Thanks to Proposition 4,
this implies that Z is causally closed in the sense of Def-
inition 3, and furthermore is also computationally closed
thanks to Theorem 2.
The implications of these results can be contemplated
from various angles. From a interventional perspective,
this implies that if one wants to control the evolution of
the number of particles in each chamber, one does not
need to worry about the exact placement of individual
particles Xt beyond what is specified by Zt — that is,
setting Zt gives all the control that is possible about fu-
ture values. From the point of view of simulations, this
implies that one can investigate the dynamics of Z (as
shown in Fig. 9b) by direct simulation of their Markov dy-
namics while disregarding X. This is guaranteed by the
fact that, thanks to causal closure, including the full state
X into the simulation adds nothing relevant to the evolu-
tion of Z. Finally, from an theoretical perspective, these
results imply that this system has a non-trivial macro-
scopic level that runs and processes information irrespec-


=== PAGE 13 ===

13
tive of the microscopic details in a software-like manner.
Following Proposition 3, the total information processed
by the system at each time-step (given by I(Xt; Xt+1))
can be decomposed into the portion that is processed at
the macro level (given by I(Zt; Zt+1)) and the one that
is not (given by I(Xt; Xt+1) − I(Zt; Zt+1)). Overall,
these findings enable a deeper view on the dynamics of
the Ehrenfest model, revealing specific ways in which it
can be efficiently predicted and controlled.
C. Ising model with Glauber dynamics
Let us now study another open system, this time in-
cluding interactions between its microscopic components.
Consider a collection of n magnetic spins, whose state at
time t is described by the vector Xt = (X(1)
t , . . . , X(n)
t ),
where X(k)
t = 1 if the k-th spin is pointing up and
X(k)
t = −1 if it is pointing down. The energy of the sys-
tem on state Xt is determined by a Hamiltonian E(Xt).
Furthermore, let’s consider standard Glauber dynam-
ics [58, 59] (which is closely related with the so-called
kinetic Ising model [60]) observing the following transi-
tion probability:
pXt+1|Xt(x′|x) =



1+tanh β∆E
2n if x′ ∈ B(x),
1 −P
x′∈B(x)
1+tanh β∆E
2n if x′ = x,
0 otherwise,
where B(x) are the set of configurations that differ from
x in exactly one spin, and ∆E = E(x) − E(x′) [61]. These
statistics can be conceived as arising from the following
procedure:
• While being at state x at timepoint t, choose one of
the n spins randomly with equal probability. De-
note by x′ ∈ B(x) the state that is equal tox except
with one selected spin being flipped.
• Calculate the energy difference between x and x′ as
∆E = E(x) − E(x′).
• Adopt x′ as state in timepoint t+1 with probability
p = (1 + tanhβ∆E)/2, otherwise stay in x.
It can be shown [58] that those dynamics satisfies detailed
balance, and gives rise to a unique stationary distribu-
tion that corresponds to the standard Boltzmann-Gibbs
distribution given by
˜p(x) = e−βE(x)
Z , (11)
with Z =P
x e−βE(x) being the partition function.
Let us now consider the coarse-graining Zt = E(Xt),
which establishes the dynamics of the energy of the sys-
tem. For simplicity of the analysis, let’s assume that the
system is such that its Hamiltonian is invariant under
Xt Xt+1
Zt = E(Xt) Zt+1 = E(Xt+1) . . .. . .
Macro
Micro
FIG. 10. Energy dynamics of an Ising model are
causally closed. When considering the Ising model under
Glauber dynamics, it can be shown that its energy is a macro-
scopic variable whose dynamics are causally — and hence also
computationally — closed.
spin permutations [62]. Using this symmetry, it is possi-
ble to show that
pZt+1|Xt(z|x) = ψ
 
z, E(x)

, (12)
where ψ(z, e) is a function of the binary vector z and the
scalar e. This implies that the υ-machine of Z is equal
to its ϵ-machine — i.e. that Z is causally closed. Thanks
to Theorem 2, this in turn implies that Z is also com-
putationally closed. It can be shown Z is generally not
computationally equivalent to X as the ϵ-machine of X
is generally richer than the one of Z (as the specific con-
figuration x often makes a difference for pXt+1|Xt(x′|x)),
hence belonging to class (a) in Figure 7.
The fact that the Hamiltonian of an Ising model is com-
putationally closed under Glauber dynamics implies that
the dynamics of the energy does not depend on micro-
scopic details, but only on the current energy level. This
has similar implications for simulations and interventions
as in the case of the Ehrenfest model: a simulation of en-
ergy dynamics in absence of its microscopic instantiation
can be exact, and macroscopic interventions to drive its
future evolution can exhert as much control as it is pos-
sible.
D. Random walks over modular networks
Let us now study a system that has several nested
levels of causally closed dynamics. For this, consider a
random walk over a weighted network with a modular
structure, made by M strongly connected communities
of nodes that are weakly connected between each other.
For simplicity, let’s assume that the links of this net-
work are characterised by two parameters: the weight
of the connections within individual modules, rw, and
the weight of the connection between different modules,


=== PAGE 14 ===

14
rb, with rw ≫ rb. Additionally, let’s consider a random
walker which moves from node to node on this network
over discrete time-steps; it decides to move to another
node with probability q, and chooses its destination with
probability proportional to the strength of the link con-
necting them.
Let us calculate the statistics of such random walk.
For this, let’s denote as cx the label of the community
to which node x belongs and N the set of nodes of the
network. Consider Xt ∈ N to be the state of the random
walker at time t, whose transition probabilities are
pXt+1|Xt(x′|x) =



1 − q if x = x′,
qrw/ϕ(cx) if cx = cx′,
qrb/ϕ(cx) if cx ̸= cx′.
(13)
Above, ϕ(cx) = rw|cx|+rb(n−|cx|− 1) is a normalisation
term to guanrantee that the probabilities sum up to one,
which depends only on the size of the current commu-
nity, denoted by |cx|. With this conditional probability,
the resulting random walk will tend to roam around a
given module, and will jump between modules only oc-
casionally due to the significantly greater connectivity
within than between modules.
Let us now consider the following coarse-graining:
Zt = cXt = f(Xt), where f : N → { 1, . . . M} is a func-
tion that returns the index of the module to which the
given node — its argument — belongs. One can show
that
pZt+1|Xt(z|x) =
(
|z| · rw/K if z = f(x),
|z| · rb/K if z ̸= f(x). (14)
where z ∈ { 1, . . . , M} is a community index, |z| its
size, and K is a normalising constant. The fact that
pZt+1|Xt(z|x) only depends on f(x) but not on x itself
shows that Z is causally closed. Furthermore, thanks to
Theorem 2, Z is also computationally closed. Addition-
ally, if the probability of staying in the same node (1 − q)
is different from the one moving to another node in the
same community, then X and Z are not computationally
equivalent. Indeed, in that case pXt+1|Xt(x′|x) changes
for different nodes x within the same community, making
the ϵ-machine of X have more states than the ϵ-machine
of Z — and hence belonging in class (a) in Figure 7.
Under some circumstances, this system exhibits mul-
tiple nested levels that are causally closed. To see this,
let’s consider the coarse-graining Wt = h(Zt) which iden-
tifies communities of different cardinalities but does not
disambiguate between communities of the same size. For
example, if the network considers two communities of
10 elements and three of 20 elements, Wt only discrim-
inates if the random walker is located in a community
with 10 elements or in one with 20. Following an argu-
ment analogous to the one made with respect toZ, it can
be shown that W is also causally closed: by considering
the conditional probability pWt+1|Xt(w|x), one can show
that it depends only in h
 
f(x)

, which shows that the
Size= 25 Size= 9
D
C
E
B
A
FIG. 11. Causally closed coarse-grainings of a random
walk over a network. A random walk on a modular net-
work can be coarse-grained such that the dynamics over the
module’s labels is causally closed. Furthermore, by consider-
ing equivalence classes of modules given by their size provides
a further causally closed macroscopic process.
υ-machine of W is equal to its ϵ-machine and hence it is
causally close. Hence, thanks to Theorem 2, W is also
computationally closed.
This analysis shows that the computations involved in
this random walk can be construed as taking place in (at
least) three nested levels: first the cardinality of the fu-
ture community is determined, then the specific identity
of the community is chosen, and finally the specific node
within that community is decided. Crucially, Proposi-
tion 3 states that the information processed by the com-
putations taking place at high levels is done in isolation of
what happens in the lower ones. This has similar conse-
quences as for previous examples: macroscopic dynamics


=== PAGE 15 ===

15
can be predicted and simulated in isolation of microscopic
details, and macroscopic interventions guarantee optimal
macroscopic controllability.
E. Agent-based simulation
Further examples for systems with computational clo-
sure can be found in the literature of agent-based models,
which provides useful tools to investigate collective hu-
man and animal behaviour [63]. Agent-based models are
usually Markov chains defined over large state-spaces,
which establish the possible configurations for a collec-
tion of interacting agents. In most cases the aim of a
simulation is not to identify the exact behaviour of indi-
vidual agents, but rather to characterise their aggregate
statistics — e.g., the number of agents in a given state.
These aggregate statistics can be seen as coarse-grainings
Z of the underlying agent-based model X.
The literature has studied settings under which agent-
based models are lumpable — i.e., conditions under
which the sequence of aggregate statistics is itself a
Markov chain. Examples for this line of work are studies
on opinion dynamics such as the voter models [64, 65] or
agent movement on graphs [66]. Lumpability is a useful
feature in agent-based modelling, as it implies that one
can avoid running the whole model X and instead run
a reduced Markov chain that gives the evolution on the
coarse-graining Z. Indeed, as shown in Proposition 4, in
this case the coarse-graining Z is computationally closed.
To illustrate this principle, let us follow Ref. [66] and
consider an agent-based model that can be used to inves-
tigate agent mobility, e.g. to simulate the movement of
refugees in conflict locations. In this model, n agents
randomly move on a graph with L nodes, and Xt =
(X1
t , . . . , Xn
t ) denotes the microscopic state of the sys-
tem where X i
t ∈ { 1, . . . , L} denotes the location of the
i-th agent at timepoint t. At each iteration, an agent de-
cides to leave their current vertex with some probability
depending on the attributes of the current vertex. If the
agent decides to leave, then it moves to a neighbouring
vertex with a probability depending on the attributes of
the respective location and the weight of the connect-
ing edge. This procedure is repeated for all agents and
for a predefined number of iterations. Simulating the
full model has a computational cost that scales linearly
with the number of agents. However, the main aim of
refugee movement simulation is to identify not individ-
ual but collective behaviours — for example to deter-
mine the dynamics of the number of agents at particular
locations (e.g., humanitarian camps). Hence, the goal
is not to study the dynamics of so-called ‘world config-
uration’ Xt, but rather to infer properties of a coarse-
graining Zt defined as the vector of the number of agents
at specific locations. Mathematically, Zt = (Z1
t , . . . , ZL
t ),
where Z ℓ
t = Pn
i=1 |{i : X i
t = ℓ}| with |A| denoting the
cardinality of the set A.
Importantly, it has been shown that — under cer-
tain conditions — the original agent-based model X is
lumpable w.r.t. this coarse-graining, i.e., that the con-
ditional probability of the agent population vector state
Zt depends only on the agent population Zt−1 of the
previous iteration, and not on the world state Xt−1 [66].
Thanks for Theorem 3, it follows that the coarse-graining
Z is informationally closed, and due to Theorem 2 it is
also computationally closed.
As a consequence, rather than simulating the full
agent-based model, it is sufficient to simulate the re-
distribution of populations over vertices, i.e., to simulate
Z. Importantly, the computational complexity of sim-
ulating Z does not depend strongly on the number of
agents n, but rather on the number of locations L, which
is typically much smaller than the number of agents. This
example illustrates an important aspect of computational
closure: computationally closed coarse-grainings may al-
low exact simulations — and hence forecasting and pre-
dictions — that may be unfeasible to run otherwise.
F. Memory retrieval and attractor dynamics
To conclude, let us study a recurrent neural network
architecture that models how associative memory works
in the human brain [67]. For this, we will focus on the
well-known Hopfield network model [68–70], which pro-
vides a simple but foundational instantiation to the long-
standing principle that memories are not stored inside
individual neurons, but rather in their synapses [71, 72].
Following Ref. [73], let us consider a Hopfield network
of n neurons, which is a system with Markovian dynamics
where neurons are modeled as binary units that can be in
states on (X j
t = 1) or off (X j
t = −1). Neurons interact
with each other via synapses, whereas the weight of the
synapsis from the i-th towards the j-th neuron is denoted
by wi,j. The input potential of the j-th neuron at time t
is then given by
hj
t =
X
i
wi,jX j
t . (15)
This potential determines the update of the j-th neuron
as follows:
P

X j
t+1 = 1|Xt
	
= g
 
hj
t

, (16)
where Xt = ( X1
t , . . . , Xn
t ) and g is a monotonous non-
linear function of hj
t. A common choice is
g(h) = (1 + tanhβh)/2, (17)
with the inverse temperature parameter β controlling
the stochasticity of the system. In particular, β → ∞
leads to deterministic dynamics given by g(h) =
 
1 +
sign(h)

/2. Furthermore, for simplicity it is assumed
that the dynamics of the whole system are simply a com-
bination of the individual dynamics, i.e.
P

Xt+1 = xt+1|Xt
	
=
Y
j
P

X j
t+1 = xj
t+1|Xt
	
. (18)


=== PAGE 16 ===

16
How can a Hopfield network store and retrieve memory
patterns? Let us denote the patterns to be stored as
p1, . . . , pm, with pµ = ( pµ
1 , . . . , pµ
n). Then, one defines
the synaptic weights as follows:
wi,j = 1
n
mX
µ=1
pµ
i pµ
j . (19)
Using those weights, the resulting dynamics of the Hop-
field network can be shown to have the mentioned pat-
terns as attractors. This can be seen by noting that the
energy function
E(Xt) = −
X
i
X
j
wi,jX i
t X j
t (20)
is a Lyapunov function of the deterministic dynamics
(β → ∞ ), and the m patterns pj constitute its local
minima (see Ref. [73]). Please note that the number of
patterns a network can retain depends on the stochastic-
ity of the system and the desired level of reliability, and is
usually much smaller than the number of neurons [74, 75].
Let us now consider a macroscopic description of the
system that is based on the memory patterns instead of
neurons. Following Ref. [73, Sec. 17.2.3], we consider
the projection of the current neural activity on the j-
th memory pattern as given by the dot product between
them:
Z µ
t = 1
n
X
i
pµ
i X i
t . (21)
Note that −1 ≤ Z µ
t ≤ 1, with
• Z µ
t = 1 if Xt and pµ are equal,
• Z µ
t = −1 if Xt and pµ are opposite, and
• Z µ
t ≈ 0 if Xt and pµ are uncorrelated (for large n,
which we assume here).
Finally, we define Zt = (Z1
t , . . . , Zm
t ) as the vector of all
m projections at time t (see Figure 12).
Let us show that Z is computationally closed. For this,
first we show that the neuron potential can be re-written
in terms of these projections as follows:
hj
t =
X
i
wi,jX j
t = 1
n
X
i
X
µ
pµ
j pµ
i X i
t =
X
µ
pµ
j Z µ
t . (22)
This, combined with Eqs. (16) and (18), imply that
the transition probabilities P

Xt+1 = xt+1|Xt
	
depend
only on Zt, which in turns implies that H(Zt+1|Xt) =
H(Zt+1|Zt) guaranteeing that Z is informationally
closed. This, in turn, implies — due to Theorem 2 —
that Z is computationally closed with respect to X.
These results imply that Hopfield networks implement
processes of memory retrieval — more specifically, the
calculation of the similarity between the present and the
stored patterns — at a macroscopic level, such that its
processing of information takes place independently of
the microscopic level of individual neurons.
Z 1
t
Z 2
t
Z 3
t
Z 4
t
Z 5
t
Zt = (Z 1
t , Z2
t , Z3
t , Z4
t , Z5
t )
Macro
Micro
FIG. 12. Hopfield network compute memory retrieval
on a causally closed macroscopic level . The state of
a Hopfield network is determined by the activity of each
of the involved neurons, here represented as a square grid.
Nonetheless, the similarity between the present pattern and
the patterns that the network stores (denoted by Z µ
t , with
µ ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} in the figure), which determines to which of
the stored patterns is more similar to the current configura-
tion. Our results show that Zt = ( Z 1
t , . . . , Z5
t ) is a causally
closed coarse-graining of the neural system, which critically
determines the memory retrieval process.
V. DISCUSSION
Understanding the nature of emergent macroscopic
phenomena is a fundamental theoretical challenge, and
also central for advancing in important open questions in
various branches of science. In this paper we introduce
a theory that investigates emergent phenomena from a
computational perspective, illuminating their inner work-
ings via core principles of theoretical computer science.
Specifically, the theory introduced in this paper explains
what it means for a natural system to display software-
like macroscopic processes in a way that is theoretically
sound and practically useful. In the sequel, we highlight
various implications of the theory, while also discussing
related work and outlining future research directions.


=== PAGE 17 ===

17
A. A computational blueprint of the functional
architecture of complex systems
By taking inspiration on how software works, our
approach articulates a view on emergence in terms of
macroscopic processes that are self-contained in causal,
informational, and computational terms. Our mathe-
matical formalism revealed a single condition (namely,
the equivalence between ϵ-machines and υ-machines) un-
der which macroscopic processes resulting from spatial
coarse-grainings guaratee all three properties. Processes
satisfying these properties possess a number of interest-
ing features. First, due to causal closure, all interventions
that drive such processes are accounted by events of the
processes themselves — and, in that sense, it can be said
that such a process ‘causes itself.’ Second, due to infor-
mation closure, microscopic events don’t have any addi-
tional predictive power over such process that couldn’t
be found in the process itself. This implies that optimal
prediction of such macroscopic processes can be attained
while disregarding all details about their microscopic in-
stantiation. Finally, due to computational closure, such
processes run a particular subset of the computations
carried out by the whole system in an autonomous man-
ner. As a consequence of this, such processes can be
thoroughly described without relying on the full micro-
scopic theory, but using solely a simpler, coarse-grained,
self-contained version of it.
In addition of characterising the properties of emer-
gent macroscopic processes individually, our theory also
accounts for the properties of them as a group. Indeed,
our formalism revealed that the collection of all emer-
gent processes are hierarchically organised into a lattice.
Furthermore, our results show that this lattice can be-
come substantially simpler when considered not in ‘real
space’ (i.e. in terms of coarse-grainings of states) but in
‘theory space’ (i.e. as nested computational machines),
which only accounts for processes that are computation-
ally distinct. Our results show how this hierarchy of
nested computational machines delineates a blueprint for
the functional architecture of the system, while also char-
acterising the computations running at each level.
Overall, the theoretical framework introduced in this
paper establishes a rigorous foundation to study emer-
gent processes akin of human-designed software on nat-
ural systems. Specifically, our theory provides concrete
criteria to answer under what conditions natural systems
can be said to be ‘running software’, and what are the
consequences of this.
B. The benefits of emergent macroscopic processes
The examples investigated in Section IV provide some
hints of why complex natural systems may exhibit macro-
scopic levels that are software-like.
First and foremost, causally closed levels can be ef-
ficiently controlled from just macroscopic interventions,
without needing to intervene on microscopic conditions.
For example, if one needs to control the dynamics of the
number of particles in each chamber in the Ehrenfest
model (see Section IV B), or the total energy in an Ising
model (see Section IV C), one can do this to the highest
possible precision by setting an initial condition that only
constrains the macroscopic property in question but oth-
erwise leaves the remaining details unspecified/random.
These results have an important practical implication:
these macroscopic thermodynamic quantities can be op-
timally controlled by the actions of macroscopic organ-
isms, whose scope of actions is restricted to set values
on macroscopic variables. This property may explain the
fact that macroscopic organisms can be highly causally-
effective on their environments without the need of hav-
ing to intervene on microscopic variables.
Additionally, the analysis done over Hopfield networks
(Section IV F) opens the door to interesting analyses of
biological process in general, and neural systems in par-
ticular. Our results show how the neural dynamics asso-
ciated to a process of memory retrieval can take place at a
macro level, being driven by macroscopic neural patterns
while being independent of the implementation of these
on the firing of individual neurons. As such, this analy-
sis establishes an objective procedure to evaluate when a
neural process is implementing a computation at a higher
level, having interesting parallels with the classic distinc-
tion of levels of analysis introduced by Marr [76]. Also,
these results provide a concrete operationalisation to the
notion of multiple realisability [23, 24], articulating how
equivalent software-like process may take place over dif-
ferent microscopic systems (see Section II A). However,
this approach does not satisfies — at least in princi-
ple — the idea of substrate independence [25], as the
causal relationships of the microscopic process determine
which macroscopic processes can take place over it, and
hence some processes may only be compatible with spe-
cific types of substrates. Building on these insights, fu-
ture work may investigate the applicability of such ap-
proaches to identify algorithms implemented on different
biological processes — neural and beyond.
Finally, causally closed processes have interesting
properties not only for the system itself, but also for the
scientist that study them. As remarked in the study of
agent-based modelling (Section IV E), computationally
closed levels allow the simulation of aspects of these pro-
cesses in an efficient yet precise manner. Indeed, the evo-
lution of causally closed levels can be thoroughly simu-
lated without accounting for the microscopic details that
underlie it, which can enable efficacious exact simulation
procedures of processes that may be unfeasible to run
otherwise.
C. Related literature and future work
The theory introduced here extends the framework
of dynamical independence proposed in Ref. [12], from


=== PAGE 18 ===

18
which it takes direct inspiration. Dynamical indepen-
dence proposes to identify emergent macroscopic pro-
cess via information closure, inheriting its strengths and
weaknesses (for example, as discussed in Section III E,
noise processes may satisfy dynamical independence
while having no underlying causal structure). One way to
circumvent these limitations is by requiring information
closure to be ‘non-trivial’, i.e. for emergent levels to actu-
ally carry some information processing [48]. In this work
we take a different approach by interpreting this limita-
tions as symptoms of a deeper issue: that information-
theoretic metrics alone are limited in the degree they can
assess the mechanisms driving the data-generating pro-
cess. This greatly limits the capability of these frame-
works not only to determine if a macro-variable is emer-
gent or not, but to provide a more detailed assessment
of how this may be taking place. Importantly, it has
been shown that statistical patterns can be qualitatively
different from their data-generating mechanisms [77]. By
embracing principles of computational mechanics and the
related notion of intrinsic computation [78, 79], our pro-
posed theory takes a first step in the direction of charac-
terising the mechanisms driving emergent processes from
a computational perspective.
The framework presented here have similar motiva-
tions to recent work reported in Ref. [34, Sec. VIII].
This approach characterises the degree of dependency
between microscopic and macroscopic levels combining
principles of computational mechanics with insights and
formal tools from fluid dynamics and dynamical systems
theory, being highly complementary with the approach
and tools developed here and well-suited for analysing
systems with continuous variables. Our framework also
has similar motivations and aims (although relying on
a radically different approach) with work reported in
Ref. [80], which introduces scalable methods to model
hidden dynamics driving time series data and hence being
promising in terms of its practical applicability. Future
work may try to combine the complementary strengths
of these approaches.
More broadly, there is an extensive literature consid-
ering efficient representations of microscopic processes,
which selects macroscopic processes via a variety of crite-
ria. Classic approaches include ‘lumpability’ techniques
(see Section 7 and Refs. [81–83]) and other aggrega-
tion approaches (e.g. Ref. [84, 85]). An interesting angle
on this problem is taken by Ref. [86], which considers
coarse-graining processes that balance predictability at
the macro level with the degree of computational com-
plexity involved in the coarse-graining mapping relating
microscopic and macroscopic levels. This idea is related
to a definition of emergence in terms of computational
mechanics properties presented in Ref. [20, Sec. 11.2.1],
based on the ratio between the information processed
by coarse-grainings and the informational cost of their
ϵ-machine (i.e. the entropy of the causal states). Includ-
ing the computational complexity of the coarse-graining,
and potentially linking it with thermodynamic consider-
ations, are important avenues for future work.
The framework presented here provides a natural com-
plement to the work presented in Ref. [87], which de-
scribes natural computation as the dual of prediction
— i.e., while prediction is a logical procedure that tell
us the result of the evolution of a system without run-
ning it, computation corresponds to the act of letting
a system run so that its evolution provides an answer
a query. While our theory can also be interpreted in
terms of relationships between ‘physical’ and ‘abstract’
processes and their predictability, our framework is ori-
ented to highlight the role of micro-to-macro relation-
ships, being closer in spirit to the recent literature on
information-theoretic methods to quantify emergence [8–
13] and other theoretical work focused on the relevance
of coarse-grainings [88]. Thus, further developing the no-
tion of ‘computation’ implied in the present framework is
a relevant avenue of future work, either by working along
the lines of Ref. [87], or by further developing the frame-
work with richer constructs from the theoretical com-
puter science literature — for instance, by considering
other machines from Choamsky’s computational hierar-
chy [44] instead of focusing solely in deterministic au-
tomata.
It is important to highlight that while the present
work follows a characterisation of emergence similar to
the one investigated by Ref. [12], other characterisations
of emergence exist (see e.g. Refs. [8–10]). An interest-
ing direction for future work is to investigate the fea-
sibility of operationalising other views on emergence in
terms of computational mechanics. Also, in this work
we conceive causality following the computational me-
chanics literature, following the principle of ‘differences
that make a difference.’ However, the quantitative char-
acterisation of causation is a challenging subject, with
a wide literature and no agreed-upon approach for its
quantification (see e.g. [89–92]). Note that while some of
the proposed metrics establish causation at the level of
individual events, the framework introduced here iden-
tified causation of variables in terms of other variables.
Extensions from variables to individual events could be
attempted via point-wise information-theoretic metrics
(see e.g. [93, 94]), being an interesting avenue for future
work.
Some of our results related to causal and informa-
tional closure are related with work reported in Ref. [95],
where the authors investigated how informational clo-
sure relates to other properties, including causal clo-
sure (which they call ‘commutativity’) and Markovianity.
Their results imply that informational closure is equiv-
alent to causal closure for spatial coarse-grainings, a re-
sult we generalise to non-Markovian processes and spatio-
temporal coarse graining functions in Theorem 1 [96].
Finally, it is important to remark that it is not straight-
forward to apply the present theory to empirical data of
large systems. The main limitation is the practical esti-
mation of potentially large ϵ-machines. There is promis-
ing work in this direction [97–99]), particularly exploiting


=== PAGE 19 ===

19
the relationship between ϵ- machines and the informa-
tion bottleneck [100], and recent extensions of state-space
modelling [101]. We leave it to future work to develop
suitably efficient and robust estimations procedures.
D. Final remarks
Given the central position that the notion of ‘computa-
tion’ has in our modern scientific worldview, it is natural
to wonder what a computational perspective can offer
to our fundamental understanding of natural processes
studied by physics, chemistry, and biology. While com-
puter science provides a rigorous and fundamental the-
ory based on the construct of Turing machines [102], the
application of these ideas to concrete scientific scenarios
(e.g. in physics or neuroscience) is not always straightfor-
ward [103]. We hope that the theory introduced in this
paper may serve as a first step towards a thorough char-
acterisation of emergent processes in a way that advances
theoretical discussions and also facilitate breakthroughs
in empirical scientific questions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Patricio Orio for helpful discussions
about cellular automata, and Lionel Barnett, Sebastian
Dohnany, and Clemens von Stengel for useful comments
about the manuscript. F.R. was supported by the Fellow-
ship Programme of the Institute of Cultural and Creative
Industries of the University of Kent, and the DIEP vis-
itors programme at the University of Amsterdam. The
work of B.G. was funded by the European Union’s Hori-
zon Europe research and innovation programme within
the KNOWSKITE-X project, under grant agreement No.
101091534. M.G. was supported in part by the Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant 200364.
APPENDIX: THE CALCULI OF MULTI-LEVEL
COMPUTATIONS
Here we present the fundamental mathematical results
that are at the basis of our framework, which was infor-
mally described in Section III.
1. Scenario and basic assumptions
Let us consider a dynamical process of interest whose
evolution can be described by a time series — i.e., a
stochastic process Xt sampled at discrete times t ∈ Z.
To simplify the results presented in this paper, we adopt
two assumptions. First, it is assumed that Xt takes val-
ues on a discrete alphabet X . Secondly, the statistics of
the system of interest (which may be Markovian or non-
Markovian) are assumed to be stationary — i.e. to have
the same statistics for different timepoints. Extensions
for non-stationary processes and/or general alphabets are
possible, but will be left for future work.
As for notation, random variables are in general de-
noted by capital letters (e.g. X, Y ) and their realisations
by lower case letters (e.g. x, y). Time series are denoted
by bold letters without subscript X = {Xt}t∈Z, finite
trajectories by ⃗X L
t := ( Xt, . . . , Xt+L), the infinite fu-
ture as ⃗Xt = ( Xt, Xt+1, . . .), and the infinite past as
⃗X t = (. . . , Xt−1, Xt). For distributions of random vari-
ables, we use the random variables as subscripts, i.e.,
pX(x) = P(X = x). We drop the subscript if it is clear
from the context. The Shannon entropy of a random
variable X is denoted by H(X), and the mutual infor-
mation between X and Y by I(X; Y ). Finally, we call
random variables X and Y equivalent if and only if there
is a bijection f such that X = f(Y ) almost surely, i.e.
with probability 1.
2. Coarse-grainings and ϵ-machines
A coarse-grained description of a variable X is another
variable Z such that a (deterministic) coarse-graining
mapping g exists such that Z = g(X). For example,
X could be a Gaussian random variable and Z could be
1 if X ≥ 0 and 0 otherwise. The range of values that
a coarse-grained representation can adopt is equal to or
smaller than the range of the original system. Crucially,
if Z = g(X) then observing a change in Z always implies
that there was a change in X, but if X is changed this
does not imply that Z will — an asymmetry known as
‘supervenience’ [104].
Let us extend the idea of coarse-graining from vari-
ables to time series. A coarse-graining of a time series X
is another time series Z such that there exists a coarse-
graining mapping g such that Zt = g( ⃗X t) for all t, so
that Z summarises spatio-temporal trajectories of X. A
coarse-grained time series Z will be described informally
as being a macroscopic process related to a microscopic
process X. We denote by GX := [ X ∗ → R] the set of
all possible coarse-graining functions taking the past ⃗X t
as input (with X ∗ denoting the set of infinite strings
corresponding to all possible past trajectories), and by
FX := [X → R] the subset of all purely spatial (i.e. non-
temporal) coarse-grainings of the form Zt = f(Xt).
When considering two coarse-grainings Z(1) and Z(2),
we use the notation Z(1) ⪰ Z(2) to denote when Z(1)
is by itself also a coarse-graining of Z(2). Two coarse-
grainings are equivalent if they satisfy both Z(1) ⪰ Z(2)
and Z(2) ⪰ Z(1), which corresponds to cases where there
exists a bijection between them. Two coarse-graining
functions g1, g2 ∈ G X are said to be equivalent if they
lead to equivalent coarse-grainings.
Lemma 1. For a given processX, the collection GX with
⪰ forms a lattice, with the infimum given by the identity
mapping and supremum given by a constant mapping.
The set FX constitutes a sublattice of GX .


=== PAGE 20 ===

20
Proof. Let us consider two coarse-grainings of X denoted
by Z and Z ′. To show that ⪰ induces a partial ordering,
one needs to prove that if X ⪰ Y and Y ⪰ Z, then X ⪰
Z, which is a natural consequence of the composition of
coarse-graining functions. The proof of the infimum and
supremum follows from the fact that X ⪰ Z ⪰ 0 for all
coarse-grainings Z, where the supremmum X is obtained
via the identity function and 0 is a trivial coarse-graining
obtained from a constant function mapped to 0. Finally,
the fact that both X and 0 also belong to FX shows that
it is a sublattice.
We now introduce the idea of ϵ-machines of a macro-
scopic processes. For this, we build on the classic defini-
tion of ϵ-machine [20].
Definition 1 (ϵ-machine). The causal states of a pro-
cess X are the equivalence classes corresponding to the
following equivalence relationship (see Figure 1):
⃗xt ≡ϵ ⃗x′
t iff p(⃗xL
t+1| ⃗xt) = p(⃗xL
t+1| ⃗x′
t) ∀⃗xL
t+1, L ∈ N.
The ϵ-machine of a process X is given by the pair
(ϵ, T x
e,e′), where ϵ( ⃗X t) = Et is the mapping that assigns
their causal state to individual trajectories, and T x
e,e′ is
the resulting transition probabilities of the form
T x
e,e′ = P{Et = e′, Xt = x|Et−1 = e} .
It can be shown that the causal states are the coarsest
coarse-graining of past trajectories of the process that
retains full predictive power over its future evolution —
i.e. if the time series of causal states is denoted by E,
then I( ⃗X t; ⃗X L
t+1) = I(Et; ⃗X L
t+1) for all future horizons
L ∈ N [37, 38]. Moreover, it can be shown that E always
exhibits Markovian dynamics, irrespective of the com-
plexity of the memory structure of X. The ϵ-machine
is thought to describe the computations that give rise
to the observed data representing them via an automa-
ton [44], as it is the most parsimonious state machine
whose transitions generate the actual data that is ob-
served (see Section II B).
By noting that the dynamics in X naturally induce
dynamics on a coarse-graining Z, one can directly ap-
ply Definition 1 to Z. Intuitively, the ϵ-machine of a
coarse-graining Z is an optimal representation of past
trajectories at that level of resolution (i.e. trajectories
of ⃗zt instead of ⃗xt), which are grouped according to
their forecasting abilities into causal states E′. Note that
the causal states of Z are also Markovian and informa-
tionally optimal at a macroscopic level, i.e. they satisfy
I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1) for all L ∈ N.
Let us think how the different machines relate to each
other. If X represents a fully observed (physical) process
governed by a given (physical) law, then theϵ-machine of
X represents the computations taking place at this most
resolved level — representing ‘the laws’ governing the
system. Similarly, the ϵ-machine of Z is the best possible
reconstruction of the computations that take place at
scale of resolution. Critically, such reconstruction may
be losing relevant information about the underlying laws,
i.e. about the ϵ-machine of X. It is natural to wonder
how the collection of ϵ-machines of all coarse-grainings of
a given process X are related. Unfortunately, in general
the members of such collection do not — to the best of
our knowledge — relate to each other in a simple manner.
For example, theϵ-machine of a coarse-graining ofX may
not be a coarse-graining of the ϵ-machine of X, as shown
in the next example.
Counterexample 1 (Incompatibility between
ϵ-machines at different levels) . Consider a Markov
chain X with three states a, b, and c. Let us assume
that the vectors of outgoing transition probabilities of a
and b are positive and identical. Then, the ϵ-machine E
has only two causal states, namely, {a, b} and c.
Now assume that there is no transition from c to b,
and that the transitions from b to a and from c to a
have different probabilities. Suppose the coarse-graining
Zt = f(Xt) is such that Zt = A if Xt = a and Zt = B
otherwise. It can be shown that Z is not Markov. In-
deed, the longer Z remains in state B, the higher the
probability that Xt = c (as there are no transitions from
c to b). Thus, since the transition probabilities into a are
different for b and c, the ϵ-machine E′ of Z has causal
states {A, (BA), (BBA), (BBBA ), . . .}. Since evidently
E′ has more than two causal states, it cannot be a coarse-
graining of the ϵ-machine E of X.
3. υ-machines
We now introduce a new class of machines associated
with coarse-grainings, which we call υ-machines — which
are illustrated in Figure 3.
Definition 2 (υ-machine). The causal states of the pro-
cess X with respect to its coarse-graining Z are the col-
lection of equivalence classes given by
⃗xt ≡υ ⃗x′
t iff p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) = p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗x′
t) ∀⃗zt+1, L ∈ N.
The υ-machine of the coarse-graining Z is then given by
the pair (υ, T x
e,e′), where υ( ⃗X t) = Ut is the mapping that
assigns the causal state with respect to Z to individual
trajectories ⃗xt, and T z
u,u′ is the resulting transition prob-
abilities of the form
T z
u,u′ = P{Ut = u′, Zt = z|Ut−1 = u} .
Unlike the ϵ-machine of X that predicts the whole (de-
tailed) future ⃗Xt+1, the υ-machine of a coarse-graining
Z is made of the collection of causal states of the micro-
scopic process X that are needed to optimally predict
only its coarse-graining ⃗Zt+1. Building on this intuition,
we now show that the causal states of the υ-machine
correspond to the coarsest coarse-graining of X that is
maximally predictive of Z (which provides an alternative
characterisation of them).


=== PAGE 21 ===

21
Proposition 1. Consider Z a coarse-graining of X, and
U the time series of causal states of the υ-machine. Then
I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1) for all L ∈ N. Moreover, if D
is another coarse-graining of X such that I(Dt; ⃗Z L
t+1) =
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1) for all L ∈ N, then the υ-machine of Z is a
coarse-graining of D.
Proof. The first assertion follows directly from the defi-
nition of the υ-machine. Namely, observe that
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1) =
X
⃗xt
p( ⃗xt)D

p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt)
p(⃗zL
t+1)

. (A.1)
Noting that p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) only depends on which equiva-
lence class ut the sequence ⃗xt belongs to, and by the
construction of ut, we can equivalently write
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1) =
X
ut
p(ut)D

p(⃗zL
t+1|ut)
p(⃗zL
t+1)

, (A.2)
and the latter is precisely equal to I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1).
For the second assertion, let us consider D a coarse-
graining of X, and express the mutual information be-
tween D and Z in terms of Kullback-Leibler divergences
as follows:
I(Dt; ⃗Z L
t+1) =
X
dt
p(dt)D

p(⃗zL
t+1|dt)
p(⃗zL
t+1)

. (A.3)
Our strategy will be to investigate under which condi-
tions this expression is smaller than I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1).
Let’s first consider what happens if Dt only lumps
together trajectories of ⃗xt that have the same condi-
tional probabilities p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt). Then, I(Dt; ⃗Z L
t+1) =
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1), as each Kullback-Leibler term in the sum-
mation stays the same, and the probabilities p(dt) just
group together probabilities of the corresponding trajec-
tories. Said differently, lumping together terms with sim-
ilar conditionals results on a rearranging of the summa-
tion terms and their weights, but nothing more.
Let’s now consider what happens if Dt lumps at least
two trajectories with different conditional probabilities
p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt), and show that in this scenario the mutual
information will necessarily drop. For this, let’s assume
that Dt = d0 is lumping together trajectories ⃗xt and ⃗x′
t
that have different conditional probabilities. Then, first
notice that
p(dt)p(⃗zL
t+1|dt) = p(dt, ⃗zL
t+1)
= p( ⃗xt, ⃗zL
t+1) + p( ⃗x′
t, ⃗zL
t+1)
= p( ⃗xt)p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) + p( ⃗x′
t)p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗x′
t)
and then
p(⃗zL
t+1|dt) = r · p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) + s · p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗x′
t), (A.4)
where r + s = 1 is an affine combination. Using then the
fact that the KL is strictly convex, i.e. that if q1 and q2
are different then
D(r · q1 + s · q2||p) < r · D(q1||p) + s · D(q2||p), (A.5)
one can show that the mutual information with such
coarse-graining cannot be maximal, i.e. that some infor-
mation must be lost.
This shows that any maximally informative coarse-
graining can only lump trajectories that have the same
conditionals. And the coarsest one is the one that lumps
them all, which is by definition the υ-machine. There-
fore, any coarse-graining that is maximally informative
will be compatible with the υ-machine, but may be less
coarse.
It is natural to wonder how the υ-machine and ϵ-
machine of a coarse-graining are related to each other.
Our next result shows that the υ-machine of Z is al-
ways more information-powerful than the ϵ-machine of
Z. Intuitively, this is a consequence of the fact that the
former can rely on information that is in X but may not
be accessible in Z.
Lemma 2. Consider Z to be a coarse-graining ofX, and
denote by U and E′ the time series of the causal states
of its υ-machine and ϵ-machine, respectively. Then, the
following relationship is satisfied for all future horizons
L ∈ N:
I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) ≥ I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1).
Proof. By the definition of ϵ-machines, we must have
I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1), while by the definition of
υ-machines, we have I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1). The
lemma is then proven by a simple application of the
data processing inequality, which states that since ⃗Z t
is a function (a coarse-graining) of ⃗X t, we must have
I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1) ≤ I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1).
This lemma could perhaps give the impression that
the causal states of the ϵ-machine of Z may simply be a
coarse-graining of the causal states of its υ-machine. Un-
fortunately, this is not the case — rather, these machines
can be related in highly non-trivial ways, as illustrated
by our next example.
Counterexample 2 (Incompatibility between
υ-machine and ϵ-machine of a macroscopic process). We
reconsider the Markov chain X and its coarse-graining
from Counterexample 1. Recall that the time series of
causal states of X, E, alternate between two causal
states states, {a, b} and {c}. As we will show later in
Proposition 2, since the coarse-graining mapping f that
defines Z is spatial, the causal states of the υ-machine
U of Z is a coarse-graining of E; hence, it can have
at most two causal states. Recall further that the time
series of causal states of the ϵ-machine of Z, E′, has
causal states states {A, (BA), (BBA), (BBBA ), . . .}.
Since evidently E′ has more than two causal states (i.e.,
more states than U has), there cannot be a mapping
f ∈ F E such that E′
t = f(Ut).


=== PAGE 22 ===

22
4. Information and causal closure
The υ-machine of a coarse-grainingZ captures the hid-
den states whose computations drive its evolution as seen
from X, while the ϵ-machine of Z is the best effort to cap-
ture such states using only information from that scale
of resolution (see Figure 3). Hence, if the ϵ-machine of
a macroscopic process is as powerful as its υ-machine
(concretely, if there exists a bijection between the causal
states of both, E′
t and Ut), then one can say that all the
relevant causal relationships take place at that macro-
scopic scale. This principle sets the basis for defining
macroscopic processes that are causally closed.
Definition 3 (Causal closure). A coarse-graining Z is
said to be causally closed if the coarse-grainings induced
by its ϵ-machine and υ-machine are equivalent.
Let us illustrate how coarse-grainings can be causally
closed in a minimal example.
Example 1. Consider a stationary Markov chain X that
can take one of three values X = {a, b, c}. This system is
fully described by a 3×3 transition probability matrix that
gives the probabilities p(x′|x) := P{Xt+1 = x′|Xt = x}
for x, x′ ∈ X , which has 6 degrees of freedom (as there are
three conditional probabilities that sum up to 1). Let us
consider a generic coarse-graining of such system given
by Zt = g(Xt), with the mapping g defined by
g(x) =
(
0 if x ∈ {a, b},
1 if x = c.
To investigate under what conditions is Zt causally
closed, let’s build the υ-machine for predicting Zt+1 in
terms of Xt. For this, first note that
P{Zt+1 = 0|Xt = x} = p(a|x) + p(b|x),
P{Zt+1 = 1|Xt = x} = p(c|x).
From here one can realise that the ϵ-machine and υ-
machine of Z are equivalent if the υ-machine is unable
to distinguish the states that are merged by the coarse-
graining, i.e. we need P{Zt+1 = r|Xt = a} = P{Zt+1 =
r|Xt = b} for r ∈ { 0, 1}. Furthermore, by noticing that
P{Zt+1 = 1 |Xt = v} = 1 − P{Zt+1 = 0 |Xt = v}, this
leads to a single condition: p(c|a) = p(c|b).
Let us add one further definition of a similar but seem-
ingly weaker condition.
Definition 4 (Information closure) . A coarse-graining
Z of X is said to be informationally closed if it satisfies
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t) = 0 for all L ∈ N.
An informationally closed coarse-graining is such that
knowing the corresponding micro-state does not provide
additional information about its future evolution over
what can be obtained from the past of the coarse-graining
itself. More technically, this condition corresponds to the
following Markov chain: ⃗X t − ⃗Z t − ⃗Zt+1, where knowing
⃗Z t makes ⃗X t and ⃗Zt+1 conditionally independent. This
condition makes ⃗Z t to be a sufficient statistic of ⃗X t for
predicting ⃗Zt+1. Information closure of coarse-grainings
have been studied by Refs. [12, 49].
While one could intuitively think that informational
closure would be a weaker notion than computational clo-
sure, our next result shows that both are, in fact, equiv-
alent.
Theorem 1. Let Z be a coarse-graining of X. Then,
the following conditions are equivalent:
(i) Z is causally closed.
(ii) Z is informationally closed.
(iii) The causal states of its υ-machine and ϵ-machine
of Z, denoted by U and E′, satisfy I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) =
I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1) for all L ∈ N.
Proof. Let us first prove the equivalence between (ii) and
(iii). This follows directly from the following calculation:
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t) = I( ⃗X t, ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1) − I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1) (A.6)
= I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z L
t+1) − I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1) (A.7)
= I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) − I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1) . (A.8)
Above, the first equality uses the chain rule for mutual
information (see e.g. [105, Thm.2.5.2]) which states that
I(W, V ; U) = I(V ; U) + I(W ; U |V ) for any random vari-
ables ( U, V, W), the second the fact that Z is a coarse-
graining (i.e. a deterministic function) of X, and the
third the properties of ϵ- and υ-machines.
Now, let’s prove the equivalence between (i) and (iii).
If Z is causally closed then there exists a bijection be-
tween E′
t and Ut, and hence I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1)
follows directly. To prove the converse, note that E′ is a
coarse-graining of X, since the causal states of a coarse-
graining is a coarse-graining of the original process. Now
note that I(Ut; ⃗Z L
t+1) = I(E′
t; ⃗Z L
t+1) implies that E′
t is
maximally predictive of Z. Due to Proposition 1, this
implies that Ut = f(E′
t). This, however, implies that U
is also a coarse-graining of Z. This, combined with the
minimality of E′
t with respect to Z (i.e. that it is the
coarses coarse-graining of ⃗Z t that still attains optimal
prediction), implies that the mapping f is a bijection.
Note that Lemma 2 shows that υ-machines are gen-
erally more powerful than the corresponding ϵ-machines;
the present result states that informational and causal
closure are characterised by the fact of them being
equally powerful.
5. The lattice of spatial υ-machines
While the results presented in previous sections in-
troduce useful relationships between υ-machines and ϵ-
machines of coarse-grainings, the relationship between


=== PAGE 23 ===

23
them and the ϵ-machine of the process itself remains
unclear. Unfortunately, no general simple relationship
exists between the ϵ-machine of X and υ-machines
of coarse-grainings for general (spatio-temporal) coarse-
grainings, as shown in the following example — which
illustrates how spatio-temporal coarse-grainings can in-
duce substantial changes into the causal organisation of
the process.
Counterexample 3 (Incompatibility between
υ-machine and ϵ-machine of the micro) . Let X be
i.i.d., from which follows that the ϵ-machine E is
trivial. Let’s focus on the following coarse-graining
Zt = g( ⃗X t) = Xt−1. The υ-machine can, by definition,
access the entire past ⃗X t to construct a causal state for
Zt+1. But since Zt+1 = Xt, we can set Ut = Xt and
obtain H(Zt+1|Ut) = 0 . Note that such Ut is minimal,
since any non-trivial coarse-graing of Xt will loose
entropy and hence ability to predict itself. However,
since E is trivial, there is no function f ∈ F E such that
Ut = f(Et).
While the collection of all ϵ-machines of coarse-
grainings Z often don’t have a clear structure linking
them, our next result shows that the υ-machines aris-
ing from spatial coarse-grainings arrange naturally into
a lattice.
Proposition 2. Let f ∈ F X be a spatial coarse-graining
function and let Zt = f(Xt). Then, the causal states Ut
of the υ-machine of Z, are a coarse-graining of the causal
states Et of the ϵ-machine of X. Moreover, the collection
of υ-machines of all coarse-grainings of X form a lattice,
which is homomorphic to the lattice of coarse-grainings
of X.
Proof. Let us first show that there exists a spatial coarse-
graining f ′ ∈ F X such that Ut = f ′(Et). Recall that Et
corresponds to the equivalence class of trajectories ⃗X t
that have the same conditional distribution p(⃗xL
t+1|et),
and that Ut corresponds to the equivalence class of tra-
jectories ⃗X t that have the same conditional distribution
p(⃗zL
t+1|ut). Now, by considering a given future trajectory
⃗zL
t+1, one sees directly that
p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) =
X
⃗xL
t+1∈f −1(⃗zt+1)
p
 ⃗xL
t+1| ⃗xt

. (A.9)
Therefore, if ⃗xt and ⃗x′
t are two trajectories such that
p(⃗xL
t+1| ⃗xt) = p(⃗xL
t+1| ⃗x′
t) for all ⃗xL
t+1 and L ∈ N, then also
p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗xt) = p(⃗zL
t+1| ⃗x′
t). This implies that the coarse-
graining that leads to Et contains all distinctions made
by the coarse-graining that leads toUt, and perhaps some
more — the ones needed to predict ⃗X L
t+1 rather than just
⃗Z L
t+1. This shows that Ut necessarily is a coarse-graining
of Et.
From the previous argument, it is clear that the collec-
tion of all υ-machines of spatial coarse-grainings inherit
the partial-ordering relationship of their corresponding
coarse-grainings. Furthermore, it is direct to see that the
υ-machine of the coarse-graining function f(x) = x is
the finest of all, and the one of f(x) = 0 is the coarsest.
This proves that the partial ordering over υ-machines
generates a lattice, and the fact that the mapping from
coarse-grainings Z to υ-machines may not be one-to-one
makes it an homomorphism.
This result formally shows that, at least for spatial
coarse-grainings, the υ-machine corresponds to the part
of the underlying ϵ-machine that plays a role in running
the macroscopic process Z.
6. Computational closure and the structure of
emerging scales
Let us now consider the notion of closure from a com-
putational perspective. For this, let us focus on a de-
terministic automaton (not necessarily related to an ϵ-
machine) with states in the set E and inputs in the alpha-
bet X , so that a tuple (et, xt+1) with et ∈ E and xt+1 ∈ X
uniquely determine the next state et+1 ∈ E [44]. Then,
for a given initial state e0, an input sequence of symbols
x1, . . . , xT generate a corresponding sequence of states
e0, e1, . . . , eT . Let us consider what happens if one has
sequences not of symbols in X , but from a coarse-grained
alphabet Z = {f(x) : x ∈ X } established by a spatial
coarse-graining mapping z = f(x), f ∈ F X . In general,
the symbols in Z may not be sufficient to uniquely spec-
ify the transitions between states in E, so that the states
E do not constitute a deterministic automaton under in-
puts in Z. If it does, we say that the coarse-graining is
computationally closed. We formalise these ideas in the
next definition.
Definition 5 (Computational closure). For a given de-
terministic automaton with states in E and inputs in X ,
the coarse-grainings of inputs f and of states f ∗ are said
to be computationally closed if the resulting transitions
between coarse-grained states E ′ = {E′ = f ∗(E) : E ∈ E}
is also a deterministic automaton under inputs in Z =
{z = f(x) : x ∈ X }.
Put simply, computational closure refers to a pair of
coarse-grainings ( f, f ∗) such that the coarse-graining of
the state is ‘compatible’ with the coarse-graining of the
input — in the sense that they give rise to a new discrete
automaton.
The notion of computational closure can be naturally
applied to macroscopic coarse-grainings, by considering
how their ϵ-machines — which can be seen as a deter-
ministic automata (see Section II B) — relates to the ϵ-
machine of the underlying microscopic process. Follow-
ing Definition 5, one can say that a macroscopic process
Zt = g( ⃗X t) is computationally closed if the time seriesE′
of causal states of its ϵ-machine is computationally closed
with respect to the time series of causal states E of the
ϵ-machine of the microscopic process X. In other words,


=== PAGE 24 ===

24
Zt = g( ⃗X t) is computationally closed if and only if there
is a spatial coarse-graining f ∗ such that E′
t = f ∗(Et).
While computational closure seems to be a stronger
condition than causal closure, our next example (adapted
from [95, Example 6.1]) shows this is not the case.
Counterexample 4 (Computational closure does not
imply information closure, adapted from [95, Ex-
ample 6.1]) . Consider the following time-homogeneous
Markov chain X with transition probability matrix
P =


0.5 0 .5 0 0
0 0 0.5 0 .5
0.5 0 .5 0 0
0 0 0.5 0 .5


, (A.10)
where, following standard convention, the entry in row i
and column j denotes P{Xt+1 = j|Xt = i}, i.e., tran-
sition probability matrices are row stochastic. The lines
indicate that the coarse-graining function f merges states
1 and 2 to A and states 3 and 4 to B. If the start-
ing distribution pX0 coincides with the uniform distribu-
tion on {1, 2, 3, 4}, then the resulting coarse-graining Z
is i.i.d. Hence, its ϵ-machine is a trivial one, and hence
is a coarse-graining of the ϵ-machine of X. However,
this coarse-graining is not causally closed. In effect, by
knowing Xt one can perfectly predict Zt+1. Namely, writ-
ing out explicitly, one can find for this particular Markov
chain that
p(Zt+1 = A|Xt = xt) =



1 if xt = 1 or xt = 4,
0 otherwise,
(A.11)
and likewise for coarse state B. Hence the υ-machine of Z
is non-trivial. Similarly, Z is not informationally closed
since
I( ⃗X t; Zt+1| ⃗Z t) = H(Zt+1| ⃗Z t) − H(Zt+1| ⃗X t, ⃗Z t)
= H(Zt+1) = 1. (A.12)
To establish this, we observe that since Z is i.i.d., we
have H(Zt+1| ⃗Z t) = H(Zt+1); due to Equation (A.11),
we have H(Zt+1| ⃗X t, ⃗Z t) = 0; and the last equality fol-
lows since the marginal distribution of Zt is uniform in
our example.
With all in place, we have all the pieces to put forward
our next result (illustrated by Figure 6).
Theorem 2. Spatial coarse-grainings that are causally
closed are also computationally closed. Moreover, the set
of all computationally closed coarse-grainings form a sub-
lattice, which maps (possibly not one-to-one) into a lat-
tice of coarse-grainings of ϵ-machines via an homomor-
phism. Furthermore, when restricted to this collection,
the following diagram commutes:
Z
EX
E′ϵ′
ϵ
f f∗
(Input sequence)
Real space
(Causal states)
Mechanism space
where f, f ∗ are coarse-graining mappings, and ϵ, ϵ′ are
operators that goes from stochastic processes to their ϵ-
machine.
Proof. To prove the first part of the theorem, let’s con-
sider a causally closed macroscopic process Z which is
generated by a spatial coarse-graining — i.e. Zt = f(Xt).
Proposition 2 guarantees that, because of coming from a
spatial coarse-graining, the causal states of theυ-machine
of Z are a coarse-graining of the causal states of X. Ad-
ditionally, due to the definition of causal closure, the ϵ-
machine of Z is equal to its υ-machine. Combining these
two facts one can conclude that the causal states of the
ϵ-machine of Z must be a coarse-graining of the causal
states of the ϵ-machine of X, proving that Z is com-
putaionally closed.
Let us prove now that all computationally closed
coarse-grainings for a lattice, and that their ϵ-machines
also do. All causally closed spatial coarse-grainings are a
sub-lattice of FX . Furthermore, as causal closure in this
case implies computational closure, then the collection of
all ϵ-machines of those are also sub-lattice of the set of
all possible spatial coarse-grainings of the ϵ-machine of
X. In virtue of this, the operation of calculating the ϵ-
machine of a causally closed coarse-graining, denoted by
ϵ′(·), establishes a natural map between coarse-grainings
of X and coarse-grainings of its ϵ-machines.
To conclude, let’s prove the conmutation between
coarse-graining f and calculation of causal states ϵ(·).
For this, let’s note that ϵ(·) preserves the partial or-
dering relationship of coarse-grainings of X — indeed,
if the coarse-graining of X f is finer than f ′, then
the υ-machine of Zt = f(Xt) is finer than the one of
Z ′
t = f ′(Xt). This fact, combined with the identity
between υ-machines and ϵ-machines that holds due to
causal closure, concludes the proof.
We note that the requirement of focusing on spatial
coarse-grainings is essential, as the implication from in-
formation closure to computational closure can be broken
in the case of general spatio-temporal coarse-grainings —
as illustrated by our next example.
Counterexample 5 (Causal closure doesn’t always im-
ply computational closure) . Let Xt be a Markov chain
such that its causal states Et satisfy Et = Xt. In this
scenario, let’s consider the coarse-graining Zt = g( ⃗X t) =


=== PAGE 25 ===

25
Xt−1. A direct calculation shows that
I(⃗Z L
t+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t) = H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗X t) − H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t)
= H( ⃗X L
t | ⃗X t) − H( ⃗X L
t | ⃗X t−1)
= 0, (A.13)
which implies that Zt is informationally closed, and hence
— due to Theorem 2 — also causally closed. Note that
Z is a Markov chain, and E′
t = Xt−1. But then E′
t =
Et−1, so that in general there no spatial coarse-graining
mapping Et to E′
t.
Let us now turn towards characterising the collections
of coarse-grainings that lead to the same ϵ-machine, cor-
responding to the pre-images of the mapping ϕ′.
Definition 6. Two coarse-grainings Z and Z ′ are said
to be computationally equivalent if their ϵ-machines are
equivalent.
Let us illustrate how coarse-grainings can be compu-
tationally equivalent in a minimal example.
Example 2. Let us revisit the setting of Example 1. To
investigate under what conditions is Zt causally closed,
let’s build the υ-machine for predicting Zt+1 in terms of
Xt. For this, first note that
P{Zt+1 = 0|Xt = x} = p(a|x) + p(b|x),
P{Zt+1 = 1|Xt = x} = p(c|x).
From here one can realise that the ϵ-machine and υ-
machine of Z are equivalent if the υ-machine is unable
to distinguish the states that are merged by the coarse-
graining, i.e. we need P{Zt+1 = r|Xt = a} = P{Zt+1 =
r|Xt = b} for r ∈ { 0, 1}. Furthermore, by noticing that
P{Zt+1 = 1 |Xt = v} = 1 − P{Zt+1 = 0 |Xt = v}, this
leads to a single condition:
p(c|a) = p(c|b).
Furthermore, a direct calculation shows that
P{Zt+1 = r|Zt = s} = P{Zt+1 = r, Zt = s}
P{Zt = s}
=
X
u∈g−1(r)
X
v∈g−1(s)
ξ(v)p(u|v),
where ξ(v) are non-negative weights withP
v∈g−1(s) g(v) = 1 given by
ξ(v) = P{Xt = v}P
v′∈g−1(v) P{Xt = v′} . (A.14)
This implies that
P{Zt+1 = 1|Zt = 0} = p(c|a), (A.15)
P{Zt+1 = 1|Zt = 1} = p(c|c). (A.16)
Clearly, if p(c|a) ̸= 1 /2 or p(c|c) ̸= 1 /2, then the Zt is
not independently distributed and hence its ϵ-machine is
isomorphic to itself.
From this analysis, one can see that there are two
types of scenarios in where Zt is causally closed. One
is whether Zt carries non-trivial computations or not
(i.e. if Zt is i.i.d.); the other is if Zt carries different
computations than Xt or not (equivalence happens when
p(x|a) = p(x|b) for x ∈ {a, b, c}, which leads to the causal
states of Xt to be equal than Zt). It is direct to confirm
that the four possible combinations of these two binary
possibilities give rise to the four scenarios illustrated in
Figure 7.
Let us define ∆L(X, Z) = I( ⃗X t; ⃗X L
t+1) − I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Z L
t+1),
which is the information that is being processed in X
but not in Z within a time horizon L. If Z a coarse-
graining of X, then ∆ L(X, Z) ≥ 0 for all L due to the
data-processing inequality. Note, for example, that if Z
is a spatial coarse-graining of X and the statistics of both
are i.i.d., then they are computationally equivalent and
also satisfy ∆ L(X, Z) = 0. Our next result generalises
this relationship.
Lemma 3. If a computationally closed spatial coarse-
graining Zt = f(Xt) satisfies ∆(X, Z) = 0, then Z and
X are computationally equivalent.
Proof. Note that ∆( X, Z) = 0 if and only if
I(Et; ⃗Xt+1) = I(E′
t; ⃗Zt+1), where Et and E′
t are the
causal states of X and Z. Also, because of computa-
tional closure, there is a function f ∗ such that E′
t =
f ∗(Et).
If X and Z are not computationally equivalent, then
f ∗ is not invertible. If that is the case, then the def-
inition of causal states implies that there exists a tra-
jectory ⃗X L
t+1 such that I( ⃗X L
t+1; E′
t) < I ( ⃗X L
t+1; Et), as
Et is by definition the coarsest coarse-graining that at-
tains I( ⃗X L
t+1; Et) = I( ⃗X L
t+1; ⃗X t) and thus E′
t needs to
be coarser than Et. The data processing inequality then
shows that
I(⃗Z L
t+1; E′
t) ≤ I( ⃗X L
t+1; E′
t) < I ( ⃗X L
t+1; Et), (A.17)
proving the desired result.
We conclude this section studying how sequences of
coarse-grainings decompose the total information pro-
cessed by the system.
Proposition 3. Consider Z = {Z i}m
i=1 a sequence of
computationally closed coarse grainings with Z1 = X
and Z m = 1 the constant coarse-graining. Then
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Xt+1) =
m−1X
i=1
∆(Z k, Z k+1). (A.18)


=== PAGE 26 ===

26
Proof. A direct calculation shows that
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Xt+1) = I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z1
t+1, ⃗Z2
t+1, , . . . ,⃗Z m
t+1)
=
m−1X
k=1
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z k
t+1|⃗Z k+2
t+1 , . . . , ⃗Z m
t+1)
=
m−1X
i=1
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z k
t+1|⃗Z k+1
t+1 ) . (A.19)
Then, the results follows from noting that
I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z k
t+1|⃗Z k+1
t+1 ) = I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z k+1
t+1 ) − I( ⃗X t; ⃗Z k
t+1)
= I( ⃗Z k+1
t ; ⃗Z k+1
t+1 ) − I( ⃗Z k
t ; ⃗Z k
t+1),
where the last equality uses the fact that each coarse-
gaining is informationally closed.
This result shows that a computationally closed coarse-
graining Z that is not computationally equivalent to X
decomposes the information processed by X into what
is processed in the macro-scale (i.e. by Z, quantified by
I( ⃗Z t; ⃗Zt+1) and what goes below (in X but not Z, quan-
tified by ∆(X, Z)).
7. Closure and lumpability
Here we explore the relationship between informa-
tional, causal, and computational closure and ‘lumpa-
bility’ — see Figure 13 for an overview of the results
we will develop in this subsection. Loosely speaking,
lumpability refers to Markov chains that have coarse-
grainings that also exhibit Markov dynamics. Markedly,
one should note that lumpability is the exception and not
the rule [106, Th. 31], as most coarse-graininings break
the Markov property of the base system.
Example 3. Let’s consider X where Xt can take one
of four possible values, denoted as a, b, c, and d. Con-
sider the random initial condition where X0 can take any
value with equal probability, and the following Markov
dynamics: if Xt ∈ { a, b} then Xt+1 is equal to c or
d with equal probability, and if Xt ∈ { c, d} then Xt+1
is equal to a or b with equal probability. Now, consider
a coarse-graining Z determined by the following coarse-
graining function: g(a) = g(b) = A and g(c) = g(d) = B.
It can be seen than Z has deterministic dynamics, as
p(B|A) = p(A|B) = 1 . Furthermore, one can see that
there are two causal states: one of all sequences that fin-
ish with A, and another with all sequences that finish
in B. Interestingly, one can check that this ϵ-machine
is isomorphic to the one of X, and capture the same
amount of future information (1 bit). So, Z is essen-
tially a more compact representation than X of the same
computational process.
Building on these ideas, let us start by introducing
the formal definition of lumpability [21, §6.3 & §6.4] —
while acknowledging that other flavours of lumpability
exist [107].
Definition 7 (Strong and weak lumpability) . A time-
homogeneous Markov chain (W0, W1, . . .) is strongly
lumpable w.r.t. a spatial coarse-graining function f if
for every initial distribution pW0 the resulting coarse-
graining Zt = f(Wt) is a Markov chain, and its tran-
sition probabilities do not depend on the choice of pW0.
A time-homogeneous Markov chain is weakly lumpable
if Z is Markov for at least one initial distribution pW0.
Evidently, if a Markov chain is strongly lumpable,
then it is also weakly lumpable. A useful information-
theoretic characterisation of lumpability is given as fol-
lows. Thanks to the data-processing inequality, the fol-
lowing relationships always hold if X is Markovian:
H(Zt|Zt−1) ≥ H(Zt| ⃗Z t−1) ≥ H(Zt| ⃗X t−1) = H(Zt|Xt−1) .
As shown by the next lemma, strong lumpability is equiv-
alent to the collapse of the two inequalities into an equal-
ity, while weak lumpability is just the collapse of the first
one.
Lemma 4. If X is a stationary, irreducible and aperi-
odic Markov chain and if f is a coarse-graining function
defined on the state space X of X, then strong lumpability
is equivalent to
H(Zt+1|Zt) = H(Zt+1|Xt) for all t (A.20)
where Zt = f(Xt). In contrast, weak lumpability is equiv-
alent to
H(Zt+1|Zt) = H(Zt+1| ⃗Z t) for all t. (A.21)
Proof. See Ref. [108, Th. 9 & Prop. 6].
Note that this results applies to the stationary setting,
i.e., in the context of Definition 7, the initial distribution
pX0 must coincide with an invariant distribution (which
is unique in the irreducible and aperiodic case).
This result can be understood as follows. When trying
to estimate Zt+1 from its past, one can consider this a
two-step process: first one estimates Xt from ⃗Z t, and
then one estimates Zt+1 from Xt. Strong and weak
lumpability are connected to these two steps. Indeed,
Counterexample 4 shows that, by carefully choosing the
initial distribution pX0, one can ensure that no matter
the value of Zt, Zt−1, Zt−2, . . ., one always ends up with
the same conditional distribution p(Xt| ⃗Z t). Thus, know-
ing more of the past ⃗Z t than Zt does not help to obtain
a better estimate of Xt. Hence, even if the conditional
distribution of Zt+1 given Xt differs for all Xt, knowing
more than just Zt does not allows us to make a better
estimate of Zt+1. In contrast, in strong lumpability the
distribution of Zt+1 is the same for all values of Xt that
are compatible with Zt. Therefore, while knowing more
of the past ⃗Z t than Zt may give us a better estimate of
the current Xt, this additional knowledge cannot improve
our estimate of Zt+1.


=== PAGE 27 ===

27
Informationally
closed/causally
closed
computationally
closed
Prop. 4
(spatial)
weakly
lumpable
weakly k-
lumpable
strongly k-
lumpable
Counterex. 6
Counterex. 7
Counterex. 4
strongly
lumpable
Ex. 1
FIG. 13. Diagram illustrating the relationships between closure and lumpability of Markov chains. Informational/causal closure
imply computational closure (Theorem 2). Within the space of Markov X, strong lumpability of X implies information closure
(Proposition 4). The same does not hold for weak lumpability and computational closure: If X is weakly lumpable, then the
same does not need to hold for E due to the minimality property of ε-machines. The diagram refers to (counter)examples in
the text. Indeed, Example 1 is strongly lumpable, while Counterexample 4 is weakly lumpable.
Our first result shows that, if a microscopic process
X has Markov dynamics and is strongly lumpable w.r.t.
the coarse graining function f, then the resulting macro-
scopic process Zt = f(Xt) is informationally closed.
Proposition 4. Let X be a stationary, irreducible, and
aperiodic Markov chain, and suppose that it is strongly
lumpable w.r.t. the coarse graining function f ∈ F X .
Then, the process Zt = f(Xt) is informationally closed.
Further, if a coarse-graining Z is informationally closed
and Markov, then X is strongly lumpable w.r.t. the
coarse-graining function f.
Proof. Using Lemma 4, a direct derivation shows that
I(⃗Z L
t+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t)
= H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t) − H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗X t, ⃗Z t) (A.22)
(a)
= H(⃗Z L
t+1|Zt) − H(⃗Z L
t+1|Xt) (A.23)
(b)
=
t+LX
ℓ=t+1

H(Zℓ|Zℓ−1) − H(Zℓ|⃗Z ℓ−1
t+1 , Xt)

(A.24)
(c)
≤
t+LX
ℓ=t+1

H(Zℓ|Zℓ−1) − H(Zℓ|Xℓ−1)

(A.25)
(d)
= 0 . (A.26)
Above, (a) follows because Zt = f(Xt) and because both
X and Z are Markov; (b) from the chain rule of entropy
and Markovianity of Z; (c) from the data processing in-
equality, stating that Xℓ−1 contains at least as much in-
formation about Zℓ as (Z ℓ−1
t+1 , Xt) does; and (d) from sta-
tionarity and Eq. (A.20).
For the second part of the proof, note that information
closure and Markovianity of Z imply that (A.23) holds
for all L. Instantiating this for L = 1 yields Eq. (A.20),
which completes the proof with [108, Th. 9].


=== PAGE 28 ===

28
Please note that the above lemma is only valid for sta-
tionary, irreducible, and aperiodic Markov chains. The
reason for this is that the equivalence between strong
lumpability and Eq. (A.20) is only guaranteed for this
class of Markov chains [109]. Also note that if the coarse-
graining function f does not produce a first-order, but
a higher-order Markov chain, the connection between
(higher-order) lumpability and informational closure can
break down — as illustrated by our next two examples.
Counterexample 6 (Lumpability is not implied by in-
formation closure and high-order Markovianity) . Let’s
consider X where Xt can take one of four possible val-
ues, denoted as a, b, c, and d, and a coarse-graining
Z determined by the following coarse-graining function:
g(a) = g(b) = A and g(c) = g(d) = B. Suppose that X0
is uniformly distributed and that we have fully determin-
istic dynamics where a → b → c → d → a. Then, one
can check that Z becomes a deterministic Markov pro-
cess with memory 2 (indeed, it can be shown that X is
strongly 2-lumpable), and its ϵ-machine is given by four
causal states: one for all sequences that finish with AA,
another for AB, other for BA, and the last for BB. It
can be shown that Z is informationally closed, although
X with f is not strongly (first-order) lumpable.
Counterexample 7 (High-order strong lumpability
does not imply information closure) . Let X be the
Markov process from [108, Example 15]. Specifically, let
the transition probability matrix of X be given as
P =


0.6 0 .4 0 0
0.3 0 .2 0.1 0 .4
0.2 0 .05 0.375 0 .375
0.2 0 .05 0.375 0 .375


. (A.27)
The lines indicate that the coarse graining-function g
merges states 1 and 2 to A and states 3 and 4 to B.
It can be shown that the resulting coarse-graining Z,
Zt = g(Xt) is a second-order Markov chain, and that the
coarse-graining is strongly 2-lumpable. A coarse graining
is strongly 2-lumpable if and only if we have [108, Th. 9]
H(Zt+1|Zt, Xt−1) = H(Zt+1|Zt, Zt−1) ≈ 0.733. (A.28)
Informational closure, for a Markov chain X and
a second-order Markov chain Z, requires that
I(⃗Z L
t+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t) = 0 for every L. However,
I(⃗Z L
t+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t) ≥ I(Zt+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t)
= H(Zt+1|Zt, Zt−1) − H(Zt+1|Xt). (A.29)
A computation of the latter quantity yields H(Zt+1|Xt) ≈
0.552, which with (A.28) leads to I(⃗Z L
t+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t) ≥ 0.18,
indicating that informational closure is ruled out.
Additionally, it can be shown that Markovianity of the
coarse-graining Z is in general not sufficient for informa-
tion closure to hold [95]. Indeed, if the Markov chainX is
only weakly (but not strongly) lumpable w.r.t. the coarse
graining function f, then Z may be a Markov chain but
may fail to be informationally closed, as illustrated in
Counterexample 4 above.
We now establish a general relationship between strong
lumpability and information closure on the one hand,
and weak lumpabiliy and computational closure in the
other. We knew from Theorem 2 that information clo-
sure is stronger than computational closure, and weak
and strong lumpability provide a complementary angle
to contemplate this relationship. The following result
builds on Proposition 4 and the fact that while many pro-
cesses X may not be Markovian, the dynamics of their
ϵ-machines always are.
Theorem 3. Let E be the ϵ-machine of a stationary
process X. Then, the following statements hold true:
1. If Z is a computationally closed coarse-graining of
X, then E is weakly lumpable.
2. If E is weakly lumpable w.r.t. a coarse-graining
function f ∈ F E, then Z = f(E) is a computa-
tionally closed coarse-graining of X.
Now let E additionally be irreducible and aperiodic.
Then:
3. If Z is an informationally closed spatial coarse-
graining of X, then E is strongly lumpable.
4. If E is strongly lumpable w.r.t. a coarse-graining
function f ∈ F E, then, Z = f(E) is an informa-
tionally closed coarse-graining of X.
Proof. We first show that Z = f(E), for an arbitrary
spatial coarse-graining f ∈ F E, is a (potentially spatio-
temporal) coarse-graining of X. By definition, the ϵ-
machine E is a coarse-graining of X, i.e., there exists an
ϵ ∈ G X such that Et = ϵ( ⃗X t). Further, since Zt = f(Et)
for some f ∈ F E, Z is a coarse-graining of X in the sense
that Zt = f
 
ϵ( ⃗X t)

.
To prove the first statement, note that computational
closure implies that there exists a function f ∈ F E such
that E′ (the causal states of the ϵ-machine of Z) is given
by E′
t = f(Et). Since, by definition, the causal states of
ϵ-machines have Markovian dynamics, weak lumpability
follows from this.
For the second statement, assume that E is weakly
lumpable w.r.t. some coarse-graining function f ∈ F E.
As a consequence Z, defined by Zt = f(Et), is Markov.
The ϵ-machine of Z is therefore a spatial coarse-graining
of Z, i.e., E′
t = ϵ′(Zt) for some ϵ′ ∈ F Z. We hence
have that E′
t = ϵ′(f(Et)), with ϵ′ ◦ f ∈ F E. Hence, the
causal states of the ϵ-machine of Z are a (spatial) coarse-
graining of the causal states of theϵ-machine of X, which
is the definition of computational closure.


=== PAGE 29 ===

29
For the third statement, we make use of a fact of ϵ-
machines, namely that the current causal state and the
future state of the process determine the future causal
state, i.e.,
H(E′
t+1|E′
t, Zt+1) = 0. (A.30a)
Since for informationally closed spatial coarse-grainings
we have computational closure, i.e., that E′
t is a function
of Et, we have also, by the fact that conditioning reduces
entropy,
H(E′
t+1|Et, Zt+1) = H(E′
t+1|E′
t, Et, Zt+1)
≤ H(E′
t+1|E′
t, Zt+1) = 0. (A.30b)
and
H(Zt+1|E′
t+1, E′
t) − H(Zt+1|E′
t+1, Et) =
H(Zt+1|E′
t+1, E′
t) − H(Zt+1|E′
t+1, E′
t, Et) =
I(Zt+1; Et|E′
t, E′
t+1) (A.30c)
Now note that information closure implies that
I(Zt+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t) = 0. Hence, with the definitions of ϵ-
and υ-machines, we get:
0 = H(Zt+1| ⃗Z t) − H(Zt+1| ⃗X t)
= H(Zt+1|E′
t) − H(Zt+1|Ut)
(a)
= H(Zt+1|E′
t) − H(Zt+1|Et)
(b)
= H(Zt+1, E′
t+1|E′
t) − H(Zt+1, E′
t+1|Et)
(c)
= H(E′
t+1|E′
t) − H(E′
t+1|Et) + I(Zt+1; Et|E′
t, E′
t+1)
(d)
≥ H(E′
t+1|E′
t) − H(E′
t+1|Et)
(e)
≥ 0 ,
where (a) follows because for spatial coarse-grainings Ut
is a function of Et, since thus Et must contain all in-
formation about Zt+1 that is necessary, and since Ut
is minimal, and where ( b) follows from adding (A.30a)
and subtracting (A.30b), ( c) follows from applying the
chain rule to the conditional entropies and (A.30c), ( d)
from the non-negativity of the mutual information, and
(e) from the fact that informational closure of spa-
tial coarse-grainings implies computational closure, and
hence H(E′
t+1|Et) = H(E′
t+1|Et, E′
t). This derivation
proves that H(E′
t+1|E′
t) = H(E′
t+1|Et), which is the
equivalent condition for strong lumpability [108, Th. 9].
We finally show that Z is informationally closed in the
sense of Definition 4 if E is irreducible, aperiodic, and
strongly lumpable w.r.t. some f ∈ F E. In this setting,
we have H(Zt|Et−1) = H(Zt|Zt−1) for any t. Hence, for
every finite L,
I(⃗Z L
t+1; ⃗X t| ⃗Z t) (A.31)
= H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗Z t) − H(⃗Z L
t+1| ⃗X t, ⃗Z t) (A.32)
=
t+LX
ℓ=t+1

H(Zℓ| ⃗Z ℓ−1) − H(Zℓ| ⃗Z ℓ−1, ⃗X t)

(A.33)
(a)
≤
t+LX
ℓ=t+1

H(Zℓ|Zℓ−1) − H(Zℓ| ⃗X ℓ−1)

(A.34)
(b)
=
t+LX
ℓ=t+1

H(Zℓ|Zℓ−1) − H(Zℓ|Eℓ−1)

(A.35)
= 0, (A.36)
where ( a) follows because Z is Markov, because Zt =
f(ϵ( ⃗X t)) since Et = ϵ( ⃗X t) is lumpable w.r.t. f ∈ F E,
and from the fact that conditioning reduces entropy, and
(b) because all information of ⃗X t relevant for the future
of E’s coarse-graining must be contained in Et. The rest
of the proof follows along the lines of Proposition 4.
This result provides another view on the relation-
ship between information/causal closure and computa-
tional closure, which can be seen now via the relation-
ship between strong and weak lumpability. In particular,
this result highlights information closure as a more ‘ro-
bust’ property. In effect, due to its relationship with
strong lumpability, this shows that information closure
is (mostly) a property of the transition probabilities be-
tween causal states and not their marginal distribution.
In contrast, computational closure — as weak lumpabil-
ity — depends on the marginal as much as on the tran-
sitions. This property is, hence, less robust than infor-
mation closure, as small deviations from the stationary
distribution may break the former but not the latter.
Additionally, this result is also important because it
allows us to use numerical methods that has been de-
veloped to empirically discover lumpable partitions of
a Markov chain. Indeed, Theorem 3 shows that those
methods can be readily used to empower data-driven
discovery of emergent coarse-grainings, requiring only
mild conditions on the transitions of the corresponding
ϵ-machines.
The literature of practical methods for discovering
lumpable coarse grainings is extensive. For example, an
algorithm that constructs the coarsest lumpable coarse-
graining of a Markov chain using binary search trees has
been presented in Ref. [110], while an eigenvector-based
approach is suggested by [111, 112]. Also, an algorithm
for the certain class of successively lumpable Markov
chains was developed in [113]. Since in many practi-
cally relevant cases the measurements of X are noisy,
a number of algorithms for detecting quasi-lumpable
coarse-grainings (i.e., for which the lumpability condi-
tion holds approximately) have also been developed. An
algorithm based on spectral theory was developed by Ja-


=== PAGE 30 ===

30
cobi in [114], while algorithms based on the information-
theoretic characterization of lumpability have been pro-
posed by [115]. To prevent these algorithmic approaches
to terminate at trivial, e.g., i.i.d. coarse-grainings, an-
nealing procedures have been proposed [116] [117].
[1] M. M. Waldrop, Complexity: The emerging science at
the edge of order and chaos. Simon and Schuster, 1993.
[2] H. J. Jensen, Complexity science: the study of emer-
gence. Cambridge University Press, 2022.
[3] G. Deco, V. K. Jirsa, P. A. Robinson, M. Breakspear,
and K. Friston, “The dynamic brain: from spiking neu-
rons to neural masses and cortical fields,” PLoS compu-
tational biology, vol. 4, no. 8, p. e1000092, 2008.
[4] M. D. Fox, A. Z. Snyder, J. L. Vincent, M. Corbetta,
D. C. Van Essen, and M. E. Raichle, “The human
brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorre-
lated functional networks,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences , vol. 102, no. 27, pp. 9673–9678,
2005.
[5] L. Pessoa, “The entangled brain,” Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 349–360, 2023.
[6] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability:
In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is
both important and slippery.” Queue, vol. 16, no. 3, pp.
31–57, 2018.
[7] Y. Zhang, P. Tiˇ no, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang, “A sur-
vey on neural network interpretability,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelli-
gence, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 726–742, 2021.
[8] A. K. Seth, “Measuring autonomy and emergence via
granger causality,” Artificial Life , vol. 16, no. 2, pp.
179–196, 2010.
[9] E. P. Hoel, L. Albantakis, and G. Tononi, “Quantifying
causal emergence shows that macro can beat micro,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol.
110, no. 49, pp. 19 790–19 795, 2013.
[10] F. E. Rosas, P. A. Mediano, H. J. Jensen, A. K.
Seth, A. B. Barrett, R. L. Carhart-Harris, and D. Bor,
“Reconciling emergences: An information-theoretic ap-
proach to identify causal emergence in multivariate
data,” arXiv:2004.08220, 2020.
[11] T. F. Varley and E. Hoel, “Emergence as the conversion
of information: a unifying theory,” Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society A , vol. 380, no. 2227, p.
20210150, 2022.
[12] L. Barnett and A. K. Seth, “Dynamical independence:
discovering emergent macroscopic processes in complex
dynamical systems,” Physical Review E, vol. 108, no. 1,
p. 014304, 2023.
[13] B. Klein and E. Hoel, “The emergence of informative
higher scales in complex networks,” Complexity, vol.
2020, 2020.
[14] B. Klein, E. Hoel, A. Swain, R. Griebenow, and
M. Levin, “Evolution and emergence: higher order in-
formation structure in protein interactomes across the
tree of life,” Integrative Biology, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 283–
294, 2021.
[15] A. I. Luppi, P. A. Mediano, F. E. Rosas, N. Holland,
T. D. Fryer, J. T. O’Brien, J. B. Rowe, D. K. Menon,
D. Bor, and E. A. Stamatakis, “A synergistic core for
human brain evolution and cognition,” Nature Neuro-
science, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 771–782, 2022.
[16] A. I. Luppi, P. A. Mediano, F. E. Rosas, J. Allanson,
J. D. Pickard, G. B. Williams, M. M. Craig, P. Finoia,
A. R. Peattie, P. Coppola et al. , “Reduced emergent
character of neural dynamics in patients with a dis-
rupted connectome,” Neuroimage, vol. 269, p. 119926,
2023.
[17] A. M. Proca, F. E. Rosas, A. I. Luppi, D. Bor,
M. Crosby, and P. A. Mediano, “Synergistic informa-
tion supports modality integration and flexible learn-
ing in neural networks solving multiple tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.02996, 2022.
[18] M. I. Sas, P. A. Mediano, F. E. Rosas, H. Leone, A. Sas,
C. Lockwood, H. J. Jensen, and D. Bor, “Synch. live:
Collective problem-solving through flocking motion in-
duces higher connectedness to others,” 2024.
[19] M. L. Minsky, Computation. Prentice-Hall Englewood
Cliffs, 1967.
[20] C. Shalizi, “Causal architecture,” Complexity, and Self-
Organization in Time Series and Cellular Automata
PhD thesis (Univ Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI) ,
2001.
[21] J. G. Kemeny and J. L. Snell, Finite Markov Chains ,
2nd ed. Springer, 1976.
[22] D. A. Patterson and J. L. Hennessy, “Computer orga-
nization and design: the hardware/software interface
(the morgan kaufmann series in computer architecture
and design),” Paperback, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
2013.
[23] W. Bechtel and J. Mundale, “Multiple realizability re-
visited: Linking cognitive and neural states,” Philoso-
phy of science , vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 175–207, 1999.
[24] T. W. Polger and L. A. Shapiro, The multiple realization
book. Oxford University Press, 2016.
[25] N. Bostrom, “Are we living in a computer simulation?”
The philosophical quarterly , vol. 53, no. 211, pp. 243–
255, 2003.
[26] R. W. Batterman and C. C. Rice, “Minimal model ex-
planations,” Philosophy of Science , vol. 81, no. 3, pp.
349–376, 2014.
[27] N. Block, “The mind as the software of the brain,” New
york, vol. 3, pp. 377–425, 1995.
[28] We remark that a simplistic interpretation of the
brain/mind dichotomy in terms of a hardware/software
distinction has most likely long outlived its useful-
ness [118]. Nonetheless, a computational perspective
might still usefully be applied to brains to identify emer-
gent functional architectures.
[29] F. J. Varela, Principles of biological autonomy . North
Holland, 1979.
[30] J. L. Chandler and G. Van de Vijver, “Emergent or-
ganizations and their dynamics,” New York: New York
Academy of Sciences, 2000.
[31] H. H. Pattee, J. Raczaszek-Leonardi, and H. H. Pat-
tee, “Cell psychology: an evolutionary approach to
the symbol-matter problem,” LAWS, LANGUAGE and


=== PAGE 31 ===

31
LIFE: Howard Pattee’s classic papers on the physics of
symbols with contemporary commentary , pp. 165–179,
2012.
[32] J. P. Crutchfield, “The calculi of emergence: compu-
tation, dynamics and induction,” Physica D: Nonlinear
Phenomena, vol. 75, no. 1-3, pp. 11–54, 1994.
[33] C. R. Shalizi and J. P. Crutchfield, “Computational me-
chanics: Pattern and prediction, structure and simplic-
ity,” Journal of Statistical Physics, vol. 104, no. 3-4, pp.
817–879, 2001.
[34] A. T. Rupe and J. P. Crutchfield, “On prin-
ciples of emergent organization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.13749, 2023.
[35] M. Barbaresi, “Computational mechanics: from theory
to practice,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universita di Bologna,
2017.
[36] J. P. Crutchfield, “The origins of computational me-
chanics: A brief intellectual history and several clarifi-
cations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06832 , 2017.
[37] P. Grassberger, “Toward a quantitative theory of self-
generated complexity,” International Journal of Theo-
retical Physics, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 907–938, 1986.
[38] J. P. Crutchfield and K. Young, “Inferring statistical
complexity,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 63, no. 2, p.
105, 1989.
[39] J. P. Crutchfield and D. P. Feldman, “Regularities un-
seen, randomness observed: Levels of entropy conver-
gence,” arXiv e-prints, pp. cond–mat, 2001.
[40] Through the article we use uppercase letters ( X, Y ) to
denote random variables and lowercase letters ( x, y) to
denote their realisations.
[41] J. Pearl, Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[42] S. L. Bressler and A. K. Seth, “Wiener–Granger causal-
ity: A well established methodology,” Neuroimage,
vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 323–329, 2011.
[43] Y. Ephraim and N. Merhav, “Hidden markov pro-
cesses,” IEEE Transactions on information theory ,
vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1518–1569, 2002.
[44] J. E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, and J. D. Ullman, “Intro-
duction to automata theory, languages, and computa-
tion,” Acm Sigact News, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 60–65, 2001.
[45] For an introduction to automata and their interpreta-
tion as computational systems, please see Refs. [19, 44].
[46] This equivalence between hidden Markov models and
discrete automatas is not general, but only holds be-
cause the Markov dynamics of ϵ-machines have the
so-called unifilar property: transitions between causal
states (e.g. from Et to Et+1) are deterministic after the
next symbol (in this case Xt+1 has been emitted.
[47] J. Pearl and D. Mackenzie, The Book of Why: The New
Science of Cause and Effect . Basic Books, 2018.
[48] N. Bertschinger, E. Olbrich, N. Ay, and J. Jost, “Infor-
mation and closure in systems theory,” in Explorations
in the Complexity of Possible Life. Proceedings of the
7th German Workshop of Artificial Life . IOS Press:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2006, pp. 9–21.
[49] A. Y. Chang, M. Biehl, Y. Yu, and R. Kanai, “Infor-
mation closure theory of consciousness,” Frontiers in
Psychology, vol. 11, p. 1504, 2020.
[50] To make this point precise, prediction quality is as-
sessed in terms of expected logarithmic loss, rather than
directly via prediction error probability. See for exam-
ple [119] for an in-depth discussion.
[51] More technically, a informationally-close macro-scale is
a sufficient statistic [120] with respect to the micro-scale
to predict its own future.
[52] K. G. Wilson, “Problems in physics with many scales of
length,” Scientific American, vol. 241, no. 2, pp. 158–
179, 1979.
[53] In such interpretation, the macroscopic level is the
coarse-graining Z, and its ϵ-machine E′
t is its corre-
sponding theory.
[54] Note that this implication holds only for macroscopic
processes based on a spatial, but not temporal, coarse-
grainings.
[55] A. Wuensche and M. Lesser, Global dynamics of cel-
lular automata: an atlas of basin of attraction fields of
one-dimensional cellular automata. Andrew Wuensche,
1992, vol. 1.
[56] J. T. Lizier, M. Prokopenko, and A. Y. Zomaya, “Local
measures of information storage in complex distributed
computation,” Information Sciences, vol. 208, pp. 39–
54, 2012.
[57] N. H. Bingham, “Fluctuation theory for the ehrenfest
urn,” Advances in Applied Probability, vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
598–611, 1991.
[58] R. J. Glauber, “Time-dependent statistics of the ising
model,” Journal of mathematical physics , vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 294–307, 1963.
[59] D. A. Levin and Y. Peres, Markov chains and mixing
times. American Mathematical Soc., 2017, vol. 107.
[60] M. Aguilera, S. A. Moosavi, and H. Shimazaki, “A uni-
fying framework for mean-field theories of asymmetric
kinetic ising systems,” Nature communications, vol. 12,
no. 1, p. 1197, 2021.
[61] Please note that one could sub-sample the temporal evo-
lution of this process (so to account for updates of k
spins instead of only one), and the arguments that fol-
low still hold.
[62] This is the case, for example, when the systems observes
a uniform and fully-connected graph of interactionsJi,k.
[63] A. T. Crooks and A. J. Heppenstall, “Introduction to
agent-based modelling,” in Agent-based models of geo-
graphical systems. Springer, 2011, pp. 85–105.
[64] S. Banisch, Markov Chain Aggregation for Agent-Based
Models. Cham et al.: Springer, 2016.
[65] R. Lamarche-Perrin, S. Banisch, and E. Olbrich, “The
information bottleneck method for optimal prediction
of multilevel agent-based systems,” Adv. Complex Syst.,
vol. 19, no. 01n02, p. 1650002, 2016.
[66] B. C. Geiger, A. Jahani, H. Hussain, and D. Groen,
“Markov aggregation for speeding up agent-based move-
ment simulations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) , London,
United Kingdom, 2023, p. 1877–1885, open-access.
[67] For a comprehensive review on the state of the art of
the neuroscience of memory, see Ref. [121].
[68] S.-I. Amari, “Learning patterns and pattern sequences
by self-organizing nets of threshold elements,” IEEE
Transactions on computers, vol. 100, no. 11, pp. 1197–
1206, 1972.
[69] W. A. Little, “The existence of persistent states in the
brain,” Mathematical biosciences, vol. 19, no. 1-2, pp.
101–120, 1974.
[70] J. J. Hopfield, “Neural networks and physical systems
with emergent collective computational abilities.” Pro-
ceedings of the national academy of sciences , vol. 79,
no. 8, pp. 2554–2558, 1982.


=== PAGE 32 ===

32
[71] S. Ram´ on y Cajal, “La fine structure des centres
nerveux. the croonian lecture,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond ,
vol. 55, pp. 443–468, 1894.
[72] D. O. Hebb, The organisation of behaviour: a neuropsy-
chological theory. Science Editions New York, 1949.
[73] W. Gerstner, W. M. Kistler, R. Naud, and L. Paninski,
Neuronal dynamics: From single neurons to networks
and models of cognition . Cambridge University Press,
2014.
[74] D. J. Amit, H. Gutfreund, and H. Sompolinsky, “Stor-
ing infinite numbers of patterns in a spin-glass model
of neural networks,” Physical Review Letters , vol. 55,
no. 14, p. 1530, 1985.
[75] ——, “Statistical mechanics of neural networks near sat-
uration,” Annals of physics , vol. 173, no. 1, pp. 30–67,
1987.
[76] D. Marr, Vision: A computational investigation into the
human representation and processing of visual informa-
tion. MIT press, 2010.
[77] F. E. Rosas, P. A. Mediano, A. I. Luppi, T. F. Varley,
J. T. Lizier, S. Stramaglia, H. J. Jensen, and D. Mari-
nazzo, “Disentangling high-order mechanisms and high-
order behaviours in complex systems,” Nature Physics,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 476–477, 2022.
[78] D. P. Feldman, C. S. McTague, and J. P. Crutch-
field, “The organization of intrinsic computation:
Complexity-entropy diagrams and the diversity of nat-
ural information processing,” Chaos: An Interdisci-
plinary Journal of Nonlinear Science , vol. 18, no. 4,
2008.
[79] J. P. Crutchfield, W. L. Ditto, and S. Sinha, “Introduc-
tion to focus issue: intrinsic and designed computation:
information processing in dynamical systems—beyond
the digital hegemony,” Chaos: An Interdisciplinary
Journal of Nonlinear Science , vol. 20, no. 3, 2010.
[80] A. C. Costa, T. Ahamed, D. Jordan, and G. J. Stephens,
“Maximally predictive states: From partial observations
to long timescales,” Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Jour-
nal of Nonlinear Science , vol. 33, no. 2, 2023.
[81] P. Auger, R. B. de La Parra, J.-C. Poggiale, E. S´ anchez,
and L. Sanz, “Aggregation methods in dynamical sys-
tems and applications in population and community dy-
namics,” Physics of Life Reviews , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 79–
105, 2008.
[82] H. A. Simon and A. Ando, “Aggregation of variables in
dynamic systems,” Econometrica: journal of the Econo-
metric Society, pp. 111–138, 1961.
[83] L. B. White, R. Mahony, and G. D. Brushe, “Lumpable
hidden markov models-model reduction and reduced
complexity filtering,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 2297–2306, 2000.
[84] B. Munsky and M. Khammash, “The finite state projec-
tion algorithm for the solution of the chemical master
equation,” The Journal of chemical physics , vol. 124,
no. 4, 2006.
[85] J. Garcıa and V. A. Gonz´ alez-L´ opez, “Minimal markov
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1002.0729 , 2010.
[86] D. H. Wolpert, J. A. Grochow, E. Libby, and S. DeDeo,
“Optimal high-level descriptions of dynamical systems,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.7403 , 2014.
[87] D. Horsman, S. Stepney, R. C. Wagner, and V. Kendon,
“When does a physical system compute?” Proceedings
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and En-
gineering Sciences, vol. 470, no. 2169, p. 20140182, 2014.
[88] J. C. Flack, “Coarse-graining as a downward causation
mechanism,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sci-
ences, vol. 375, no. 2109, p. 20160338, 2017.
[89] D. Janzing, D. Balduzzi, M. Grosse-Wentrup, and
B. Sch¨ olkopf, “Quantifying causal influences,”The An-
nals of Statistics , vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 2324–2358, 2013.
[90] M. Kocaoglu, A. Dimakis, S. Vishwanath, and B. Has-
sibi, “Entropic causal inference,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 31,
no. 1, 2017.
[91] L. Albantakis, W. Marshall, E. Hoel, and G. Tononi,
“What caused what? a quantitative account of actual
causation using dynamical causal networks,” Entropy,
vol. 21, no. 5, p. 459, 2019.
[92] R. Comolatti and E. Hoel, “Causal emergence is
widespread across measures of causation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.01854, 2022.
[93] C. Finn and J. T. Lizier, “Pointwise partial informa-
tion decompositionusing the specificity and ambiguity
lattices,” Entropy, vol. 20, no. 4, p. 297, 2018.
[94] M. Prokopenko and J. T. Lizier, “Transfer entropy
and transient limits of computation,” Scientific reports,
vol. 4, no. 1, p. 5394, 2014.
[95] O. Pfante, N. Bertschinger, E. Olbrich, N. Ay, and
J. Jost, “Comparison between different methods of level
identification,” Adv. Complex Syst. , vol. 17, no. 02, p.
1450007, 2014.
[96] Please note that the definition of informational closure
used in Ref. [95] only requires I(Zt+1; Xt|Zt) = 0 due to
Markovianity of X, and is hence identical to the char-
acterisation of strong lumpability in [108, Th. 9].
[97] P. Tino and G. Dorffner, “Predicting the future of
discrete sequences from fractal representations of the
past,” Machine Learning, vol. 45, pp. 187–217, 2001.
[98] C. Shalizi and K. L. Klinkner, “Blind construction of
optimal nonlinear recursive predictors for discrete se-
quences,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.2025 , 2014.
[99] S. Marzen and J. P. Crutchfield, “Circumventing the
curse of dimensionality in prediction: causal rate-
distortion for infinite-order markov processes,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.2859, 2014.
[100] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The
information bottleneck method,” arXiv preprint
physics/0004057, 2000.
[101] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence
modeling with selective state spaces,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
[102] A. M. Turing et al., “On computable numbers, with an
application to the entscheidungsproblem,” J. of Math ,
vol. 58, no. 345-363, p. 5, 1936.
[103] An illustrative example is the old but still ongoing de-
bate in neuroscience of whether the brain ought to be
conceived as a computer [122–126] or not [127–129]:
while under some definitions the brain is clearly a com-
puter and under others it is not, it is not entirely evident
how any of these outcomes advances our actual under-
standing of how the brain works.
[104] B. McLaughlin and K. Bennett, “Supervenience,” in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , E. N. Zalta,
Ed. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
2021.
[105] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas,Elements of Information
Theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.


=== PAGE 33 ===

33
[106] L. Gurvits and J. Ledoux, “Markov property for a func-
tion of a Markov chain: a linear algebra approach,” Lin-
ear Algebra Appl., vol. 404, pp. 85–117, 2005.
[107] There are also other notions of lumpability, such as ex-
act lumpability [130], and higher-order lumpability [106]
(where the coarse-graining Z is a Markov chain of higher
order).
[108] B. C. Geiger and C. Temmel, “Lumpings of Markov
chains, entropy rate preservation, and higher-order
lumpability,” J. Appl. Probab., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1114–
1132, Dec. 2014, extended version: arXiv:1212.4375
[cs.IT].
[109] In essence, strong lumpability requires an equality of
certain probability distributions (cf. [21, Th. 6.3.2]);
this equality of distributions is implied by the equal-
ity H(Zt|Zt−1) = H(Zt|Xt−1) only if the conditioning
event Xt−1 covers the whole state space X with posi-
tive probability. This is ensured for irreducible Markov
chains with finite X [21, Th. 4.1.4]. Whether the re-
quirement of aperiodicity can be removed, or whether
the requirement of stationarity can be relaxed, is cur-
rently unclear.
[110] S. Derisavi, H. Hermanns, and W. H. Sanders, “Opti-
mal state-space lumping in markov chains,”Information
Processing Letters, vol. 87, no. 6, pp. 309–315, 2003.
[111] D. R. Barr and M. U. Thomas, “Technical note—an
eigenvector condition for markov chain lumpability,”
Operations Research, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1028–1031, 1977.
[112] M. N. Jacobi and O. G¨ ornerup, “A dual eigenvector
condition for strong lumpabilit of Markov chains,” 2008,
arXiv:0710.1986.
[113] M. N. Katehakis and L. C. Smit, “A successive lumping
procedure for a class of Markov chains,” Probability in
the Engineering and Information Sciences , vol. 26, pp.
483–508, 2012.
[114] M. N. Jacobi, “A robust spectral method for find-
ing lumpings and meta stable states of non-reversible
Markov chains,” 2010, arXiv:0810.1127.
[115] B. C. Geiger, T. Petrov, G. Kubin, and H. Koeppl,
“Optimal Kullback-Leibler aggregation via informa-
tion bottleneck,” IEEE Trans. Automatic Control ,
vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1010–1022, Apr. 2015, open-access:
arXiv:1304.6603 [cs.SY] .
[116] R. A. Amjad, C. Bl¨ ochl, and B. C. Geiger, “A gen-
eralized framework for Kullback-Leibler Markov ag-
gregation,” IEEE Trans. Automatic Control , vol. 65,
no. 7, pp. 3068–3075, Jul. 2020, open-access:
arXiv:1709.05907 [cs.SY] .
[117] Code for this type of approaches can
be found at https://github.com/stegsoph/
Constrained-Markov-Clustering.
[118] M. Cobb, The Idea of the Brain: The Past and Future
of Neuroscience. Basic Books, 2020.
[119] M. Bondaschi and M. Gastpar, “Alpha-NML universal
predictors,” in 2022 IEEE International Symposium on
Information Theory (ISIT). IEEE, 2022, pp. 468–473.
[120] G. Casella and R. L. Berger, Statistical inference. Cen-
gage Learning, 2021.
[121] E. R. Kandel, Y. Dudai, and M. R. Mayford, “The
molecular and systems biology of memory,” Cell, vol.
157, no. 1, pp. 163–186, 2014.
[122] J. A. Fodor, The Language of Thought . Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1975, vol. 5.
[123] Z. Pylyshyn and W. Turnbiull, “Computation and cog-
nition: Toward a foundation for cognitive science,”
Canadian Psychology, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 85–87, 1986.
[124] M. Rescorla, “From Ockham to Turing – and back
again,” in Philosophical Explorations of the Legacy of
Alan Turing. Springer, 2017, pp. 279–304.
[125] M. Milkowski, Explaining the Computational Mind .
MIT Press, 2013.
[126] B. A. Richards and T. P. Lillicrap, “The brain-computer
metaphor debate is useless: A matter of semantics,”
Frontiers in Computer Science , vol. 4, p. 810358, 2022.
[127] T. Van Gelder, “What might cognition be, if not com-
putation?” The Journal of Philosophy , vol. 92, no. 7,
pp. 345–381, 1995.
[128] ——, “The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive science,”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 615–
628, 1998.
[129] L. B. Smith, “Cognition as a dynamic system: Princi-
ples from embodiment,” Developmental Review, vol. 25,
no. 3-4, pp. 278–298, 2005.
[130] P. Buchholz, “Exact and ordinary lumpability in finite
markov chains,” Journal of Applied Probability, vol. 31,
no. 1, p. 59–75, 1994.
