=== PAGE 1 ===

Economics and Philosophy
http://journals.cambridge.org/EAP
Additional services for Economics and
Philosophy:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here
Real Patterns and the Ontological Foundations
of Microeconomics
Don Ross
Economics and Philosophy / Volume 11 / Issue 01 / April 1995, pp 113 - 136
DOI: 10.1017/S0266267100003242, Published online: 05 December 2008
Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0266267100003242
How to cite this article:
Don Ross (1995). Real Patterns and the Ontological Foundations of
Microeconomics. Economics and Philosophy, 11, pp 113-136 doi:10.1017/
S0266267100003242
Request Permissions : Click here
Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/EAP, IP address: 138.251.14.35 on 31 Mar 2015


=== PAGE 2 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
Economics and Philosphy, 11, (1995), 113-36.
REAL PATTERNS AND THE
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF
MICROECONOMICS
DON ROSS
University of Ottawa
Most philosophical accounts of the foundations of economics have
assumed that economics is intended to be an empirical science concerned
with human behaviour, though they have, of course, differed over the
extent to which it has been or can be successful as such an enterprise. A
prominent source of dissent against this consensus is Alexander Rosen-
berg. In his recent book, Rosenberg summarizes and completes his
statement of a position that he has been developing for some time
(Rosenberg, 1992a). He argues that although economists evaluate one
another's work according to shared and rigorous standards of adequacy,
these standards are strictly internal, like those of mathematics, instead of
being derived from discoveries about contingent relationships between
theoretical statements and empirical facts. Economics, that is to say, is
essentially conceptual rather than empirical inquiry. In the following
discussion, I will provide grounds for resisting Rosenberg's conclusion.
The point of this criticism, however, is not mainly negative. Most of the
historical preoccupations of the philosophy of economics, like those of the
philosophy of science in general, have been epistemological. Careful
attention to Rosenberg's argument, however, redirects our attention to
ontological questions about the
 objects of economics, and this redirection,
I will maintain, is to be welcomed. I will argue that while the majority of
I would like to thank the following people for their helpful criticisms of earlier drafts of this
paper: Hilliard Aronovitch, Daniel Hausman, Chantale LaCasse, Robert Nadeau, Wayne
Norman, Claude Panaccio, Alexander Rosenberg and two anonymous referees for
 Economics
and Philosophy. I also profited from the comments of audiences at l'Universite du Quebec a
Montreal and the University of Waterloo.
113


=== PAGE 3 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
114 DON  Ross
philosophers of economics is correct, as against Rosenberg, in regarding
economics as an empirical science, the conventional view as to the
identity of its empirical objects should be substantially revised under
the pressure of Rosenberg's criticisms. My critical analysis of the
implications of Rosenberg's work for the ontological commitments of
economics is intended to furnish one line of argument towards my own
conception of the objects of economics. This conception, which is still
preliminary in many respects, will be briefly sketched toward the end
of the present paper; a detailed account of it is given in Ross and
LaCasse (1993).
One caveat is in order before I proceed. My attention will be largely
confined to microeconomics. I make no claim that the position I will
sketch provides foundational support for the theoretical and practical
structure of macroeconomics. It might appear to be to Rosenberg's
advantage that he imposes no such restriction on his analysis, offering it
as a general philosophy of economics that both microeconomists and
macroeconomists should endorse. In his reach for generality of scope,
however, Rosenberg exceeds his grasp. It is among the most apparent and
anecdotally well-attested facts about the sociology of economics that
microeconomists are frequently uneasy about the foundational integrity
of macroeconomics, especially macroeconomics based on models which
do not feature optimizing behaviour. Although the rise of rational
expectations theory has encouraged, in some quarters, the view that
microeconomics will provide foundations for macroeconomics,
1 the fact
that many economists themselves do not expect unification should lead
us to be wary of presuming this. Prudent regard for the actual dynamics
of the discipline makes it wisest to first seek
 separate foundational theories,
and then ask whether, and/or how, these pieces can be fitted together into
a more general interpretation. The following discussion is confined to just
one of these three tasks.
The problem of identifying the objects of microeconomics arises from
the fact that the most obvious candidates for the job face serious
objections. The most natural, and naive, interpretation of microeconomics
is to view it as seeking generalizations about the behaviour of actual
people under idealized conditions which are most closely approximated
in the competitive marketplace. The appeal of the naive view is obvious:
1 See Lucas, 1973; representative work on real business cycles (Kydland and Prescott, 1982;
Long and Plosser, 1983); and recent work on consumption and asset prices. Most of these
macroeconomic models directly borrow the tools of microeconomic theory by featuring a
'representative agent' who is infinitely lived and maximizes some utility function. Another
unifying view, though one which does not necessarily award pride of place to
microeconomic tools, holds that the two branches of economics are foundarionally bound
by their common goal of analysing economic systems by means of general equilibrium
theory. This view seems to be frequently held by economists who study growth, and is
sometimes hinted at by Rosenberg himself.


=== PAGE 4 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF  MICROECONOMICS 115
according to it, microeconomics studies people (qua rational utility
maximizers) in just the way that mechanics studies bodies  (qua  packets
of energy subject to limited ensembles of forces), and economics presents
no special problems for the philosophy of science. The  defects  of the
naive view, however, are just about equally obvious. If the conditions
that define 'Rational Economic Man' are treated as idealizations, then we
face a battery of well-known problems concerning their empirical
motivation and limits of application. In general, a science that traffics in
idealizations after the model of classical physics achieves its predictive
successes by relaxing the idealizations in particular cases according to
principles that can be independently justified in terms of the operating
theory. There was a moment in the history of economics, prior to the
work of Edgeworth and Pareto, when it might have developed in this
way, and thereby have become a branch of the emerging science of
psychology. But Pareto's disdain for motivations as 'metaphysical
entities' led him to reinterpret utility in a way that foreshadowed
Samuelson's later project of showing how to assign preference profiles
without making empirical claims or assumptions about individuals other
than (apparently) that their demand behaviour could have been
generated from a utility maximizing model using
 some fixed set of tastes.
I say 'apparently' here because, as many writers have objected, the fact
that tastes must be treated as unchanging throughout an analysis, in
conjunction with the fact that there is no extra-economic theory of tastes
to which economists can defer in relaxing their idealizations, means that
data cannot be used as a basis for revising the rationality conditions
embedded in a given model; instead, they can only be used to determine
whether the model applies at all. But in that case the rationality
conditions cannot be idealizations, since idealizations are  abstractions
from empirical regularities, not a priori criteria for theory application.
The rationality conditions resemble idealizations with respect to their
function, which is to permit generalization and analytical tractability, but
they do not resemble idealizations with respect to their  justification.  If
microeconomics does not describe idealized individuals, then the only
way to try to preserve the naive view is to argue that it describes
 actual
individuals, that is, that individual people are in fact rational (at least in
the marketplace) in the way that revealed preference theory supposes.
But that economists are not inclined to this response is suggested by
their general indifference to famous experimental results (Nisbett and
Ross, 1980; Kahneman et al, 1982) suggesting that most people system-
atically violate the assumptions of rational choice theory.
If one concludes that agents are not the objects of empirical study for
microeconomics, then one may reasonably wonder whether there are any
such objects, and this clearly amounts to wondering whether microeco-
nomics is an
 empirical  science at all. Accounts of microeconomics as


=== PAGE 5 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
116 DON  Ross
nonempirical may be divided into two broad classes: those that under-
mine its general epistemic legitimacy, and those that decouple it from
empirical pretensions in order to defend it. Proponents of accounts in the
first class usually hold economics to be disguised ideology. This is a view
which I will not take seriously. While it is no doubt true that many
individual economists have been influenced in their work by their
personal political persuasions - as is the case in any science - there is no
attainable critical perspective from which a (pompous) philosopher could
legitimately convict an entire discipline of bad faith. With less malice
aforethought, other philosophers have argued that microeconomics is a
normative enterprise not in the political sense, but rather according to the
sense in which epistemology is a normative enterprise. On this view,
microeconomics investigates the conceptual structure of maximizing
rationality, without pronouncing on the extent to which consumers are
rational in this way, or ought to be. Just as the epistemologist provides
practical advice only for those who already place a high relative value on
truth and belief consistency, so the microeconomist's recommendations
are conditional on our extrinsically motivated concern with the consis-
tency of acquisitive actions relative to a well defined set of interests. To
the extent that one associates this sort of conceptual inquiry with the
philosopher's task, microeconomics emerges on this view as a kind of
technically specialized philosophy. If it is not an empirical science, it has
at least as much epistemic legitimacy as philosophy, which, in the eyes of
philosophers, is apt to be plenty.
Attractive though it can be made to seem, this view, I wish to
maintain, is false; microeconomics is an empirical science that investigates
real phenomena. My claim, to be defensible, must be importantly
different from the naive version of it sketched a couple of paragraphs ago,
which is hopeless. My alternative is not fully developed; what I will offer
instead is a proposal for further investigation. The motivation for this
proposal arises from consideration of what is right, and what is wrong,
with the view of economics as conceptual inquiry. Here I turn gratefully
to Rosenberg, who, as mentioned above, gives us a sophisticated
argument to the effect that economics is a legitimate science precisely to
the extent that it is properly seen as a conceptual one. Although it will
turn out that Rosenberg is wrong, the way in which he is wrong is the
best guide we yet have as to what is right.
According to Rosenberg, economics
is a branch of
 mathematics, one devoted to examining the formal properties
of a set of assumptions about the transitivity of abstract relations: axioms
that implicitly define a technical notion of 'rationality', just as geometry
examines the formal properties of abstract points and lines (Rosenberg,
1992a, p. 247).


=== PAGE 6 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOCICAL FOUNDATIONS OF  MICROECONOMICS 117
The analogy with geometry is developed at some length in Rosenberg's
discussion, and is essential to understanding his justification for claiming
that economics is a species of mathematics. Geometry was at one time
taken to be an empirical science, whose central terms referred directly to
classes of objects in space. The fact that the methods of geometers were
uncharacteristic of experimental science, however, generated the pro-
blems in the epistemology of geometry that found their most acute
expression in Kant's uncomfortable doctrine of the synthetic a priori.
Later, the development of non-Euclidean geometries and of relativistic
physics demonstrated that geometry is not the empirical science of space,
but is instead the study of patterns of relations among abstract concepts
defined according to families of axioms.
 Part of geometry's utility stems
from the applications that are made of it by physicists, but the epistemic
integrity of a given piece of geometric inquiry is independent of the
existence of any such uses. The situation of economics, Rosenberg argues,
is parallel to this. Economists initially took their central terms to refer
directly to agents and to some of their psychological properties. Their
indifference to predictive failures, however, and the apparent willingness
of early eminences such as Mill to insulate theory indefinitely against the
possibility of disconfirmation, led methodologically self-conscious econo-
mists to produce a trail of special epistemologies for their discipline, each
of which tries implausibly to rationalize the Kantian tension between
empiricism and a priorism. (For an outline of this history, see Blaug, 1980,
Part II.) As with the epistemology of geometry, we are best freed from
such hopeless labours, Rosenberg maintains, when we recognize that the
objects of economic inquiry are purely abstract relations. To be sure,
economics has applications - principally, whenever we wish to determine
the possible range of impacts of some exogenous change in the trading
environment of agents evolving in a competitive system, or the possible
qualitative influences upon a particular market of a change in the
competitive system to which it belongs. That economic arguments usually
have the form of possibility proofs, however, should alert us to the fact
that they do not directly concern contingent phenomena. Rosenberg
concludes that economics, like geometry, is hostage only to standards
generated by its own historical dynamic of mathematical rigour. Its
authority as a basis for public and personal policy is necessarily limited
by this analysis, but, in compensation, systematic predictive imprecision
need not threaten the integrity of the discipline.
At least where microeconomics is concerned, the chief merit of this
account lies in its explanation of two salient features of the discipline: the
fact that greater prestige and significance is accorded to abstract
possibility proofs than to elaborations of structural isomorphisms
between models and phenomena; and the unusual attitude of economists,
by comparison with other scientists, towards the importance of their


=== PAGE 7 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
118 DON  Ross
discipline's empirical track record. 2 I think that the account also has two
serious flaws: (1) it depends on a misunderstanding and a misapplication
of the distinction between the conceptual and the empirical; and (2) it
requires an implausibly strong identification of scientific theory with
scientific aims and methods. These mistakes abet one another, and so I
will seek to substantiate my identification of them together.
Distinguishing conceptual inquiry from empirical inquiry does not
require that we revive rigid positivistic distinctions between the a priori
and the a posteriori or between the analytic and the synthetic. We could
instead agree to count, say, set theory as a paradigm case of conceptual
inquiry and terrestrial geology as a paradigm case of empirical inquiry,
look for methodological characteristics of the two sciences that seem
crucially related to our intuitions, and then sort other investigative
enterprises along an intervening spectrum governed by those character-
istics. One sorting characteristic which will surely emerge as very
important here is the extent to which a discipline treats predictive success
as an essential aspect of hypothesis justification. 3 For this reason,
Rosenberg focuses much of his attention on the predictive efficacy of
economics.
In particular, he relies heavily on the distinction between
 quantitative
and qualitative prediction. His use of it is inspired by Samuelson's remark
that
In the absence of complete quantitative information concerning our
equilibrium conditions, it is hoped to be able to formulate qualitative
restrictions on slopes, curvatures, etc., of our equilibrium equations so as to
be able to derive definite qualitative restrictions upon the responses of our
system to changes in certain parameters. (Samuelson, 1947, p. 20)
Samuelson makes clear in a subsequent passage - which Rosenberg
quotes, though missing the point - that his claim is not that individual
economists who are skilled in the application of theory and closely
2 The point here is not just the familiar one that economists are less interested in data than
most scientists. It is that, in addition, their own view of their discipline's history is
uncharacteristic of empirical sciences. Economists do not celebrate epochal instances where
theories faced decisive tests - Lavoisier's jar, Halley's comet, the procession of the
perihelion of Mercury, etc. Instead, macroeconomists are embarrassed by the crudeness of
historians of thought who try, for example, to portray the 1929 crash as a turning point in
the fortunes of neoclassical theory, and I think that most of them are at some level
 relieved
that this apparent 'revolt of the facts' could later be interpreted as cancelled out by the
stagflation of the 1970s. I do not mean to be taking a stand here on the epistemic
significance of crucial experiments. I take it to be interesting, however, that the mythology
of the discipline has so little use for them.
3 It is possible to dissent from this 'predictive empiricism', as an anonymous referee of an
earlier draft of this paper points out. However, Rosenberg clearly accepts it, and so, at least
for the purposes of the argument, will I.


=== PAGE 8 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF MICROECONOMICS 119
acquainted, through experience, with a particular system, cannot often
achieve reliable quantitative predictions about the system in question (pp.
26-7). Rather, his contention is that economic theory does not by itself
provide methodological recipes for quantitative prediction. (I will
henceforth refer to 'specific prediction', of which Samuelson's particular
notion of 'quantitative prediction' is a special case.) Now, this feature of
economics is shared with a number of other thriving sciences, including
evolutionary population ecology, cognitive ethology and paleotaxonomy.
If this observation is important, it must be because it picks out a class of
inquiries for which special epistemological problems arise.
 Call this class a
class of 'conceptual' inquiries if you like; but this terminological decision
solves no problems unless these sciences relevantly resemble geometry in
the way that economics is supposed to. Recall that we are sorting sciences
along the conceptual-empirical continuum by reflective equilibrium
against our intuitions. My intuitions are pretty sure of themselves in
judging that whereas geometry is not about space - even though it can be
applied to space - evolutionary population ecology is essentially about
the dynamics of populations, cognitive ethology is essentially about
animal behaviour, and paleotaxonomy is essentially about evolutionary
history and relationships. The point is that it would be a mistake to
identify the boundary between conceptual and empirical inquiry with the
boundary between sciences whose theories identify strategies for deli-
vering specific predictions and sciences whose theories do not.
Rosenberg does not, exactly, make
 this mistake, since he knows that it
would be unacceptable to claim that evolutionary biology is not empirical
inquiry. What he seems to suppose instead is that for a science to be
empirical it must make predictions that are  relevant to (successful) specific
predictions, whether or not it directly offers such predictions itself
(Rosenberg 1992a, p. 70). Evolutionary theory is at least intended to be
relevant to specific prediction, though Rosenberg appears to be of two
minds as to whether it succeeds in this. At one point he implies that to the
extent that evolutionary theory relies on adaptationist assumptions, it is
failed empirical inquiry (pp. 181-5). Later he suggests that evolutionary
theory contributes to successful empirical inquiry once it is buttressed by
molecular genetics (pp. 233-4). Since Rosenberg does not explicitly
summarize his view of the comparison between evolutionary theory and
economics, I shall try to do so for him in a way that seems to me to be
charitable in the light of what he needs for his larger argument. If
evolutionary theory is committed to adaptationism, then it is irrelevant to
specific prediction, and so is a species either of conceptual inquiry or of
failed empirical inquiry.
4 To the extent that it is not committed to
4 If one takes the view that evolutionary theory is committed to adaptationism, and that it is
conceptual inquiry, then it might, in fact, be fairly natural to see evolutionary theory as a
part of economics!


=== PAGE 9 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
120 DON  Ross
adaptationism, it is relevant to specific predictions by way of its relation-
ship to molecular genetics. Now, the only science that could stand to
economics as molecular genetics (presumably) stands to evolutionary
theory would be a psychological theory that gave ontological substance
to the motivational and intentional states in which microeconomics
traffics (pp.
 112-51, 235-6). Taking an explicit stand on hot issues in the
philosophy of cognitive science, Rosenberg asserts that no such theory is,
or will be, forthcoming. Therefore, economics cannot be vindicated as
empirical inquiry in the way that evolutionary theory might be; therefore,
economics is either failed empirical inquiry or it is conceptual inquiry.
This is intended by Rosenberg as an
 explanation  of the (putatively)
independently established claim that, as a matter of fact, the predictive
success rate of neoclassical economics has failed to show improvement
over the last century or so (p. 149). From here, he goes on to argue that
since our intuitions need not revolt at treating economics as conceptual
inquiry, in the way they do where evolutionary theory is concerned, the
cross-disciplinary principle of charity that is now a working maxim
among philosophers of science should lead us to hypothesize that
economics is conceptual inquiry.
There are several tendentious assumptions driving this reasoning. Let
us focus first on the relationships between qualitative predictive efficacy,
specific predictive efficacy, and the empirical/conceptual dichotomy.
Rosenberg provides only a sketchy argument for his judgement that
qualitative predictive efficacy is insufficient for successful empirical
science, but his basis for it seems to have Lakatosian affinities: he
supposes that a scientific research programme which cannot push its
predictive power beyond the qualitative must be regarded as degener-
ating. This invites two immediate criticisms. First, it fails to address the
possibility that a science could progressively develop by widening its
range of qualitative predictions.
5 Following Dawkins (1986), I believe that
this is in fact the principal sense in which evolutionary theory has been
progressive. Second, it glosses over the subtlety in Samuelson's distinc-
tion, alluded to above, which Rosenberg seems to have missed. One of
the principal functions of a theory is to organize and systematize
phenomena. A theory that does a good job of this may play an essential
role in enabling an individual scientist who is empirically well acquainted
with a particular system to provide specific predictions about that system.
The extra-theoretical knowledge and practical experience that, along with
the theory, constitute necessary conditions for such predictions need not
always be specifiable as initial conditions by means of parameters
recognized explicitly by the theory. The point is that there are two ways
Rosenberg doesn't ignore this possibility. But his sketchy argument against using it as a
basis for defending the progressiveness of economics (Rosenberg, 1992a, pp. 106-7) begs
the question. More on this below.


=== PAGE 10 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF  MICROECONOMICS 121
in which a theory can meet Rosenberg's criterion of relevance to specific
prediction: by spawning a body of specifically predictive theory, or by
serving as a conceptual organizer that facilitates a range of low-level
quantitative inferences in the company of particular, system-relative
empirical facts. Since empirical relevance of this second variety will not
(necessarily) generate theoretical  progress, we might distinguish it from
the standard Lakatosian image of progressive science by saying that a
science which perpetuates itself by being useful in the second way is
empirically productive. If philosophers of science have given little notice to
empirical productivity, this may reflect a history of undue emphasis on
theory as the sole repository of epistemic importance, with which the
discipline has been persuasively charged by Hacking (1983) and Cart-
wright (1983).
The most pressing immediate business of the philosophy of eco-
nomics, I suggest, is to investigate the question of whether microeco-
nomics and macroeconomics are (separately) empirically progressive in
the first sense described above, or empirically productive, or both, or
neither. This cannot be accomplished just by conceptual reflection and
through surveys of economists' methodological tracts; what we need are
close, detailed analyses of particular episodes of economic explanation
and model-building, of the kind to which we have become accustomed in
the philosophy of physics. My expectation is that such research would
find enough clear cases of empirical
 productivity to explain the continuing
survival - indeed, institutional flourishing - of economics. But my
expectation might be wrong, since more overtly sociological, non-
epistemic factors could conceivably account for the institutional facts.
There is, I think, little to be gained by staging a war of philosophical
preconceptions here; we must simply get down to work on cases. On the
question of qualitative empirical progressiveness, however, there is more
to be said alongside, or in advance of case-work, since the very concept of
qualitative empirical progress is unclear, and is implicated in important
general issues in the philosophy of science.
One of the chief merits of Rosenberg's work is that it draws our
attention away from the mere
 extent to which economic theory can deliver
specific predictions, in favour of focusing it on the epistemic dynamics of
a field which demonstrably doesn't care very much, at least by
comparison with the familiar examples of scientific disciplines, about
specific predictions, whether it actually produces them or not. As
discussed, I do not find Rosenberg's diagnosis of economics as conceptual
inquiry - the cash value of which lies in the appropriateness of his
analogy between economics and geometry - to be very convincing. He is
driven to this analysis, however, because he simultaneously wants to be
charitable towards economics while denying the possibility of a science
whose empirical progressiveness can consist solely in expanding the


=== PAGE 11 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
122 DON  Ross
range of its qualitative predictions. This is an important mistake, because
it has consequences that ramify through the philosophy of science. Just as
it pushes him to an uncomfortable philosophy of economics, it is also
implicated in his view of evolutionary theory. Recall that, for Rosenberg,
evolutionary theory, despite its qualitative character, is in better shape
than economics as an empirical science because, when deployed in
conjunction with our understanding of the mechanisms of inheritance
supplied by molecular genetics, it is frequently relevant to specific
predictions of a kind that it cannot generate on its own. One familiar way
of understanding this relevance relation might be as follows: molecular
genetics 'cashes out', in some quasi-reductionistic sense, the fundamental
causal operators - Mendelian genes - whose qualitatively significant
properties are described by neo-Darwinian theory; thus neo-Darwinian
theory conceptually informs, and perhaps heuristically guides, molecular
genetics, but it is molecular genetics, not neo-Darwinian theory, that
directly provides specific predictions. This is alright, as far as it goes. But
the moment one tries to be any more specific than this, Rosenberg's
conceptual framework begins to chafe. If the 'cashing out' function
alluded to above is explained by holding that classical genetics really
reduces to molecular genetics, then neo-Darwinian theory will be assimi-
lated to molecular genetics, many of its famous qualitative generalizations
will turn out to be false, and we will not have a case, after all, of a
qualitative theory that is autonomous from the source of specific
predictions while being nevertheless relevant to those predictions. On the
other hand, if one follows Kitcher (1984) in maintaining that Mendelian
genes are irreducible to any types recognized by molecular genetics, and
thus that classical genetics is an autonomous special science in the sense
of Fodor (1974), then the relationship between neo-Darwinian theory and
the specific predictions to which it contributes will be relevant to the
former's empirical productivity, but not to its empirical progressiveness.
Rosenberg had best take the first approach, lest evolutionary theory turn
out to have an epistemic status just like economics after all, in which case
he will face the unwelcome choice of either assigning evolutionary theory,
with economics, to conceptual inquiry, or acknowledging that there can
be qualitative theories that are empirically progressive. Now, the first
option is also one which Rosenberg might prefer to resist, since his
argument about economics is clearly weakened if it turns out to depend
on taking one side of a controversial issue in the philosophy of biology.
My suspicion, however, is that Rosenberg's scepticism about qualitatively
predictive sciences is ultimately motivated by reductionist intuitions. I
will try to substantiate this suspicion, not for the sake of finding error in
Rosenberg, but to show how different microeconomics can appear under
the light of varying attitudes to reductionism.
When Rosenberg seeks respects in which evolutionary theory is on


=== PAGE 12 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF MICROECONOMICS 123
firmer ground, despite its qualitative character, than economics, his
emphasis is revealing. He does not cite the notable successes of evolu-
tionary ethologists at predicting and explaining patterns in foraging
behaviour, mate selection, reproductive spacing, behavioral thermoregula-
tion, kin preference, territoriality and so on. Instead, in exact contrast to
Dawkins' arguments for interpreting the scope of Darwinian theory as
broadly as possible, Rosenberg writes as if the sole concern of evolutionary
theory were changes in distributions of population characteristics over
time, as understood in terms of changes in gene frequencies (Rosenberg,
1992a, pp. 195-6; 1992b, pp. 176-83).6 One would gather from Rosenberg's
remarks that in this area evolutionary theory delivers, and explains, a
single class of qualitative results, namely, the tendency of gene frequencies
to find and maintain stable equilibria. This, one might suppose, is a rather
slight base of accomplishments for a successful science. However, Rosen-
berg uses it to contrast economics, treated as an empirical science,
unfavourably with evolutionary theory (at least with respect to their use of
equilibrium concepts; and these concepts, as Hausman (1992) argues, are
absolutely fundamental to the structure of economics):
economic equilibrium theory ... lacks the most important feature that
justifies the same kind of thinking in evolutionary biology: independent
evidence that there is a stable equilibrium to be explained (Rosenberg,
1992a,
 p. 195).
This is not very convincing. Both populations and exchange relationships
will seem more or less stable depending on the grain of analysis with
which they are studied. If someone were surprised that populations are
stable to any measurable degree, then her surprise could be relieved just by
describing natural selection, that is, by reciting Darwin's most basic
insight. Similarly, Adam Smith already has the answer to someone who
does not understand why exchange relationships are not irremediably
chaotic. The question, then, is this: what might justify Rosenberg's view
that the focus on equilibria is justified in the case of evolutionary theory in
a way that it isn't in the case of neoclassical economic theory? His explicit
answer is extremely unsatisfying. Evolutionary adaptational problems, he
claims, are to a suitable degree of approximation parametric, whereas
6 Rosenberg makes clear that he 'do[es] not endorse the view that the theory of natural
selection is about gene ratios' (personal communication). This accords with what he says in
his detailed study of the foundations of biology (Rosenberg, 1985). But note that I have not
charged him with holding this view, exactly. Rather, what I read Rosenberg as implying, at
least in his briefer treatment of the nature of biology as it relates to economics, is that what
makes it possible for evolutionary theory to treat empirically of changes in distributions of
population characteristics, despite rendering only qualitative predictions about them, is
that these changes are, so to speak, 'ontologically grounded' in measurable changes in gene
frequencies.


=== PAGE 13 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
124 DON  Ross
economic relations are fundamentally nonparametric (pp. 195-6)7 The
first part of this claim is highly questionable. Its acceptance would render
mysterious the motivations for, and the excitement generated by, evolu-
tionary game theory, and would undermine some of the most important
arguments against Panglossian adaptationism in biology, arguments with
which Rosenberg appears to be in sympathy. Rosenberg may, however,
have a better answer available to him than this official one - 'available' in
the sense that it comports naturally with his stated grounds for doubting
that economics is or can be empirically progressive. // one supposes that
genes are the basic objects of evolutionary theory, and that molecular
genetics ostensively, so to speak, substantiates these objects by supplying
their detailed mechanics, then one can understand how evolutionary
theory can be in good foundational shape as an empirical science even
though most of
 its generalizations are only qualitative. As Rosenberg notes
(p. 195), specific predictions are hard to come by in population genetics
due to the complexity of the genetic/environmental causal nexus. But
there are cases, such as (the philosopher's favourite) that of the hetero-
zygote superiority that keeps human populations in malarial regions
polymorphous for the sickle cell allele, where one set of vectors is so
causally dominant that local equilibria can be specified, predicted and
tested with great accuracy. Finding some such cases in the field, and being
able to produce many others in the lab, reassures us that evolutionary
theory is tracking real phenomena despite its poor output of important
specific predictions. Its failure to be empirically progressive in the
conventional sense, then, turns out to be a consequence of the difficulty of
gathering data, rather than of conceptual problems in the theory.
My main basis for attributing to Rosenberg the view that it is the
molecular substantiation of genes and genetic mechanisms that makes
evolutionary theory empirical, in a way that economics can't be, is that he
explicitly holds the
 lack of such a substantiator in economics to provide
the explanation for the putative failure of economics to satisfy its
empirical pretensions (p. 149). If economics is interpreted empirically,
then its basic objects, according to Rosenberg, are types of intentions -
beliefs, preferences and plans. Microeconomics stands to these entities
just as Darwinian theory stands to genes. That is, if we take revealed
7 Rosenberg does not maintain that evolutionary theory is successful just because
adaptational games are mainly parametric (personal communication). But this  does seem
to be the basis for his view that biologists can have confidence in equilibrium phenomena in
a way that economists can't. It should, in general, be borne in mind that we could do better
justice to Rosenberg's views on biology by availing ourselves of his detailed (1985) study of
that subject. But the shifts of emphasis between that work and his brief exposition in
Rosenberg (1992a) are precisely to be explained, I am suggesting, by appeal to the fact that
placing the sort of weight on the qualitative/specific contrast that Rosenberg does in
connection with economics complicates and disrupts a sensible philosophy of biology - his
own included.


=== PAGE 14 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOCICAL FOUNDA TIONS OF MICROECONOMICS 125
preference theory and von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility
theory as being among the foundations of microeconomics, then micro-
economics has nothing to say about what intentions are, about their
internal dynamics, or about the nature of their realization in agents. It
begins from whatever assumptions about intentionality are most reason-
able, in the light of what we know. 8 The source of improvements in the
empirical progressiveness of economics, on this story, must be improve-
ments in what we know about intentions; this is (I here conjecture)
supposed to be analogous to the way in which evolutionary theory is
made specifically predictively efficacious in principle and, occasionally, in
fact, by the increases in our knowledge of genes delivered by molecular
genetics. Leaving aside, for the moment, the question of whether this is
the right way to view the relationship between neo-Darwinian theory and
molecular genetics, note that it is a beguiling line on microeconomics.
While microeconomists' rationality conditions do function like idealiza-
tions on this account, they function as idealizations
 should.  The crucial
difference between this view and that dismissed earlier as naive, is that
according to the former, our idealizations are not about agents but about
intentional structures themselves. And, in cognitive science, we  do have a
thriving empirical inquiry into intentional structures - don't we? Can
cognitive science play the role for microeconomics that molecular genetics
(putatively) plays for neo-Darwinian theory?
Rosenberg's answer to this question is an unequivocal 'no'. Where the
philosophy of cognitive science is concerned he is, it develops, a kind of
eliminativist. He does not hold, as Paul Churchland has on occasion (e.g.,
1979), that intentional attribution and its folk psychological setting will
disappear from daily life; but he insists on the part of eliminativism that
matters, namely, the claim that there can be no science of prepositional
attitudes.9 I will quote Rosenberg at length here, since there are now so
many shades of opinion on these matters that the mere assignment of
philosophers to isms is not very informative:
8 Rosenberg explains economists' unshakeable commitment to rationality as arising from the
fact that the use of intentional concepts already presupposes general rationality, although it
can allow for limited departures from any particular set of rationality conditions under
specifiable circumstances. I think that he is entirely right about this, though I do not think
that it in any way impugns the empirical integrity of the discipline. For reasons which may
become clear(er) below, I am unmoved by the arguments of Stich (1990) and others to the
effect that no proper science can presume agents to be generically rational.
9 A referee of an earlier draft points out that Rosenberg's scepticism about the prospects for a
science of the intentional can be justified by appeal to Davidson's arguments for
anomalism, and thus does not require eliminativism. Note, however, that I am using
'eliminativism' to denote a position that is a bit less radical than Churchland at his most
dramatic. By 'eliminativism' 1 refer just to the thesis that no intentional predicates will
figure in a successful scientific theory. While this is weaker than the thesis that the
intentional predicates will disappear altogether, it is stronger than anomalism, since it is a
matter of contention as to whether or not anomalism is compatible with functionalism. (See


=== PAGE 15 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
126 DON  Ross
the real source of trouble for the attempt to find  improvable  laws of
economic behaviour is something that has only become clear in the
philosophy of psychology's attempts to understand the intentional vari-
ables ... '[Beliefs' and 'desires'... do not describe 'natural kinds'. They do
not divide nature at the
 joints. They do not label types of discrete states that
share the same manageably small set of causes and effects and so cannot be
brought together in causal generalizations that improve on our ordinary
level of prediction ... let alone attain the sort of continuing improvement
characteristic of science. We cannot expect to improve our intentional
explanations of action beyond their present levels of predictive power. But
the level of predictive power of our intentional theory is no higher than
Plato's, (p. 235)
To the extent that Rosenberg's argument depends on eliminativism, it is
seriously weakened. Far from being a consensual position in the
philosophy of cognitive science, as the first sentence quoted above
suggests, eliminativism is a radical, minority view. This is not the place to
debate the merits of eliminativism; of more interest in the present context
is Rosenberg's
 route to eliminativism:
The more we learn about the way the brain stores information of the sort to
be represented in our beliefs and desires, the more it becomes apparent that
there is no fact of the matter about exactly what we want and exactly what
we believe. That is, the propositional content of these states is misleadingly
precise in the preferences and expectations it attributes to us. (p. 129)
While most philosophers, as noted, are not eliminativists, many philoso-
phers agree with Rosenberg that the context-sensitivity of intentional
ascription, and the accompanying 'fuzziness' of intentional entities, leads
toward eliminativism; this, combined with the widespread conviction
that eliminativism is nevertheless preposterous, is what causes philoso-
phers such as Fodor (1987) to hold out under increasing strain for
classical computationalist theories of cognition. However, Dennett (1991),
in an important paper, argues that eliminativists and their classical
computationalist arch-foes share a common assumption that fuels the
above debate: an undermotivated brand of reductionism. Following
Dennett's case against this reductionism will enable us to understand
Rosenberg's most interesting mistake, and, in the process, will point the
way toward an alternative conception of the foundations of micro-
economics.
Lycan, 1988, Part 1, for an extended discussion.) Rosenberg's explanation of the failure of
economics as an empirical science cannot allow for the possibility of a functionalist theory
of mind, so he  needs  something stronger than anomalism. As the referee notes, what
Rosenberg actually says in his new book is in fact, more suggestive of eliminativism, as I
am using the term.


=== PAGE 16 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF  MICROECONOMICS 127
Dennett's argument is difficult to summarize, because its structure is
entirely inductive. Through reflection on a number of cases, he invites us
to recognize that our scientific explanatory practices abound with uses of
and references to irreducible, abstract patterns. Philosophers' attitudes
toward the ontological status of such patterns have often been highly
inconclusive, not to say shifty. Consider rates of inflation (my example,
not Dennett's). Are rates of inflation real? Well, they're not  fictitious;
they're not unreal in the way that Tarzan is unreal. A popular position
these days is to say that rates of inflation
 supervene  upon unnameable
armies of micro-events that constitute the true bedrock of reality. This
view revives, in fancy dress, Aristotle's belief in gradations of reality; rates
of inflation are real, but not as real as, for example, the notice on
Shopkeeper Smith's front window announcing a 10% price rise. The
intuitions that support such a metaphysic are as old as philosophy, and
Dennett is obviously in no position to refute them. He can be read as
forcefully pointing out, however, that they do not comport easily with the
prevailing pragmatism about ontology that is almost everybody's official
position, according to which ontological commitments are determined by
our scientific practices, rather than the other way around. In any case,
Dennett's main concern is not to argue directly against reductionism, but
to assuage worries that an extreme ontological liberalism that sanctions
abstract patterns as readily as it does micro-particulars necessarily breeds
instrumentalism, irrealism or idealism. Fears on this score are motivated
by the fact that patterns are perspective-dependent. What Dennett shows
is that ontologists can take perspectives seriously without abandoning
realism, so long as they have well motivated epistemic criteria for
distinguishing between, on the one hand, patterns which, once recognized
from a perspective, serve irreplaceable explanatory and predictive
purposes, and, on the other, patterns which are arbitrarily cobbled
together under idiosyncratic perspectives to no general epistemic gain.
It is not possible, in this space, to say enough to convince the reader
that Dennett is right. I will instead just summarize his conclusion, while
offering a reminder of its most basic motivation: since atomistic
reductionism seems to be a gratuitously strong metaphysical view, and
the currently popular abandonment of ontology urged by Rorty (1979) to
be an over-reaction to it, some attempt at a compromise position is in
order. Here, then, is Dennett's. To be a real pattern is to be a type of
relatively stable, enduring structure that encodes information in a
compressed form about other types of structures such that that informa-
tion can be registered by some physically possible perceiver. More
succinctly, what makes something real is both its stability over time
under a perspective and its utility as a carrier of information. Two aspects
of this position prevent it from sliding into idealism or constructivism: (1)
what determines the range of physically possible perceivers is itself the


=== PAGE 17 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
128 DON  Ross
non-constructed, mind-independent structure of the world; and (2)
questions about which structures encode information about which others,
and about whether a given encoding is more compressed than a bit-map
representation and, hence, epistemically useful in Dennett's required
sense, can be investigated by the usual objective methods of science. To
be sure, these ontological criteria are extremely liberal; according to
Dennett, the world is teeming with real patterns. But, if she is to avoid
begging the question by appealing to reductionistic intuitions, then an
opponent owes us an argument as to what is wrong with ontological
liberalism. (Note that, thanks to the epistemic utility criterion, Dennett's
view does
 not violate Ockham's principle.)
Dennett's own main use of his ontological thesis is against the
argument that goes from the denial of Fodorian micro-realism about
prepositional attitude states to eliminativism. That cognitive science has
railed to find neurophysiological or discrete computational syntactical
bearers of prepositional content does not imply that the ontology of folk
psychology is mistaken, or that it cannot serve as the basis for scientific
elaboration, for folk psychology, according to Dennett, has (imperfectly,
to be sure) locked onto a set of real patterns. Dennett's conclusion thus
directly undermines Rosenberg's explanation of the putative empirical
failure of economics. Its significance in that context runs deeper, however.
As I have been at pains to show, Rosenberg is consistent in his views of
the several sciences that fall under his comparative gaze in the course of
his work on economics. His denial of the possibility of purely qualitative
empirical progress, his nuanced view of the empirical status of neo-
Darwinian theory, and his denial of empirical content to microeconomic
theory can all be explained, I suggest, as resulting from his failure to
acknowledge the reality of abstract patterns. If there are no real patterns,
but only, in the end, real particulars, then theories which do not go
beyond qualitative prediction are theories which are imprecise and
incomplete, which fail, in an important sense, to be
 accurate.  Empirical
progress must depend on  empirical contact with the world; it must involve
showing that the theory in question says an increasing proportion of true
things about real entities. Thus the empirical content of neo-Darwinian
theory can be saved if, contrary to Kitcher (1984), its central entities are
given 'substance' by molecular genetics. Thus, too, economics could be an
empirical science only if there were real entities for it to be
 about. The
thesis that it is about agents is, as we were reminded at the beginning of
the paper, a non-starter. A more promising suggestion is that it is about
the role played by intentional structures in strategic interaction. But these
structures are not yet themselves bona fide empirical objects, in
Rosenberg's view. If economics is to have an empirical subject matter,
then its putative objects must be substantiated by cognitive science. At
this point, the general failure to acknowledge real patterns arises again in


=== PAGE 18 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDA TIONS OF MICROECONOMICS 129
this more particular context to suggest that cognitive science doesn't
substantiate intentional structures. And thus we arrive at Rosenberg's
conclusion: either we must push the analogy between economics and
geometry, implausible though it may be, in order that economics turns
out to be respectable conceptual inquiry, or we must consign economics
to the realms of pseudo-science and propaganda.
10
When matters are presented in this light, it emerges that the emphasis
on prediction was something of a distraction. Emphasis shifts from
epistemology to ontology: an empirical science needs empirical objects of
study, and it is not obvious that economics has any. Since this was the
point made at the beginning of the present paper, it may seem that our
critical progress through Rosenberg has just led us around a circle. I think
that something has been accomplished, however. I would argue, though I
cannot do so here, that the main controversies in the philosophy of
economics have always been driven, below the surface, by difficulties in
identifying the subject matter of economics. The nature of Rosenberg's
mistake now serves to show that we have consistently been looking in the
wrong place. Having failed to discharge an unwarranted metaphysical
assumption that abstract patterns cannot be empirical objects, most
inquirers have searched along the ground, assuming that the objects of
economics must be 'found' objects, that they must arise from a framework
extrinsic to the discipline - from our natural ontology, in the cases where
individuals and intentions have been proposed as the relevant objects. An
alternative view, to the effect that economic theory
 creates  a perspective
from which real patterns emerge that would otherwise be invisible, has
not been seriously considered. Is such an alternative credible?
Among the philosophers and economic methodologists who have
focused most explicitly on the question of the  objects of economic study is
Sir John Hicks (1939). As Rosenberg (1980, p. 87) notes, Hicks broke with
his tradition in asserting that economics is not about individual
behaviour. Of more interest in the present context, his proposed
alternative objects were
 abstracta par excellence: economics, he declared, is
concerned with the properties of markets and whole economies. In his
view, microeconomics is just a sort of calculus that serves macroeco-
nomics, and the former's referentia - agents, preferences, etc. - are
essentially theoretical fictions. Now, this is not a position which I wish in
any way to endorse. If macroeconomics is a sound empirical science, then
the phenomena that it tracks are surely abstract real patterns; but, as
10 I should make clear that this is not intended as a reconstruction of Rosenberg's argument. It
is supposed to be a  diagnosis of a  mistaken view  of the  relationship between theory
justification and  ontological commitment which, if attributed to  Rosenberg, explains at a
single stroke the various, more particular, mistakes that I have discussed. The main point
of the  discussion of  Rosenberg's eliminativism  was to  provide additional evidence
licensing this attribution.


=== PAGE 19 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
130 DON  Ross
mentioned earlier, I wish to remain strictly neutral on the question of
whether macroeconomics and microeconomics have their detailed foun-
dations in common, and I certainly do not suppose that microeconomics
derives its justification from its service to macroeconomic ambitions.
What is interesting about Hicks is that when he poses a direct question
about ontology in connection with economics, and when, as in his
account, this question is not complicated by philosophical sophistication
concerning explanation and prediction, he sees, almost at a glance, that
economists are concerned with abstract patterns. It is important to note
that these patterns could not themselves have been detected prior to the
development of some economic theory. No one in ancient Athens was in
a position to know that there were rates of inflation and various local
equilibria of demand and supply. An economic
 perspective had first to be
found, from which the information carried in such patterns could be
recognized. Roman and medieval thinkers went a considerable way
towards developing such a perspective, and the greatest single contribu-
tion to its clarification belongs to Adam Smith. But the early economists
did not construct economic phenomena; there were rates of inflation in
ancient Athens, which can sometimes be determined in retrospect and
which can serve in historical explanations. 11 Economic patterns are only
evident from an economic perspective, and the more sophisticated the
perspective, the more patterns will turn up. But they are
 real  patterns
nevertheless.
So what about microeconomics? Which real patterns are its objects of
study? To begin with, the best  general description of the subject matter of
microeconomics remains Robbins's classic definition of it as 'the science
which studies the relationship between ends and scarce means which
have alternative uses' (Robbins, 1932, p. 15). That there is such a
relationship - that there is a real pattern here to be investigated - is the
most basic insight of microeconomics. Study of this relationship reveals
further, deeper patterns: various abstract dilemmas, strategic options and
motivations for competitive responses reoccur under broad ranges of
particular conditions. The most appropriate name for these abstract
phenomena is 'games'. This proposed use of the term is broader than that
11 An example which helps to make the point involves the Roman emperor Diocletian (284-
305 AD). He found himself confronted by ruinous inflation that had been triggered by
generations of extortion on the part of imperial soldiers, who routinely demanded pay
rises as bribes against fomenting mutiny. The standard response of the imperial
administration had been to meet the demands by minting additional coin. Diocletian
recognized that there were inflationary phenomena, in the sense that he saw that money
was declining in value because of continual increases in prices. But he and his advisors
had no grasp of the relevant structural relations. Not understanding that failure to control
the output of the treasury was the cause of the inflation, they fixed prices by edict. As any
economist would predict, this caused goods to disappear from the market, and resulted in
famine.


=== PAGE 20 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOCICAL FOUNDATIONS OF  MICROECONOMICS 131
which informs game theory, but it is not in conflict with it. Game theory,
we may say, studies the most interesting class of games, namely, those in
which actions by any one player can directly affect the payoffs of the
others, and where this interdependence is recognized by the agents. The
decision problems on which neoclassical theory sharpened its analytical
tools can be represented as games in which any one player's influence on
the others is not measurable because the number of agents is large, and
where one player has a stake in the coordination of the market outcome
(as in the classic example of the auctioneer hammering down the
Walrasian equilibrium). My claim, then, in summary form, is that
microeconomics is the study of games, which are real patterns.
As indicated earlier, I do not have space here to provide a full defense
of this claim. It is apt to seem intolerably unclear and undermotivated,
however, in the absence of at least one example. Let me, then, briefly
provide one. The basic idea here is that the games depicted in abstract
microeconomic models12 are types of real patterns, which must be tracked
if their tokens are to be properly explained and predicted. Consider, then,
as an example of such a type, the game that is well known throughout the
game theory literature in economics as 'Matching Pennies'. It takes its
name from its most familiar toy instantiation. Imagine that there are two
players, who may not communicate with each other. Each independently
places a coin, showing either heads or tails. The payoff matrix is shown in
Figure 1.
Player II
HEADS
TAILS
Player I
HEADS
(2,2)
(0,0)
TAILS
(0,0)
(14)
FIGURE 1
By 'Matching Pennies', I will henceforth refer to the class of games
that share two features of this toy instantiation: there are multiple
equilibria, and some of them can be Pareto-ranked. Discovering that the
'Matching Pennies' pattern is instantiated in a strategic interaction can
thus provide the essential basis for predicting that the interaction may
12 What counts as a 'microeconomic model', as I here intend the term, is determined by
properties of the model, not by the subject matter with which it is concerned. So models
built by biologists doing evolutionary game theory are microeconomic models.


=== PAGE 21 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
132 DON  Ross
yield outcomes that seem to be Pareto-inferior, and for explaining Pareto-
inferior outcomes should these arise. The mainstream microeconomic
literature features a number of cases of such explanation (though of types,
rather than tokens, of interactions; these types, too, are real patterns). In a
repeated game where a few firms meet each other in a market for a
homogenous good, any feasible payoff can be attained as a subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium. Thus there are multiple equilibria and a subset
of these can be ranked; this is a case of Matching Pennies.
13 Similarly,
Howitt and McAfee (1992) show that in a situation where workers search
for employment and firms search for employees, and where it is optimal
for both sets of agents to match their intensities of search, there are two
equilibria. Since one equilibrium features a higher level of unemployment
than the other, they are Pareto-ranked. Matching Pennies is thus
instantiated again.
While examples such as these are the most interesting, citing them
alone in the present context will not suffice, since seeing the modelled
types of interactions as empirical phenomena already rests on an appeal to
the real patterns metaphysic. Let me, then, describe what I take to be a
token whose individuation requires no theoretical sophistication, but
which cannot be fully understood unless it is recognized as a token of
Matching Pennies. Since one of the epistemically important characteristics
of many real patterns is robustness across conceptual domains, it is
helpful in any case to find an example which falls outside of the classical
subject matter of economics. Here, then, is an application drawn from my
own doorstep. In the city of Ottawa, where I live, an unusually high
proportion of drivers from out of town get into accidents at intersections.
Anecdote suggests that they show marked impatience when behind local
drivers at a light that has just turned green; the locals evidently seem to
them to be sluggish in getting off the mark. Ottawa motorists might be
happy to explain these facts by supposing that the visitors are reckless,
impatient drivers by comparison with themselves. But one other observed
fact, in conjunction with the recognition that this is a case of Matching
Pennies, suggests an analysis that is less flattering to the locals. The
additional fact is that Ottawa drivers
 never stop on yellow lights; instead,
they speed up to race through them. Now, consider this as a game of
Matching Pennies. Suppose the agents in the game are drivers travelling
in perpendicular directions with respect to each other through an
intersection whose light is changing. Hoople is the last driver through the
intersection in his direction; he can either speed up or stop on yellow.
Ziffel is the first driver through the intersection in the other direction; he
can delay before going on the green, or proceed at once. The two
13 This is implied, for the infinitely repeated game with discounting, by results due to
Fudenberg and Maskin (1986), and, for quantity-picking oligopolies in the case of finitely
repeated games, by results due to Benoit and Krishna (1985).


=== PAGE 22 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDA TIONS OF MICROECONOMICS 133
equilibria in this game tell us that, for both the case involving only
Hoople and Ziffel, and the general case involving many drivers, there are
two stable situations, namely, that in which everyone speeds through
yellow and all opposing drivers wait, or that in which everyone stops on
yellow and all opposing drivers proceed. Ottawa drivers have converged
on the first equilibrium, and this causes difficulties for visitors whose
communities have converged on the other. Note also that the Ottawa
equilibrium permits fewer cars to turn left on each light than does the
other. Since this contributes to gridlock, which inconveniences everyone,
it is reasonable to claim that the traffic pattern in Ottawa has locked onto
a Pareto-inferior equilibrium. Understanding the pattern as a case of
Matching Pennies explains this.
Microeconomists will be familiar with many analyses of this sort. My
point in running through one was to provide an 'intuition pump' (to
borrow a phrase from Dennett) for my main proposal. One does not fully
understand the unusual traffic behaviour in Ottawa unless one sees it as
an instance of Matching Pennies (though, of course, to do this one need
neither conceptualize nor label it using precisely the notation of game
theory). Matching Pennies thus satisfies the criteria for being a real
pattern. In this respect, it is a typical microeconomic object.
Again, I stress that the purpose of the example is to clarify my
proposal, and not to justify it. In the same motivational spirit, I will
conclude by reviewing its affinities and differences with Rosenberg's
view. Like Rosenberg, I claim that microeconomists study abstract
relationships between elements that are specified by the axioms of their
own basic theoretical structures. That Rosenberg and I agree on this much
is a good thing; something would be seriously wrong if we were at odds
in our capacities as 'journalists' over what microeconomists, as a matter
of fact, do with their time. But this raises the worry that we disagree only
over what metaphysical spin to attach to our common description of
microeconomic practice: I claim that the relationships studied by micro-
economists are empirical phenomena, whereas Rosenberg claims that
they're conceptual phenomena. Philosophers of science of a strongly
empiricist bent, who believe that metaphysical annexes to scientific
inquiries are epistemically gratuitous, may thus be inclined to dismiss the
issues with which Rosenberg and I are concerned as pseudo-problems. I
contend, however, that there will be significant differences over what one
takes to be the most interesting problems and the most important tasks
for microeconomics, depending on whether one prefers Rosenberg's
analysis or mine. On my account, microeconomists should be expected to
discover new games, new classes of games, and new properties of games
partly by pure mathematical deduction, but mostly by reflection on the
sorts of strategic situations, as they arise for real agents, that constitute
empirical tokens of games. Thus, I take Becker's applications of micro-


=== PAGE 23 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
134 DON  Ross
economic models to non-market phenomena, such as marriage and
discrimination (Becker, 1957, 1975, 1976), and the fruitful interanimation
of microeconomics and evolutionary theory launched by the work of
Maynard Smith (1982),
14 to be among the most exciting exemplars of
empirical progress in microeconomics. By contrast, Rosenberg views
Becker's work, at least, as resting on a philosophical muddle, that is, as
forcing contingent, essentially historically conditioned phenomena into a
narrow conceptual space which there is no good reason for expecting
them to fit (Rosenberg, 1979).
15 According to Rosenberg, microeconomists
will be best off if they recognize that they are not empirical scientists and
are thus freed from the constraints of empirical science to settle into
happy lives as deductive inquirers exploring an arcane but fascinating
branch of mathematics. (It should be added that, on Rosenberg's account,
they also get to contribute to the equally non-empirical investigations of
normative political philosophers working in the contractarian tradition
[Rosenberg, 1992a, 215-27]). As I have it, by contrast, microeconomists
are right to regard themselves as investigating properties of the world,
and their current confusion over which elements of the world they are
responsible for is to be explained by the fact that most of them, like most
philosophers, haven't yet had time to acquire and assimilate Dennett's
insights concerning real patterns.
My proposal as to the philosophical foundations of microeconomics
is, most importantly, intended to motivate a research programme. The
philosopher of science who seeks to elucidate the foundations of
microeconomics, and whose working methodology involves presuming
that there
 are sound foundations to be elucidated, should first identify the
real patterns with which microeconomists are concerned. She should then
try to explain, with reference to particular models and applications, how
microeconomic methods give epistemic access to those patterns. This will
often involve her in ontological debates over which classifications of
games and types of games best respect the sometimes competing
demands of empirical adequacy and conceptual consistency. She will try
to settle such issues by working to reflective equilibrium between her
basic intuitions, as honed by philosophical practice, her understanding of
the explanatory practices of microeconomists, and the data about well
established classes of games that microeconomists unearth. This descrip-
14 Maynard Smith's own work, and that of the evolutionary game theorists who immediately
followed him, was originally fruitful for biologists, rather than for economists. But recent
results relating the formal equilibrium concepts of evolutionary game theory to those of
conventional game theory promise exciting new applications of the former to problems in
microeconomics. (See Mailath, 1992; Young, 1993a, 1993b.) In particular, the sort of
attention to the
 history of games made possible by evolutionary game theory offers some
promise of taking the sting out of the folk theorem.
15 Rosenberg has other reasons, rooted in his distrust of adaptationism in biology, that
should lead him to take a sceptical attitude toward evolutionary game theory.


=== PAGE 24 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
ONTOLOCICAL FOUNDATIONS OF  MICROECONOMICS 135
tion of a research strategy will sound familiar to mainstream philosophers
of science who have dealt mainly with physics or biology. This should
further recommend my approach to those who continue to hope, despite
many decades of philosophical scepticism, that microeconomics can be
shown to have a place among the sound empirical sciences.
REFERENCES
Becker, G. 1957. The  Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press
Becker, G. 1975. Human Capital. University of Chicago Press
Becker, G. 1976. The  Economic Approach to Human Behaviour. University of Chicago Press
Benoit, J., and V. Krishna. 1985, 'Finitely repeated games.'  Econometrica, 53:305-22
Blaug, M. 1980. The Methodology of  Economics. Cambridge University Press
Cartwright, N. 1983. How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford University Press
Churchland, P. M. 1979. Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of
 Mind. Cambridge University
Press
Dawkins, R. 1986. The Blind Watchmaker. Longman's
Dennett, D. 1991. 'Real patterns.' The  Journal of Philosophy, 88:27-51
Fodor, J. 1974. 'Special sciences, or the disunity of science as a working hypothesis.' Synthese,
28:77-115
Fodor, J. 1987. Psychosemantics. MIT Press/Bradford
Fudenberg, D., and E. Maskin. 1986. "The folk theorem in repeated games with discounting
or with incomplete information.'
 Econometrica,  54:533-54
Hacking, 1.1983. Representing and Intervening. Cambridge University Press
Hausman, D. 1992. The Inexact and Separate Science of Economics. Cambridge University
Press.
Hicks,  Sir J. 1939. Value and Capital. Oxford University Press
Howitt, P. and R.P McAfee. 1992. 'Animal spirits.' American  Economic Review, 82:493-507
Kahneman, D., P. Slovic and A. Tversky. 1982. judgement Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases. Cambridge University Press
Kitcher, P. 1984. '1953 and all that: a tale of two sciences.' The Philosophical Review,
93:335-73
Kydland, F. and E. Prescott. 1982. Time to build and aggregate fluctuations.' Econometrica,
50:1345-70
Long, J. and C. Plosser. 1983. 'Real business cycles.'  Journal of Political Economy, 91:39-69
Lucas, R. 1973. 'Some international evidence on output-inflation tradeoffs.' American
Economic Review, 63:326-34
Lycan, W. 1988. judgement and justification. Cambridge University Press
Mailath, G. 1992. 'Introduction: symposium on evolutionary game theory.' Journal of
Economic Theory, 57:259-77
Maynard Smith, J. 1982. Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge University Press
Nisbett, R. and L. Ross. 1980. Human  Inference:  Strategies and Shortcomings of  Social Judgement.
Prentice-Hall
Robbins, L. 1932. An Essay on the Nature and Significance of  Economic Science. Macmillan
Rosenberg, A. 1979. 'Can economic theory explain everything?' Philosophy of the Social
Sciences, 9:509-29
Rosenberg, A. 1980. 'A sceptical history of microeconomic theory.' Theory and Decision,
12:79-93
Rosenberg, A. 1985. The Structure of  Biological Science. Cambridge University Press
Rosenberg, A. 1992a. Economics: Mathematical Politics or Science of Diminishing Returns?
University of Chicago Press
Rosenberg, A. 1992b. 'Neo-classical economics and evolutionary theory: strange bedfellows?'


=== PAGE 25 ===

http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 31 Mar 2015 IP address: 138.251.14.35
136 DON  ROSS
In Proceedings of the Philosophy of Science Association 1992, Vol. 1, pp.  174-83.  D. Hull, M.
Forbes and K. Okruhlik, (eds.).
Ross, D. and C. LaCasse. 1993. 'Toward a new philosophy of positive economies'. Working
Paper No. 9324, Groupe de Recherche en Epistemologie Comparee, Universite du
Quebec a Montreal; Working Paper No. 9319E, Department of Economics, University of
Ottawa
Rorty, R. 1979.  Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton University Press
Samuelson, P. 1947. Foundations of  Economic Analysis. MIT Press
Stich, S. 1990. The Fragmentation of Reason. MIT Press/Bradford
Young, H. 1993a. 'The evolution of conventions.'  Econometrica, 61:57-84
Young, H. 1993b, 'An evolutionary model of bargaining.' Journal of Economic Theory,
59:145-68.
