=== PAGE 1 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13194-024-00622-4
PAPER IN GENERAL PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Emerging into the rainforest: Emergence and special
science ontology
Alexander Franklin 1 · Katie Robertson 2
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Scientiﬁc realists don’t standardly discriminate between, say, biology and fundamen-
tal physics when deciding whether the evidence and explanatory power warrant the
inclusion of new entities in our ontology. As such, scientiﬁc realists are committed to
a lush rainforest of special science kinds (Ross, 2000). Viruses certainly inhabit this
rainforest – their explanatory power is overwhelming – but viruses’ properties can
be explained from the bottom up: reductive explanations involving amino acids are
generally available. However, reduction has often been taken to lead to a metaphysical
downgrading, so how can viruses keep their place in the rainforest? In this paper,
we show how the inhabitants of the rainforest can be inoculated against the elimina-
tive threat of reduction: by demonstrating that they are emergent. According to our
account, emergence involves a screening off condition as well as novelty. We go on
to demonstrate that this account of emergence, which is compatible with theoretical
reducibility, satisﬁes common intuitions concerning what should and shouldn’t count
as real: viruses are emergent, as are trout and turkeys, but philosophically gerryman-
dered objects like trout-turkeys do not qualify.
Keywords Philosophy of science · Philosophy of special sciences · Autonomy ·
Emergence · Reduction · Ontology · Causal markov conditions
1 Introduction
If anything is real, viruses are real. That’s because viruses enter into robust gener-
alisations that are outstandingly empirically successful. And it is just this empirical
Authors in alphabetical order.
B Alexander Franklin
alexander.r.franklin@kcl.ac.uk
Katie Robertson
katie.robertson@stir.ac.uk
1 Department of Philosophy, King’s College London, London, UK
2 Department of Philosophy, University of Stirling, Stirling, Scotland
0123456789().: V,-vol 123
Received: 4 September 2023 / Accepted: 28 October 2024 / Published online: 4 December 2024


=== PAGE 2 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
success that motivates the scientiﬁc realist’s commitment to them. 1 But viruses are
not fundamental, and neither are cells, phonons or glaciers. Instead, the common
expectation is that the fundamental constituents of reality will only be revealed by a
yet-to-be-discovered ﬁnal theory of physics. Of course, how to justify the scientiﬁc
realist’s commitment to non-fundamental entities and which brand of scientiﬁc realism
is best is deeply controversial. Some of these controversies – e.g. those concerning the
observable/unobservable distinction – are not our concern. What motivates us is that
the heated debate about scientiﬁc realism doesn’t hinge on whether scientiﬁc theories
are or are not fundamental; instead this is the domain of the metaphysics of science.
In this paper we present a new account of emergence, and thereby set out criteria that
cast non-fundamental special science ontology as real. Our overall goal is that such
criteria for admittance to the rainforest will satisfy the metaphysician, and yet will
return an ontology appropriate to the scientiﬁc realist.
Y et maybe ‘is real’ should be applied to much more than just that which is dreamt
of by all the sciences, even the non-fundamental ones, see e.g. Thomasson ( 2009).
Some may want to say that in addition to every special science kind, every con-
catenation of spacetime points and every trout-turkey (the mereological fusion of a
trout with a turkey) are also real. Here, the debate about the status of higher-level,
or non-fundamental, ontology makes contact with van Inwagen’s special composi-
tion question; the material plenitude view is committed to an explosion of entities
(Fairchild, 2019), and so the entities of the higher-level sciences are bundled in along-
side all possible mereological fusions.
Nonetheless there is an asymmetry between viruses (and special science kinds more
generally), and those arbitrary concatenations; some discuss this metaphysical asym-
metry, or privilege, in terms of naturalness (Dorr & Hawthorne,2013), or sparseness of
properties (Schaffer, 2004). Thus, another way to parse our project is as a discussion
of which properties are natural, or of the ‘scientiﬁc conception’ of sparse proper-
ties – aiming to include ‘being a virus’ but exclude more gerrymandered properties. 2
Another idiom is that of entity realisation: we want to argue that while trout are realised
in terms of the entities of scientiﬁc theories more fundamental than biology, we can be
committed both to trout and their realisers without also committing to gerrymandered
entities. Although we are content with these formulations of our view – and the reader
should feel free to reformulate what follows accordingly – in the following we express
our arguments in language closer to that of the scientiﬁc realist: we say that viruses
are real but trout-turkeys are not.
A common way to cash out this metaphysical privilege is by appeal to theoretical
irreducibility: while any properties of confected entities such as trout-turkeys are
directly derivable from the bottom up, the suggestion would be that irreducible entities
such as viruses have features that cannot be thus explained. However, given widespread
theoretical reductionism many will be tempted to answer the question ‘what is there?’
1 See e.g. Chakravartty ( 2017, §2.1).
2 Schaffer (2004) argues that the fundamental conception, as opposed to the scientiﬁc conception, of sparse
properties does well on the minimality criterion for sparse properties but that we should reject the minimality
criterion; instead for Schaffer ‘total science’, i.e. the fundamental sciences and the special sciences together,
give us the sparse properties. We agree, and see our project as similar in spirit though different in focus;
our focus is on resolving the tension between scientiﬁc realism and ontological eliminativism.
123
61 Page 2 of 25


=== PAGE 3 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
with ‘only the fundamental stuff’; see e.g. Barnes ( 2012). This is at odds with the
criteria, methodologies, and sensibilities of the scientiﬁc realist. We set out and defend
a view that resolves this tension by providing a principled basis for accepting the special
scientist’s ontology and granting that theoretical reductionism is rife.
One may analogise extravagant ontologies to rainforests on the one hand, and sparse
ontologies to deserts on the other. Those attracted to desert landscapes stipulate that
only the fundamental exists. But according to the scientiﬁc realist our reasons for
accepting viruses into our ontology concern the quality of the evidence and explana-
tions involving viruses, not whether viruses are fundamental or not. Indeed, were the
scientiﬁc realist to follow the desert-lover’s dictum of only committing to the funda-
mental, her present day ontological commitments would be so sparse as to be empty,
since we lack a fundamental theory. 3
But the desert is not to everyone’s tastes and the gerrymandered kinds do not sit
easily with the scientiﬁc realist. If ontological commitments are so easy to determine,
why do scientiﬁc realists have to work so hard to establish the existence of particular
scientiﬁc kinds?
The scientiﬁc realist wants the lush landscape of a rainforest but, like Goldilocks,
she needs it to be ‘just right’: trout, viruses, phonons, and gases roam the rainforest,
but trout-turkeys do not. The key issue – and the focus of this paper – is the admittance
criteria for the rainforest. The terminology of ‘rainforest realism’ comes from Ross
(2000), and although there are certain similarities between our accounts, discussed
later, there are also signiﬁcant divergences, the foremost being the role that reduction
plays.
We say that even if viruses, phonons, and mountains can be understood entirely
from the bottom up (that is, they are theoretically reducible), they are still in the
rainforest just in case they are emergent. Provided that a non-fundamental or special
science entity is emergent, it is inoculated against being eliminated by any theoretical
reduction.
Here, our new account of emergence is compatible with reduction; this harmony
has been suggested elsewhere by (e.g., Butterﬁeld, 2011a; Crowther, 2015) but these
are widely interpreted to be epistemological, rather than metaphysical, accounts of
emergence (Barnes, 2012;D eH a r o ,2019). Our novel contribution is to draw out the
metaphysical commitments of the scientiﬁc realist, and as such, our project is central
to naturalised metaphysics.
In Section 2 we argue that irreducibility (understood as the failure of inter-theoretic
reduction) is the wrong peg on which to hang the existence of the higher-level entities.
Section 3 outlines our account of emergence: for us, emergence requires screening
off as well as novelty. Section 4 applies our account to the case study of viruses, and
Section 5 demonstrates that trout-turkeys and other gerrymandered examples fall foul
of the criteria and, thus, are denied admittance to the rainforest. In Section 6, we relate
our account to prior analyses of rainforest realism, and show that our view encompasses
that of Ladyman and Ross ( 2007), but avoids some of the criticism levelled against
their project. In Section 7, we conclude.
3 See Hoefer and Martí (2020) for an argument that the scientiﬁc realist should be committed to the entities
of all sciences other than fundamental physics.
123
Page 3 of 25 61


=== PAGE 4 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
2 A traditional view
‘Irreducibility’ is often taken to be key to the existence of special science entities, for
example, Ney ( 2021) says: “for the reductionist, the hope is that for all phenomena,
they will either be identiﬁed with entities of physical science or eliminated altogether
in favor of the entities of a superior theory”. 4 Indeed, irreducibility is very closely
related to the name of one position committed to the existence of the special science
entities: non-reductive physicalism. According to this view, the higher level (or special
science) supervenes on the fundamental physical level, but is not reducible to it. 5
However, there are at least two distinct ways to understand what ‘irreducibility’
means. First, irreducibility is a relation between different theories (see e.g., Nagel,
1961; Butterﬁeld, 2014). Second, irreducibility may be read ontologically; thus, the
irreducible entities are those which exist in addition to the fundamental entities. On
this ontological conception, the reduction of the mental to the physical, or biological
to the chemical is the claim that there are no mental (or biological) entities in addition
to the physical (or chemical) entities. But this doesn’t offer any explanation for the
contents of our ontology. So, while we accept that ontologically irreducible entities
will be admitted into the rainforest, henceforth we’ll understand (ir)reducibility as a
claim about inter-theoretic relations.
The crucial point is that, on our view, theoretical reducibility is divorced from the
criteria for realism/admittance to the rainforest, thus our project should be of central
interest to those who are realists about higher-level entities even if they hold that these
are theoretically reducible.
On Nagel’s inﬂuential account of inter-theoretic reduction, one theoryTt is reduced
to another Tb if the descriptions given by Tt can be deduced from Tb, perhaps with the
aid of some additional assumptions (known as bridge laws). 6 This deduction allows
the entities and their behaviour described by Tt to be explained from the bottom up. 7
Note that this is not to suggest that the higher-level reduced theory is, thus, redundant
or could be eliminated; only that its adequacy to its target phenomena can be explained.
Given this characterisation of reduction, we can now state the traditional view that
we oppose: the view that it’s only (theoretically) irreducible entities that exist. Nagel
(1961, p. 337) notes this view: “successful [inter-theoretic] reduction of thermody-
namics to statistical mechanics was [...] taken to prove that spatial displacements are
the only form of intelligible change, or that the diverse qualities of things and which
men encounter in their daily lives are not ‘ultimate’ traits of the world and are perhaps
not even ‘real”’.
4 See also e.g. Gillett ( 2016).
5 The connection between the ontological status of the special science entities (such as economies, magnets
and viruses) and non-reductive physicalism is controversial. Some, such as Barnes ( 2012), claim the two
topics are orthogonal. Others, such as Crane ( 2001), claim that these topics are the same debate under a
different name.
6 For other related accounts, see e.g. Schaffner ( 2013), Dizadji-Bahmani et al. (2010), and Rosaler (2017).
7 Nagel’s account is closely related to, and inspired by, Hempel’s deductive-nomological view of scien-
tiﬁc explanation, so for Nagel reduction and explanation are interwoven. On other accounts of scientiﬁc
explanation, a deduction of Tt from Tb will not be so closely linked to explanation.
123
61 Page 4 of 25


=== PAGE 5 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Our view is that non-fundamental entities exist if they are ontologically emergent,
and much of this paper is devoted to the detailed analysis of what it takes to count
as ontologically emergent, but we resist the conﬂation of ontological emergence with
theoretical irreducibility for the following reasons:
First, (ir)reducibility, as stated, is a relation between theories. While this is a guide
to the relations between the entities, there’s no completely straightforward relation
between theories, understood as scientiﬁc representations of the world, and the entities
that we ﬁnd in the world. On our view, theories describe the phenomena, and entities
participate in such phenomena, where ‘entity’ is neutral between objects, states, and
events (see e.g. Bogen & Woodward, 1988, p. 321). As such, it’s not easy to make
theoretical irreducibility serviceable to distinguish between ontologically emergent
and ontologically eliminable entities.
Second, while the theoretical reducibility of entities can be called into question, the
supervenience of special science entities is far less controversial.8 However, in certain
circumstances reduction and supervenience are not far from one another. Indeed, when
the conditions of Beth’s theorem hold, supervenience collapses into reduction, and
so maintaining supervenience without reduction is an unstable position. 9 Of course,
the assumptions required for Beth’s theorem do not hold for many realistic cases of
scientiﬁc theories, since our scientiﬁc theories are not ﬁrst-order formal languages.
Should we discover that we can formulate a pair of scientiﬁc theories in a ﬁrst-order
language, then it seems that the assumption of supervenience would entail reduction,
and so vanquish the commitment to the higher-level entities. But we do not expect
our commitment to the existence of viruses, mountains, and magnets to be sensitive
to such formal developments.
Third, even if viruses and suchlike can be reduced (since the theory describing them
can be understood from the bottom up), we don’t think they should be ejected from the
ontology. So where we have inter-theoretic reduction, we needn’t then follow through
with ontological reduction, or elimination of the higher level. Widespread reduction
looks like a plausible bet to us. 10 Later we will see that the case study of viruses
provides an exemplar of a kind (or many kinds) that certainly should be taken to exist,
but may well be reducible. Moreover, even if viruses can’t be understood entirely from
the bottom up, that’s not the reason that they exist.
Our account of ontological emergence is compatible with theoretical reducibility.
Ontological emergence then licences admission to the rainforest and is the ground of
ontological irreducibility.
8 Even those who advocate strong emergence, such as Hendry ( 2010), aim to maintain the supervenience
of the special sciences such as chemistry on the physical; though see Seifert ( 2020) for the suggestion that
Hendry’s position is unstable.
9 The ﬁrst philosophers to emphasise Beth’s theorem as threatening such a collapse were (Hellman &
Thompson, 1976; Butterﬁeld, 2011a) discusses this topic in detail.
10 In keeping with the original work on reduction since (Oppenheim & Putnam, 1958), we agree that
whether reduction holds in particular cases is an empirical matter, and the plausibility in any given case
depends on how stringent one’s detailed account of reduction is. Nonetheless, we see the success of research
programs such as the human genome project, work in biophysics and many other areas as reasons to be
optimistic that reduction will succeed more generally, see e.g. Waters ( 2008) and Schaffner 2013.
123
Page 5 of 25 61


=== PAGE 6 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
While we claim that ontological emergence, rather than theoretical irreducibility,
is the admittance criterion to the rainforest, reduction is still relevant for classifying
types of emergence: emergence that’s compatible with reduction is termed ‘weak
emergence’, whereas emergence combined with the failure of reduction is termed
‘strong emergence’.
Although we believe that inter-theoretic reduction is plausibly widespread, it is
not a requirement of our account. As such, those (like Chalmers, 2006; Bedau &
Humphreys, 2008, and us in this paper) who deﬁne strong emergence in terms of
failure of inter-theoretic reduction, will take our focus to be primarily, though not
exclusively, on weak emergence. On the other hand, those like Gillett ( 2016), who
take the strong/weak emergence distinction to correspond, respectively, to ontologi-
cal/epistemological emergence will take our focus to be on strong emergence. Either
way, our examples of ontological emergence are, in principle, compatible with reduc-
tion, but our account should still be relevant to those interested in (putative) failures
of reduction.
We began this section with Ney’s contention that the reductionist aims to choose
between elimination and identiﬁcation. In what follows, we focus our critical atten-
tion on the eliminative branch, but note that many – especially those following in
the tradition of David Lewis – plump for identiﬁcation. To our eyes, the practice of
science furnishes us with very few examples of straightforward identiﬁcation of enti-
ties and properties; see e.g. Wilson ( 1985) for a critique of the temperature-kinetic
energy putative identity.11 Ultimately, we are sceptical that that all the scientiﬁc real-
ists’ ontological commitments can be understood to be identical with the ontology of
fundamental physics, so we think it worthwhile to explore an alternative view.
3 Our account of emergence
Deﬁnition: An entity is emergent if and only if it is involved in dependencies
that are novel and screen off lower-level details.
According to us, emergent entities feature in macrodependencies that have two key
features. Firstly, the macrodependencies must screen off the microdetails in a certain
sense, to be outlined in Section3.1. Secondly, the macrodependencies must be suitably
novel, as discussed in Section 3.2.
But what are the macrodependencies that we have in mind? Macrodependencies
are projectible; each macrodependency may fall into various categories, but it can be
useful to distinguish the following. They can be dynamical: as is the case with the
differential equations for reaction rates in chemistry, population dynamics in biology,
or the equations describing the approach to equilibrium in statistical mechanics. There
are also causal macrodependencies: perception of predators by prey causes ﬂight, or
11 Another naturalistic worry for identiﬁcation is that dynamical processes, interactions, and forces are
essential to the formation of macroscopic entities. The mereological composition of certain parts never
sufﬁces for the whole, and interactions and processes occur over time, so the identiﬁcation would have to
be over temporally extended segments (see Ladyman & Ross, 2007).
123
61 Page 6 of 25


=== PAGE 7 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
a change in temperature causes a change in magnetisation. And often the macrode-
pendencies are law-like: for example, the ideal gas law is an example of a nomic
macrodependency, as are the laws of the special sciences such as economics’ law of
supply and demand. By ‘macrodependency’ we do not place any constraint on the
scale at which the dependency operates, only that it is not a dependency featuring in
any putative fundamental physical theory.
Note that, despite discussing scientiﬁc representations or descriptions, we aim for
our account of emergence to be one of ontological emergence. Accounts of emergence
in the philosophy of science are often dismissed as merely of epistemological interest
(cf. Barnes, 2012, as discussed by Crowther, 2015), and clearly accounts that deﬁne
(weak) emergence as involving ‘surprise’ or ‘unexpected features’ render emergence
a feature of our knowledge of the world (Chalmers, 2006). But we are interested in
emergence as a feature of the world rather than our descriptions of the world. That
being said, the best way we can get a handle on such worldly features is through our
scientiﬁc representations of the world – scientiﬁc theories. Consequently, we refer to
the ‘microdetails’ that correspond to features both in particular scientiﬁc descriptions
and in the facts they represent.
In addition, we assume that the macrodependencies in question are genuine
macrodependencies. That is, in keeping with the attitude of the standard scientiﬁc
realist, we presume that there are higher-level laws, higher-level causal relations, and
higher-level dynamics.12
In general, emergence balances some form of dependence on the more fundamen-
tal with some form of independence, autonomy or distinctness. 13 Our account of
emergence is slightly unorthodox in that we won’t have one criterion for the form of
dependence and a separate one for the form of independence. Both will be present
in the ﬁrst of our two conditions for emergence: screening off. Macrodependencies
that screen off microdetails are important because they are central to understanding
how higher-level facts can be autonomous (in a particular sense) from the underlying
microfacts.
3.1 Screening off
Entities count as emergent in our sense if they enter into macrodependencies that
have two features: novelty and screening off. The macrodependency in question must
screen off some lower-level details that might seem – at ﬁrst glance – highly relevant to
the phenomena in question. This screening off condition has two parts: a dependence
part – ‘unconditional relevance’, and an independence part – ‘conditional irrelevance’,
following (Woodward, 2021; Spirtes et al., 2000), as developed by Robertson ( forth-
coming).14
12 The assumption that there are genuine special science laws, dynamics, and causes is part and parcel of
the scientiﬁc realist’s view, but note: this presumes that a satisfactory solution to Kim’s causal exclusion
problem has been found, e.g. by explaining why overdetermination is non-problematic (cf. Bennett, 2007).
13 Taylor ( 2015, p. 654): “emergent properties are macro-level properties that are in some sense both
dependent on and autonomous from their underlying micro-level properties”.
14 See Sober (1999) for an appeal to screening off with goals related to ours.
123
Page 7 of 25 61


=== PAGE 8 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Let’s start with an example of a nomic macrodependency: under usual background
conditions, water boils at 100◦C. This is a macrodependency B-A: where B is the
temperature, and A is the boiling of the kettle. We will use this to illustrate the key
idea of screening off, and the connection to a particular account of autonomy from
which we take the core ideas.
First, let’s consider the dependence part. While there’s a macrodependency B-A
describing the goings on in the kettle, there are other relevant details – in particular there
are lower-level details that B and A supervene upon. In this example, water boiling
depends on the underlying properties: the molecular motion of the water molecules is
relevant to whether the kettle boils (if they are moving faster, then the kettle is more
likely to boil). This is the dependence part of the condition.
We can spell this out following the framework discussed by Woodward ( 2021)
and Robertson ( forthcoming) in terms of ‘unconditional relevance’. The lower-level
description, or microstate, of the water is relevant to whether the kettle boils. There
is a probabilistic ﬁngerprint of this dependence but to make this precise we need to
specify what the microstate or lower-level description (LLD) is. For now, we take
the LLD to be the supervenience basis of the temperature (B). (We will come to the
supervenience basis of A shortly).
Since (in)dependencies can be represented using probabilities, we can deﬁne uncon-
ditional relevance as follows.
Unconditional relevance: conditional on a particular lower-level description, the
probability of the macro-description A obtaining increases: P(A|LLD )> P(A).
Under certain circumstances,15 P(A|LLD ) = 1.
But lots of the lower-level ﬁne-grained details don’t matter, i.e. they don’t inﬂuence
the macrodescription. One way of putting this: those details can be changed without
inﬂuencing A. So there are other descriptions LLD 1, LLD 2, ..., LLD N for which
P(A|LLD i )> P(A). In the kettle example, there are a range of distinct molecular
motions that give rise to the kettle boiling - exactly how the boiling is realised doesn’t
matter. (E.g. swapping molecule 105830’s position with molecule 300594’s position
makes no difference). We can think of these different lower-level descriptions as
forming an equivalence class, a collection of lower-level descriptions that subvene B
and inﬂuence macrofact A.
On to the independence part: for now, let’s assume that which member of the
equivalence class of microstates is instantiated isn’t going to matter to the occurrence
of A (we will relax this assumption shortly). This foreshadows how the lower-level
details are irrelevant – roughly, given the macrostate B (namely 100◦C), the molecular
motion is irrelevant.
As such, molecular motion is unconditionally relevant to the boiling of your kettle
– that is, the boiling depends on the molecular motion. But once we conditionalise on
the temperature of the water, any further details of the molecular motion are irrelevant.
This is known as conditional irrelevance. While we are operating under the assumption
15 If the microdynamics take all the members of the supervenience basis of B to members of the superve-
nience basis of A.
123
61 Page 8 of 25


=== PAGE 9 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Fig. 1 In all three diagrams, the red circled variable or fact screen off the downstream fact (Z, W or A
respectively) from their ancestors: a generalised Markov condition
that B-A is a strict macrodependency, this is then a case of exact screening off and we
can deﬁne conditional irrelevance:
Conditional irrelevance (strict version): P(A|B&LLD ) = P(A|B) = x where
0 ≤ x ≤ 1.16
Conditional irrelevance is a screening off condition: due to the macrodependency
B-A, conditionalising on B screens off the inﬂuence of LLD on A. In other words, in
this case, all the inﬂuence of LLD (the microstate underlying B) is mediated through
B.
These (in)dependencies can be represented graphically, as is familiar from both
the literature on levels of dynamics and the causal modelling literature. Moreover, the
conditional irrelevance condition is akin to the causal Markov condition in a multi-level
setting: the most proximate causal parents of A screen off any other ancestor.
The left hand diagram in Fig. 1 shows a directed acyclic graph familiar from the
causal modelling literature – the horizontal arrows represent causal dependence. The
Causal Markov condition requires that nearest ancestors, i.e. more proximate causes,
screen off more distant ancestors, such that Y screens off X from Z. In the grounding
literature (see e.g. Schaffer, 2016), there is an analogous Markov condition – thus, in
the middle diagram the vertical arrows represent grounding. The P (psychological)
facts screen off the N (neurophysical) facts from the W (well-being) facts. The inter-
ventionist framework generalises to a multilevel framework (Eva & Stern, 2020). In
the right hand diagram, there is a multi-level Markov condition: B screens off the LLD
from A.17 The arrow from B to A represents the macrodependency, which could be
causal, nomic or dynamical. We do not commit to the nature of the dependency from
LLD to B, but it could just be taken to be supervenience. In this way ‘unconditional
relevance’ ﬁts with the supervenience physicalism of the non-reductive physicalist –
but the arrows could represent other dependence relations such as grounding.
16 Note this does not require that the macrodependency B-A is deterministic, i.e. P(A|B) = 1, if x < 1
then B could still screen off LLD.
17 For reasons that we will see shortly, this is an idealised case. When B-A is not a deterministic case of
causation, then the multi-level Markov causation requires the subvening parent of A as well as A ’s causal
parent, B for exact screening off, see Eva and Stern ( 2020) for more details.
123
Page 9 of 25 61


=== PAGE 10 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Now let’s relax the assumption that the macrodependency B-A is strict. After all,
it is far more realistic for special science laws to have exceptions, as Fodor ( 1974)
emphasised. Special science laws, such as Mendel’s law, the Law of demand and
Snell’s law, are frequently taken to be ceteris paribus laws for this reason.
Let’s take a case of levels of dynamics, since this is the example that Fodor dis-
cusses. Exceptions to the macrodependency B-A occur when one (or more) members
of the supervenience basis of B (the LLD i , ..., LLD N earlier) is not taken to the
supervenience basis of A, as depicted in Fig. 2. Such exceptions are sometimes called
‘deviant microstates’.
In the case where the LLD is a deviant microstate, which member of the equivalence
class is instantiated clearly does matter; so, in the example in Fig. 2, LLD3 would not
raise the probability of A.
As shown in Fig. 2, the microdynamics T take microstates from earlier to later. If
we have a strict macrodependency, then B screens off LLD exactly. (So in terms of
conditional irrelevance: P(A|B&LLD ) = P(A|B).) But, as shown in the diagram,
when not every member of the equivalence class of the LLD subvening B is taken to
the supervenience basis of A, then we only have approximate screening off.
Consider the game of life (see e.g. Dennett, 1991): the microstate of the grid and
the grid microdynamics are unconditionally relevant to the later macrostate, but are
screened off by macrodynamics such as glider dynamics (a collection of cells that form
a glider will travel with a certain velocity). But the glider dynamics in the game of life
only hold until, e.g., a particularly pernicious piece of debris ﬂoats by destroying the
glider pattern. Consequently, the glider dynamics only apply over certain timescales
and for certain initial conditions.
Another example is found in statistical mechanics. There are two levels of dynam-
ics: the reversible microdynamics, and the irreversible macrodynamics, such as the
Boltzmann equation. The full microstates and microdynamics are unconditionally rel-
evant to the later macrostate, but are screened off by the macrodynamics. There are,
occasionally, deviant microstates that are not taken by T from the supervenience basis
of B to the supervenience basis of A.
Fig. 2 In this case, not every member of the supervenience basis of B is taken by the microdynamics T to
the basis of A. This is how Fodor ( 1974) argues that the laws of special sciences have exceptions
123
61 Page 10 of 25


=== PAGE 11 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
In both cases, the screening off condition is weakened to an approximate screen-
ing off. P(A|B) ≈ P(A|B&LLD ) because if the particular LLD is one of the
deviant microstates such as LLD 3, then the P(A|LLD dev ) is very different from
P(A|LLD not−dev ).
Conditional irrelevance (full generality): P(A|B&LLD ) ≈ P(A|B) = x
where 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
Why think that this still counts as ‘screening off’ if it’s only approximate?
Even though it’s approximate, it still has teeth: in particular, the approximate nature
of the generalised screening off condition does not prevent it from delivering clear
verdicts. The lower-level details are approximately screened off by statistical mechan-
ical dependencies, which makes gases and entropy candidates for being emergent.
Approximate screening off is, thus, essential for any account to deliver an ontology
that matches that of the scientiﬁc realist; a strict criterion is not compatible with the
nature of real-world relations.18 But other putative dependencies (such as total choles-
terol causes heart disease) do not even approximately screen off the lower-level details
(whether it is high or low density cholesterol), and so total cholesterol is not a candi-
date emergent entity since the macrodependency in question does not screen off, even
approximately.
If the approximate nature sits uneasily, there are two possible responses, both of
which are independently used in the philosophy of physics and ceteris paribus laws
literatures.
The ﬁrst response is that background conditions may allow us to rule out the deviant
microstates. In the statistical mechanical case, the system will approach equilibrium
unless there are very ﬁnely balanced correlations in the microstate. These are ruled
out in the choice of initial conditions used in constructing the macrodynamics from
the microdynamics – this constraint on initial conditions is called ‘Naturalness’ by
Wallace (2019). Arguably, this construction allows us to see the limited domain of
applicability of the macrodynamics – they only apply for certain initial states. In these
cases, by stipulating the right background conditions, the exact screening off condition
is restored. That is, in examples such as statistical mechanics where we know the
caveats, we can convert P(A|B&LLD ) ≈ P(A|B) to P(A|B&LLD ) = P(A|B)
by explicitly stating the deviant circumstances (e.g. the unnatural initial states, and
timescales longer than the recurrence time).
More generally, this echoes certain approaches to understanding ceteris paribus
laws – how to understand ceteris paribus laws turns out to be closely tied to one’s
metaphysics of laws (cf. Earman & Roberts, 1999).
For example, on Fodor’s (1991) account the ceteris paribus law is rendered strict by
including extra information (known as ‘completers’) that rules out the deviant states
or interfering factors (Pietroski & Rey, 1995 take a similar view). For Lange ( 2002)
and Woodward and Hitchcock (2003), unlike universal laws, ceteris paribus laws hold
only for a limited range of counterfactual suppositions.
However, some approaches to the metaphysics of laws do not spell out the circum-
stances in which the ceteris paribus law/macrodependency holds, but just stipulate that
18 It’s for this reason that we reject the assumption in Wilson ( 2010) that only strict elimination of degrees
of freedom is ontologically relevant.
123
Page 11 of 25 61


=== PAGE 12 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
under ‘normal conditions’ or ‘with high probability’ B-A (Schurz, 2002). This leads
us to the second option for understanding the approximate screening off: namely, to
note that in the case of macroscopic systems, the deviant microstates are very few and
far between. Consequently, the approximate equality is incredibly close to being an
equality sign. This response works especially well in statistical physics, where deviant
microstates can be demonstrated to constitute a staggeringly small fraction of all pos-
sible microstates. Other special sciences will have their own standards for goodness
of approximation.
To sum up: macrodependencies that screen off are key to our account. While we
have focused on dynamical dependencies in explicating this idea, nomic and causal
dependencies operate in the same way. An example of the former: the ideal gas law.
The quantum state and dynamics are unconditionally relevant (to motivate this: if
matter were not quantum, it wouldn’t be stable), but the ideal gas law screens off these
microdetails: the temperature is determined by pV /nR . Causal generalisations are
used in biology. To brieﬂy mention an example to which we’ll return in Section 4:t h e
underlying amino acids are unconditionally relevant to the behaviour of a virus, but
the macrodependency between the viral infection and the mottling of tobacco leaves
screens off these lower-level details. The discussion of screening off is taken up again
in Section 5 where examples of screening off failure are discussed.
Note that our account is connected to autonomy in the following way: the macrode-
pendency that screens off the LLD warrants the claim that the macrofact A is
autonomous. For Fodor (1997), the autonomy of the special sciences is partially tied to
the irreducibility of these descriptions. But our screening off condition, and the account
of autonomy it comes from is compatible with inter-theoretic reduction. For instance,
in the temperature example above, the higher-level variables and their inter-relations
can be understood (or derived from) the lower-level descriptions in terms of molecu-
lar motion. Likewise in the case of autonomous macrodynamics, like the Boltzmann
equation, the higher-level macrodynamics can be constructed from the underlying
microdynamics. As such, theoretical reducibility is compatible with screening off.
And yet all this conforms to the alternative characterisation of autonomy found in
Fodor ( 1997, p. 160): “unimaginably complicated to-ings and fro-ings of bits and
pieces at the extreme micro-level manage somehow to converge on stable macro-level
properties”.
3.2 Novelty
In many cases, the entities that feature in the macrodependencies that screen off are
emergent. Viruses, phonons, gases, and wildebeest feature in macrodependencies that
screen off and are emergent – they are archetypal inhabitants of the rainforest.
But consider this case: when two stars are in orbit around a common centre of
mass, they may be considered to be a binary star system. Such a system will in
general be orbiting further objects, such as, say, a super-massive black hole. The
trajectories of the individual stars will be unconditionally relevant to the trajectory
of the binary star system, but by conditionalising on their joint centre of mass, one
123
61 Page 12 of 25


=== PAGE 13 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
can compute the trajectory of the binary star system around the black hole. So the
dynamical dependency involving the centre of mass variable (e.g. Newton’s equations)
screens off the individual stars’ trajectories. This is a case of screening off. But it seems
wrong to say that the binary star system is admitted to the rainforest in addition to the
two stars that compose it. Why?
The dependencies of binary star system are missing novelty relative to the under-
lying two stars, whereas gases and viruses are relatively novel in this respect. Thus,
the binary star system isn’t admitted to the rainforest because the nomic dependencies
describing the binary star system, whether these are those of Newtonian gravitation or
general relativity, are just the same nomic dependencies that describe the trajectories
of the two individual stars. Distinct macrodependencies are required for novelty.
Our novelty criterion thus captures what (Wimsatt, 2007; Mitchell, 2012)a r ea f t e r
with their stipulation that emergence is non-aggregative: some aggregates, especially
those which involve simple averaging,19 are not described by distinct macrodependen-
cies, but by the very same dependencies that describe their parts. While the invocation
of non-simple aggregation can account for certain instances of distinct macrodepen-
dencies, this won’t sufﬁce for a fully general criterion since, e.g., the gas may be
thought as an aggregate of its molecules yet gases are described by distinct macrode-
pendencies from their molecules.
Distinct macrodependencies at different levels leads to cross-classiﬁcation – that
ontological divisions at a novel level of description cut across those at more fundamen-
tal levels; this underwrites the metaphysically substantive consequence of novelty. In
sum: emergent entities have distinct modal proﬁles and can sustain distinct counter-
factuals from their more or less fundamental counterparts – the discussion that follows
captures this by cashing out the distinct-macrodependency criterion with respect to
dynamical and causal dependencies respectively.
Among the criteria that real entities satisfy, novelty stands out as both the least
controversial and the most contested: if an entity isn’t novel in some sense then it’s
already included in the ontology at some other level, and including it would be doubling
up, so everything in the ontology ought to have some novelty with respect to the
remainder of the contents of the ontology. But it’s difﬁcult to ﬁnd much consensus in
the literature as to what novelty involves. 20
Given our ontological focus, merely stating that novelty corresponds to epistemic
criteria such as ‘surprising relative to some reference class’ or ‘unexpected’ (see e.g.
Butterﬁeld, 2011a, b) is insufﬁcient.
One might hope, contra Butterﬁeld, that more can be said than ‘we know nov-
elty when we see it’. Indeed, if there are no inter-subjective standards for novelty,
then it’s of very limited use as a criterion for emergence – the differing metaphys-
ical tastes of scientists and analytic metaphysicians might impact their judgements
about novelty, rendering the broader enterprise circular. Their differing tastes might
themselves be explained by features of the judgments they have been exposed to. For
19 Further examples where simple averaging techniques are inapplicable in physics are discussed in Bat-
terman (2013) and Wilson ( 2017).
20 See e.g. Knox ( 2016), Butterﬁeld (2011a), Wilson (2010), Chalmers (2006), and Crowther (2015)f o ra
range of distinct views.
123
Page 13 of 25 61


=== PAGE 14 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
instance, philosophers trained on logic judge that if the laws of fundamental physics are
complete, then everything else ‘follows from’ this – not leaving much room for nov-
elty. In contrast, physicists witness radically different behaviour in different domains.
Fluid behaviour differs from atomic behaviour, quantum ﬁelds behave differently from
ordinary particle mechanics. Most strikingly, the macroscopic behaviour described by
classical mechanics differs radically from microscopic behaviour described by quan-
tum mechanics. Thus, physicists would say that the classical world qualiﬁes as novel,
and so is emergent (see Wallace, 2012).
For us, a macrodependency is novel if and only if it’s not type-identical to
the microdependencies that instantiate it . Note that this conception of novelty is
inherently contrastive – a macrodependency is distinct with respect to a given microde-
pendency.
The idea is that lower-level kinds or entities may be connected, joined up, or organ-
ised in various complex ways. As a consequence, the combined whole at the higher
level participates in novel macrodependencies that are not identical with any microde-
pendencies, and it’s this which justiﬁes the inclusion of that whole as a new kind in
the rainforest.
One challenge faced by attempts to identify what’s novel about higher-level entities
is to avoid requiring too strong a species of novelty. While our account is compati-
ble with higher level entities’ being strongly emergent, strong emergence shouldn’t
be a foregone conclusion of our account. Instead, we aim to avoid the theoretical
irreducibility criterion for higher-level ontology.
For us, novelty refers to distinct dependencies, but this distinctness manifests in
slightly different guises for dynamical and causal dependencies – respectively, dif-
ferent functional form, and novel causal powers. In the remainder of this section, we
develop this, and relate it to the concept of cross-classiﬁcation.
What’s crucial to us is that many of the theorists discussed in this section have made
substantial progress in identifying what’s required for ontological emergence, but that
most have failed to identify precisely what’s required. It’s not sufﬁcient that the higher-
level description be surprising or that it be just a bit different from that at the lower
level. Rather, we require that there be cross-classiﬁcation and thus no identity between
the types at the different levels. In the following, we demonstrate how many accounts
get at this from slightly different perspectives, and that our general characterisation
subsumes and improves on each.
3.2.1 Distinct dynamical dependencies
Taking dynamical dependencies ﬁrst, an entity is novel if it features in macrodependen-
cies with distinct functional form from the corresponding microdependencies. Gases,
as described by thermodynamics, have a great many macrodependencies that are of a
different type to the microdependencies that describe the behaviours of their particles.
A well-studied example is that the particles may be described by time-reversible Hamil-
tonian dynamics, and the gas described by the time-irreversible Boltzmann equation.
These clearly have a different functional form, and such functional forms give rise to
different properties for each equation notwithstanding that, given certain conditions,
one equation is derivable from the other.
123
61 Page 14 of 25


=== PAGE 15 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
This feature of distinct functional form is generic across physics: the relations
between different theories involve differing dynamics and macrodependencies that
aren’t identical to any microdependencies. One further commonplace example is that
the functional form of the dependencies of classical mechanics is distinct from those
found in quantum physics, and this helps explain why both the classical and the
quantum domains contribute entities to the rainforest.
3.2.2 Distinct causal dependencies
As should be clear from the preceding discussion, we think that the metaphysics of
science should be understood in terms of dependencies. While dynamical and nomic
dependencies are standard in physics (see e.g., Price & Corry, 2007 for arguments
not to use causal language in physics), biological and higher-level sciences are often
conceptualised in causal terms. We follow the relevant literature in cashing out novelty
here in relation to causal powers, yet we are not committed to any particular conception
of causal powers, and expect our approach to remain friendly to the Humean (cf.
Wilson, 2014), In our view, where A depends on B, B may be understood to have the
power or disposition to bring about A. The macrodependencies in which B participates
determine what B can do, i.e. what powers B has. Given this connection, we can relate
our discussion of novel macrodependencies to the literature on novel powers.
As further discussed in Section 4, higher-level biological entities can do things
that lower-level entities cannot do. For example, tobacco mosaic viruses (TMV) have
the power to mottle tobacco leaves, whereas the amino acids that constitute the virus
do not have that power. So, the dependencies between TMV and tobacco leaves are
distinct and of distinct types from the dependencies between the amino acids found
in the leaves and the virus. Such distinct macrodependencies have distinct functional
forms, and thus, the same type of novelty is found here as in the physics case. Not
only is this the same type of novelty as in the physics case, our conception of novelty
may be understood to subsume the following approach.
Wilson (2011), in arguing that non-fundamental kinds can be causally efﬁcacious,
ﬁnds such efﬁcacy not only with distinctive causal powers (which she sees as akin to
strong emergence) but also “with distinctive collections of powers” (ibid. p.135).
The general idea, which has been taken up widely (see e.g. Tahko, 2020), is that
higher-level kinds feature a particular proper subset of the full range of causal powers
located in the lower-level realising kinds. Novelty is then a consequence of the higher
level having strictly fewer powers than its realisers. This guarantees that the higher
level has a distinct but dependent causal proﬁle. If an entity is individuated by its
powers, then this characterisation underwrites additions to the ontology.
Wilson (2021, p. 51) draws an interesting distinction between ‘fundamentally novel’
and ‘nonfundamentally novel’ powers, where the former but not the latter entail strong
emergence; only nonfundamentally novel powers are to be fully explained in terms of
the subset strategy. In accordance with our overall aim to remain compatible with but
not committed to theoretical reducibility, we remain neutral on whether our powers
123
Page 15 of 25 61


=== PAGE 16 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
are fundamentally or nonfundamentally novel. 21 Given that proviso, a higher-level
entity is novel if it has novel causal powers.
But we think that her account doesn’t do enough to emphasise the importance of
organisation/dynamical interaction for novel causal powers. Novelty is related to the
dynamical structure, interactions, and organisation of parts in the entity – that’s what’s
responsible for the new entity having strictly fewer powers than those of its parts, yet
being able to do things that its parts cannot do individually.
3.2.3 Cross-classiﬁcation
These notions are related to the more general concept of cross-classiﬁcation. Wherever
we ﬁnd a genuinely novel macrodependency that’s distinct from the corresponding
microdependency then such dependencies will cut across one another. Consequently,
the entities which we read off these dependencies are cross-classiﬁed.
For example, relative to the underlying proteins, viruses have novel causal powers.
That is, they exhibit distinct macrodependencies associated with the following cross-
classiﬁcation: at the higher level the dependencies relate TMV to tobacco leaves,
whereas at the lower-level dependencies relate, for example, the RNA to the proteins
it codes for. What’s signiﬁcant for cross-classiﬁcation is that some of the dependencies
between the component parts of TMV are also found between the component parts of
the tobacco leaf. So the ontological division into virus and leaf cuts across the onto-
logical division into RNA and proteins. Likewise, in the physics case, the ontological
division into gases and the containers (into which gases spread) cuts across the onto-
logical division into molecules before and after collision. Sorting the entities into the
higher-level kinds ‘gas’ and ‘container’ or ‘leaf’ and ‘virus’ won’t line up with the
lower-level’s ‘molecules with various speeds’, ‘proteins’, and ‘RNA ’.
The macrodependencies responsible for screening off the microdetails are not type-
identical to the microdependencies. And since we read off our ontology from these
patterns/laws/dependencies, the cross-cutting of macro and microdependencies leads
to a cross-classiﬁcation of the ontological divisions or kinds at the higher and lower
levels – cementing the notion that the higher-level entities are indeed distinct from the
lower-level entities.
It’s the novelty of the dependencies that lead to cross-classiﬁcation and, together
with the screening off of the dependencies, underwrites the status of the higher-level
entities as ontologically emergent.
As noted above, this conception of novelty is compatible with theoretical reducibil-
ity. We can, for example, explain how proteins come together to form a virus that
can do things the proteins can’t do individually, or how collections of particles with
certain initial conditions can act differently from the particles individually. Their inter-
actions are governed by the microdependencies, but the totality is governed by the
macrodependencies. That’s not mysterious, and doesn’t entail the denial of theoret-
ical reductionism but, for the reasons discussed above, it does provide a basis for
ontological emergence.
21 Though we disagree with Wilson’s connection between this distinction and aggregation.
123
61 Page 16 of 25


=== PAGE 17 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
It’s important to note that our focus on cross-classiﬁcation is signiﬁcantly inspired
by Eleanor Knox’s introduction of variable change as a criterion for emergence (see
Knox, 2016; Franklin & Knox, 2018). Changing variables is a useful strategy for
uncovering dependencies that may turn out to be novel and screen off the microde-
tails.22. In this way, Knox’s account gives us the epistemic tools for ﬁnding novel
macrodependencies that screen off – ontological emergence; but her account should
not be understood as a purely epistemological account as some such as De Haro (2019)
have read it. 23 Knox also emphasises a different kind of novelty to our account: she
argues that the combination of changing variables and abstractions can give rise to
novel explanatory value. For us this is because changing variables and abstractions
uncover new dependencies, and these dependencies generate novel explanations by
providing the causal or nomic link between explanantia and explananda. Our account
thus underwrites the connection between novel explanatory value and emergence.
Although we don’t focus on explanation as a criterion for admittance into the rainfor-
est, we embrace this consequence of our account.
Perhaps some will ﬁnd this all to be inadequate: they might hold that real novelty
requires a dependency relation that goes beyond what is determined by fundamental
physics. So long as we maintain compatibility with theoretical reducibility to funda-
mental physics — or even just the supervenience between levels — then these folks
will hold that no dependency counts as truly novel with respect to its reductive base.24
To sum up, we think that theoretical reduction is widespread, but independent of the
existence of non-fundamental entities. Rather, it’s essential to those entities’ existence
that the world is differently arranged at different levels – that the best categories to
describe nature at one level cut across those used at other levels. That’s the basis of
this view of novelty, and captures precisely the ontology implicit in the special science
realist’s project!
4 Case study: a virus
Pretty much everyone alive in 2020 or 2021 knows that viruses can have a causal
impact both on individual humans, and, more speciﬁcally, on individual humans’
lungs, olfactory systems, immune systems, and on human societies more generally.
For those who think that to exist is to play an essential role in causally bringing about
certain effects, or to exist is to play an essential role in scientiﬁc explanations, or to
22 Changing variables can help us ﬁnd dependencies/patterns that are “there for the picking up if only we
are lucky or clever enough to hit on the right perspective” (Dennett, 1991, p. 41)
23 While we think this is a misreading, to avoid similar confusions about our project, we emphasise that
variable changes are of especial importance when these help identify distinct dependencies and consequent
cross-classiﬁcation.
24 Our response to such claims is to admit that this is indeed a salient philosophical understanding of ‘novel’.
However, we return to the claims expressed earlier: we hold that irreducibility is an inappropriate criterion
for inclusion in the ontology. As such, given that novelty is the right kind of criterion, it’s appropriate to
interpret ‘novelty’ in a way that’s compatible with reducibility. Thus, we hope to be judged by the upshots
of our framework rather than falling prey to objections concerning the alternate meanings of individual
terms.
123
Page 17 of 25 61


=== PAGE 18 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
exist is to feature in scientiﬁc laws, it should be incontrovertible that viruses exist. 25
The case of viruses allows us to demonstrate that the criteria for inclusion in the
rainforest set out above return an ontology that matches that of the scientiﬁc realist.
By establishing that the reasons for including viruses, or any other entity in our
ontology do not relate to the failure of the theoretical reduction of such entities, we have
made signiﬁcant progress in one of the key aims of the paper – namely, establishing that
theoretical reduction and ontological emergence are compatible. Moreover, the various
examples above, especially the example of the gas as described by the Boltzmann
equation also help establish this point.
Are viruses in fact theoretically reducible? Can one explain how viruses function
by investigating their parts and the details of the interactions among their parts? To
these questions we answer ‘yes’.
Take, for example, the Tobacco Mosaic virus (TMV) – this is of course a very simple
example of a virus – one could hold that only more complicated viruses exist over and
above their parts, but this seems untenable, and TMV is well known to be virulent and
have a devastating impact on tobacco crops – thus, it’s difﬁcult to challenge its causal
proﬁle.26
TMV’s “rod shape results from its basic design, namely a regular helical array of
identical protein subunits, in which framework is embedded a single molecule of RNA
wound as a helix” (Klug, 1999, p. 531).
According to Liu and Nelson ( 2013): “Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) encodes four
known functional proteins: the 126 and 183 kDa replication-associated proteins, the
movement protein (MP), and the structural capsid or coat protein (CP).” The coat
protein, for example, can be further analysed into 2130 identical coat protein subunits
following the right-handed helix of an accompanying RNA strand to produce a 300
nm hollow cylinder with an outer diameter of 18 nm and a 4 nm wide central channel.
Proteins are strings of amino acids. So there are many parts, but it’s only when the
parts conform to the appropriate structure that the virus is able to realise its function
and that it thus has its novel explanatory and causal attributes. 27 The wrong assem-
blage of parts would be inert – viruses are able to infect hosts exactly when they are
structured appropriately. When this happens abstractions from the detailed interac-
tions of the parts (be that at the molecular or sub-molecular level) are legitimated and
the dependencies that underwrite causal and explanatory claims are in terms either of
the virus as a whole or in terms of the interactions of the proteins.
While there remain unanswered questions about the functioning of viruses and
proteins, it seems both pessimistic and unwarranted to claim that such questions aren’t
answerable at all. At least we wouldn’t bet against the vast array of research projects
involved with mapping and understanding the complex details of how viruses work.
As such, the theoretical reduction (according to some or other account) of viruses
seems highly plausible.
25 See Khalidi (2013, §5.4) for a discussion of virus as a natural kind.
26 While it’s tempting to choose SARS-CoV -2, the science on TMV is, at the time of writing, far more
settled.
27 See Herman et al. ( 2021) for a discussion of structure and function in biology. Oppenheim and Putnam
(1958) also discuss synthesising structurally identical but causally inert collections of proteins that mirror
but are not identical to TMV .
123
61 Page 18 of 25


=== PAGE 19 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
We say: there are viruses in the rainforest (i.e. viruses feature in our best ontological
inventory). Unless there is some radical and unforeseen scientiﬁc revolution, viruses
are essential to our scientiﬁc account of the world. And, as such, those who accept
that there are non-fundamental real kinds or entities ought to accept viruses into
their ontology. That’s the justiﬁcation for including viruses in the ontology, but the
explanation for viruses’ inclusion over and above the parts which constitute viruses, is
that viruses are ontologically emergent, that is: virus dependencies screen off lower-
level descriptions and are novel.
Virus dependencies screen off: the molecular and submolecular descriptions are
unconditionally relevant, but in part conditionally irrelevant to the virus’s efﬁcacy. The
dependency between a viral infection and, say, the mottling of tobacco leaves screens
off the sub-parts of the virus.
The presence of an active TMV will be sufﬁcient to enable predictions regarding
whether or not tobacco leaves will mottle or otherwise register signs of infection.
As such, conditional on a property of the virus as a whole – whether it is active or
inactive – one can abstract away from the lower-level details that compose the virus:
the macrodependencies about the virus screen off these lower-level details.
Virus dependencies are novel: as discussed above they have novel causal powers
– they can do things their parts can’t do; and virus-leaf dependencies are distinct from
the protein and amino acid dependencies – while the former engender ontological
divisions into plants and viruses, the latter engender much more ﬁne grained divisions
into types of protein or amino acid, which can be found both in viruses and plants.
Now it could be the case that TMV is like jade28 and that in fact there are TMV sub-
types that lead to different kinds of mottling and have different structures. If that did
turn out to the best analysis of TMV its dependencies would fail our novelty criterion
as TMV would have no novel causal powers relative to its sub-types. Consider by
analogy the claim that SARS-CoV -2 causes Covid vs. the suggestion that variants of
the virus cause variants of the disease. This dependence of our ontology on scientiﬁc
discovery is exactly as it should be.
5 Taking stock: Trout-Turkeys and other philosophical conundra
The previous section showed us that viruses are admitted to the rainforest, now it’s
worth demonstrating that some putative entities are denied entry. We are after a verdant
and lush rainforest, but gerrymandered kinds ought not to be there!
To be clear: we do not claim that the contents of the rainforest exhaust all our
ontology. As such, we take no stance as to the existence of mathematical entities,
or gerrymandered kinds such as trout-turkeys, or any other ontology. Rather we are
interested in specifying admission criteria to the rainforest, and we do claim that the
rainforest has a particular role to play since it contains all and only those entities to
which the scientiﬁc realists ought to be committed. 29
28 See Kim (1992) and Franklin ( 2021).
29 If truly fundamental entities were ever to be discovered then these would form a notable exception to
this claim as these would not be ontologically emergent but would feature in the scientiﬁc realist’s ontology.
123
Page 19 of 25 61


=== PAGE 20 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
So, are there trout-turkeys in the rainforest? 30 The answer is, obviously, ‘no’, but
to see precisely why we ought to specify a bit further exactly what trout-turkeys are.
Trout-turkeys could be conceived of as mereological sums of trout and turkeys. That
is, each trout-turkey is composed of one speciﬁc trout and one speciﬁc turkey, whether
or not these animals happen to be spatially contiguous at any particular time. 31
Are trout-turkeys emergent? First we need to consider the screening off condition.
Straightaway the situation is different: in the other cases, there were bona ﬁde scientiﬁc
theories at both the lower and higher level. What are the two levels for a trout-turkey?
The higher-level theory putatively describes the mereological complex ‘a trout-turkey’
and the lower-level theory must either describe the collection of simples (say, atoms)
that compose the trout-turkey, or perhaps the trout and the turkey.
To state the obvious, no scientiﬁc theory of trout-turkeys is forthcoming. Do they
swim? Are they prey of other animals? How do they reproduce? But is this lack of
scientiﬁc theory for them just because of the basic kinds and predicates we choose
to describe the world? Could there be some kind of creature that does choose to use
the variable ‘trout-turkey’ and has higher-level theories about their evolution? While
of course the question of variable choice is a tricky one entangled with the problem
of induction (see e.g. Cohen & Callender, 2009), we have principled reasons to think
that trout-turkeys are not emergent.
To demonstrate this, it is helpful to remember other examples of gerrymandered
kinds, like Dennett’s lost socks, or the centre of mass of all philosophers of science.
Let’s assume we are interested in how the location of these kinds changes over time.
What description can we give for these entities? Well, we can see how their com-
ponents’ locations change over time, and use that to see how the composite object
changes location over time. Are there dependencies involving these kinds that screen
off lower-level details? No! In order to see how the centre of mass changes at each time
step we have to look at where each member has moved to and re-average – there is
no higher-level equation/macrodependency that screens off these microdetails. 32 The
locations of the components remain relevant.
Following Wilson ( 1985), one could come up with a mathematical function to
describe any arbitrary concatenation of entities, but this wouldn’t take the form such
that it would allow for projecting into the future. So, it’s not at all clear that this should
count as a macrodependency at all; this point is made by Ross ( 2000, p. 162), albeit
in a different idiom. More importantly, this macrodependency would not screen off
any lower-level details for the reasons given above: to know what our trout-turkey will
do, we have to check what the trout and what the turkey do, and then re-sum. In other
words: there is no conditional irrelevance, and so the screening off condition is not
met. Trout-turkeys are not emergent.
30 There is a separate question (the new problem of induction) about what, if anything, makes trout (or
green) a better variable than trout-turkey (or grue), but we don’t have space to address that here.
31 If, instead trout-turkeys were composed of half a particular trout and half a particular turkey, the claims
in the following paragraph would still apply.
32 Perhaps there are certain higher-level regularities about the centre of mass of all philosophers of science
– the location shifts whenever there is a PSA or BSPS!
123
61 Page 20 of 25


=== PAGE 21 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
One might have the worry at this stage that our emergent ontology is irrecover-
ably vague and that this is a reason to reject the approach outright. In particular, one
might worry that conditional irrelevance was not an exact, cut and dried condition,
but involved approximate screening off. Oftentimes, this approximation can be made
exact by specifying the exact circumstances when the lower-level details become rel-
evant again. But when we can’t do this, should we be concerned about the vagueness
that creeps in?
We think not. Consider clouds: not only do these have blurry edges, but there will
be a vagueness as to whether a collection of water droplets counts as a cloud or not. We
don’t think that such vagueness can be excised, in part because we can’t think of any
scientiﬁc examples that don’t have vague boundaries and vague edge cases. That is,
even in fundamental physics, particles are excitations of quantum ﬁelds, and there’s a
vagueness both as to the boundaries of such excitations, and when an excitation counts
as a particle or not. Our goal in this paper is not to persuade the desert advocate – if
one has the view that future, as-yet-undiscovered fundamental physics will furnish a
complete and precise ontology then that’s ﬁne. But as long as one is prepared to admit
some non-fundamental entities, some degree of vagueness in ontology is inevitable.
Having addressed these concerns we come to the consideration of how our ontology
relates to the well-known articulations of rainforest realism in the existing literature.
6 Rainforest realism
Our concern in this paper has been establishing what lives in the many-levelled ontol-
ogy of the scientiﬁc realist. 33 The terminology of ‘rainforest realism’ comes from
Ross (2000), Ladyman and Ross ( 2007), and Ladyman ( 2017, p. 152) identiﬁes this
with the claim that “[t]he ontological commitments of the special sciences should be
taken as metaphysically on a par with those of physics”. So how does our account of
the higher-level, or special science ontology relate to Ladyman and Ross’s? First, we
discuss how our account aligns with theirs, and then we discuss two ways in which
our account is less radical.
Dependencies play a key role in our analysis, and are clearly patterns of some kind.
But the link is tighter than this: the novel macrodependencies that screen off lower-
level details are real patterns. In this way, our account offers an alternative explication
of how patterns at one level relate to patterns at another level such that there is a lush
ontology. And our account needn’t be considered a rival to Dennettian real patterns –
indeed Ladyman explicitly allows that the “theory of Real Patterns can be explicated
in various ways” (Ladyman, 2017, claim XIV).
Whereas the account in Ladyman and Ross ( 2007) focusses more on the features
of scientiﬁc representations, we emphasise the worldly backing of such features. In
addition both we and they (ibid. p.233) insist on the projectibility of real patterns
and dependencies: that is, that they must play a role in scientiﬁc generalisations
that can serve as the basis for inductive reasoning. Likewise, where they discuss the
33 Note that Ladyman and Ross ( 2007) and Shech and McGivern (2019) call this ontology ‘scale relative’.
While, broadly speaking, this ﬁts with our conception of the rainforest, we don’t use this terminology
because levels, as understood in this paper, don’t always align with particular scales, cf. Potochnik ( 2017).
123
Page 21 of 25 61


=== PAGE 22 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
compressibility of an encoding relative to the bitmap (see Dennett, 1991), our notion
of screening off underlies such compressibility. Thus, our account of the rainforest
encapsulates signiﬁcant features of Ladyman and Ross’s project.
One way in which our account is less radical than theirs is the status we give to
dependencies and patterns. For Ladyman and Ross, patterns are ontologically prior to
the entities that enter into them. Indeed, more radical views, such as French (2014), go
further and argue there is only relational structure and all entities should be eliminated.
While our account places dependencies and patterns centre stage, and is compatible
with structural realism, it does not require or presuppose structural realism. On our
account, entities ontologically emerge only if they are involved in – featured on one
side or the other – of some dependency that is both novel and screens off lower-level
details. It’s the relations between dependencies discussed in detail above, in virtue of
which entities emerge. But the primacy of patterns or dependencies in our account is
not a metaphysical claim: it is just that patterns are the starting place for our analysis
and so are conceptually prior – this needn’t entail that they are ontologically prior.
There is a further way in which our account can be considered to be a generalisa-
tion of Ladyman and Ross: our language of autonomy and novelty generalises away
from, and subsumes, the information-theoretic gloss that Ladyman and Ross give.
Information-theoretic ideas are useful ways to express the key ideas and connect the
philosophical discussion to empirical research in data science, but they are eliminable.
Ladyman and Ross defend their view by claiming that it “expresses the principle
of Occam’s razor, in restricting ontological commitment to what is required for a
maximally empirically adequate science”, and they spell this out in terms of predictive
novelty (ibid., pp. 233-234, original emphasis). We differ from them by focussing
on a slightly different form of novelty: even though higher-level goings-on may be
predictable from the bottom up, the novel dependencies are not type-identical with
those at the lower level. By tying the deﬁnition of real patterns to the availability of
novel and screening-off dependencies at higher levels, we satisfy the intuition that
such dependencies are required by maximally empirically adequate science.
On our view, real patterns might be both reducible and emergent. While some reduc-
tions may engender elimination, those patterns which are emergent are ineliminable.
Even if it turns out that reduction is commonplace, this will allow for a verdant rain-
forest, with an array of entities whose properties may be understood from the bottom
up.
7 Conclusion
Ontological tastes differ: some prefer lush rainforests and others stark deserts. While
we do not presume to have persuaded those with the latter tastes, we hope to have
articulated an account that makes explicit the commitments popular among philoso-
phers of science. Our goal is to admit some non-fundamental scientiﬁc entities into the
ontology, and to exclude gerrymandered non-scientiﬁc kinds. We claimed that there
are principled ways to make that distinction.
We argued that those entities that are to be admitted to the rainforest are ontologi-
cally emergent, and yet at least some of them may be theoretically reducible. We went
123
61 Page 22 of 25


=== PAGE 23 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
on to characterise ontologically emergent entities as those that participate in novel
and screened-off dependencies. Through a careful application of these criteria, we
demonstrated that viruses are in, but that trout-turkeys are out. Finally, we showed
that this approach sets rainforest realism on ﬁrmer metaphysical ground.
Acknowledgements We are very grateful to participants in the FraMEPhys and MetaScience reading
groups for their engagement and helpful feedback. We’d also like to thank audiences at MetaScience’s
‘Going Up’ conference, and the EPSA 2021 conference. KR’s work was supported by the FraMEPhys ERC
grant 757295 and a Leverhulme Early Career Fellowship.
Author Contributions Equal contribution by both authors
Funding KR supported by Leverhulme Early Career Fellowship.
Data availability statement N/A.
Declarations
Ethical approval N/A
Informed consent N/A
Conﬂict of interest N/A
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Barnes, E. (2012). Emergence and fundamentality. In: Mind, 121.484, 873–901, ISSN: 00264423, 14602113.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/23407311
Batterman, R.W. (2013). The tyranny of scales. R.W. Batterman (Ed.), The oxford handbook of philosophy
of physics (pp. 256–286). Oxford University Press.
Bedau, M. A., & Humphreys, P . E. (2008).Emergence: Contemporary readings in philosophy and science.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT press.
Bennett, K. (2007). Mental causation. Philosophy compass, 2(2), 316–337.
Bogen, J., & Woodward, J. (1988). Saving the phenomena. The Philosophical Review, 97(3), 303–352.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2011a). Emergence, reduction and supervenience: A varied landscape. Foundations of
Physics, 41(6), 920–959. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-011-9549-0
Butterﬁeld, J. (2011b). Less is different: Emergence and reduction reconciled. Foundations of Physics,
41(6), 1065–113. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-010-9516-1
Butterﬁeld, J. (2014). Reduction, emergence, and renormalization.The Journal of Philosophy, 111(1), 5–49.
Chakravartty, A. (2017). “Scientiﬁc Realism”. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ed. by Edward
N. Zalta. Summer 2017. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Chalmers, D. J. (2006). Strong and Weak Emergence. In The ReEmergence & of Emergence: The Emer-
gentist Hypothesis From Science to Religion. (Eds.), P . Davies and P . Clayton: Oxford University
Press.
123
Page 23 of 25 61


=== PAGE 24 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Cohen, J., & Callender, C. (2009). A better best system account of lawhood. Philosophical Studies, 145(1),
1–34.
Crane, T. (2001). The signiﬁcance of emergence. B. Loewer and G. Gillett (Eds.), Physicalism and its
discontents. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Crowther, K. (2015). Decoupling emergence and reduction in physics. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 5(3), 419–445.
De Haro, S. (2019). Towards a theory of emergence for the physical sciences. European Journal for Phi-
losophy of Science, 9(3), 1–52.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Real patterns. The Journal of Philosophy, 88, 27–51.
Dizadji-Bahmani, F., Frigg, R., & Hartmann, S. (2010). Who’s afraid of nagelian reduction? Erkenntnis,
73(3), 393–412.
Dorr, C., & Hawthorne, J. (2013). 1. naturalness. Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 8,1 ,
Earman, J., & Roberts, J. T. (1999). “ceteris paribus", there is no problem of provisos. Synthese, 118(3),
439–478. https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1005106917477
Eva, B., & Stern, R. (2020). Antireductionist interventionism.British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
74, 241–267.
Fairchild, M. (2019). The Barest Flutter of the Smallest Leaf: Understanding Material Plen-
itude. The Philosophical Review , 128(2), 143-178, issn: 0031-810. https://doi.org/10.1215/
00318108-7374932. eprint: https://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/128/2/
143/575793/143fairchild.pdf .u r l :https://doi.org/10.1215/00318108-7374932 .
Fodor, J. A. (1974). Special sciences (or: The disunity of science as a working hypothesis). Synthese, 28(2),
97–115.
Fodor, J.A. (1991). Y ou Can Fool Some of The People All of The Time, Everything Else Being Equal;
Hedged Laws and Psychological Explanations1. Mind, C(397), 19-34, issn: 0026-4423. DOIurl-
https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/C.397.19. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/mind/article-pdf/C/397/19/
10888930/19.pdf .u r l :https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/C.397.19
Fodor, J. A. (1997). Special sciences: Still autonomous after all these years. Noûs, 31(s11), 149–163.
Franklin, A. (2021). Can multiple realisation be explained? Philosophy, 96(1), 27–48. https://doi.org/10.
1017/S0031819120000285
Franklin, A., & Knox, E. (2018). Emergence without limits: The case of phonons. Studies In History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 64, 68–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsb.2018.06.001
French, S. (2014). The structure of the world: Metaphysics and representation. Oxford University Press.
Gillett, C. (2016). Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
Hellman, G. P ., & Thompson, F. W. (1976). Physicalism: Ontology, determination, and reduction. The
Journal of Philosophy, 72(17), 551–564.
Hendry, R.F. (2010). Emergence vs. reduction in chemistry. Emergence in mind, 205–221,
Herman, M., Aiello, B., DeLong, J., Garcia-Ruiz, H., González, A., Hwang, W., & Y akoby, N. (2021). A
unifying framework for understanding biological structures and functions across levels of biological
organization. Integrative and Comparative Biology, 61(6), 2038–2047.
Hoefer, C., & Martí, G. (2020). Realism, reference & perspective. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 10(3), 1–22.
Khalidi, M. A. (2013).Natural categories and human kinds: Classiﬁcation in the natural and social sciences.
New Y ork: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, J. (1992). Multiple realization and the metaphysics of reduction. Philosophy and phenomenological
research, 52(1), 1–26.
Klug, A. (1999). The tobacco mosaic virus particle: structure and assembly. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 354(1383), 531–535,
Knox, E. (2016). Abstraction and its limits: Finding space for novel explanation.Noûs, 50(1), 41–60. https://
doi.org/10.1111/nous.12120
Ladyman, J. (2017). An apology for naturalized metaphysics. Metaphysics and the philosophy of science:
New essays Ed. by Matthew Slater and Zanja Y udell. Oxford University Press. Chap. https://doi.org/
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199363209.003.0008.
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics naturalized. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Lange, M. (2002). Who’s afraid of ceteris-paribus laws? or: How i learned to stop worrying and love them.
Erkenntnis, 57(3), 407–423.
123
61 Page 24 of 25


=== PAGE 25 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Liu, C., & Nelson, R. S. (2013). The cell biology of tobacco mosaic virus replication and movement.
Frontiers in plant science, 4, 12.
Mitchell, S. D. (2012). Emergence: Logical, functional and dynamical. Synthese, 185(2), 171–186.
Nagel, E. (1961). The structure of science: Problems in the logic of scientiﬁc explanation . San Diego:
Harcourt, Brace & World Inc.
Ney, A. (2021). Reductionism. The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .U R L :https://iep.utm.edu/red-
ism/
Oppenheim, P ., & Putnam, H. (1958). Unity of science as a working hypothesis. Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, 2, 3–36.
Pietroski, P ., & Rey, G. (1995). When other things aren’t equal: Saving ceteris paribus laws from vacuity.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 46(1), 81–110. issn: 00070882, 14643537. URL
http://www.jstor.org/stable/687634
Potochnik, A. (2017). Idealization and the aims of science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Price, H., & Corry, R. (Eds.). (2007). Causation, physics, and the constitution of reality: Russell’s republic
revisited. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Robertson, K. Forthcoming. Autonomy generalised; or, why doesn’t physics matter more? Ergo,( )
Rosaler, J. (2017). Reduction as an A Posteriori relation. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axx026
Ross, D. (2000). Rainforest realism: A dennettian theory of existence. D. Ross, A. Brook, and D. Thompson
(Eds.), Dennett’s philosophy: A comprehensive assessment. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schaffer, J. (2004). Two conceptions of sparse properties. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 85(1), 92–102.
Schaffer, J. (2016). Grounding in the image of causation. Philosophical Studies, 173(1), 49–100.
Schaffner, K. F. (2013). Ernest nagel and reduction. The Journal of Philosophy, 109(8/9), 534–565.
Schurz, G. (2002). Ceteris paribus laws: Classiﬁcation and deconstruction. Erkenntnis (1975-), 57(3), 351–
372. issn: 01650106, 15728420. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20013162
Seifert, V . A. (2020). The strong emergence of molecular structure. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 10(3), 45.
Shech, E., & McGivern, P . (2019). Fundamentality, scale, and the fractional quantum hall effect.Erkenntnis,
86, 1411–1430.
Sober, E. (1999). Physicalism from a probabilistic point of view. Philosophical Studies: An International
Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition, 95(1/2), 135–174.
Spirtes, P ., Glymour, C. N., & Scheines, R. (2000). Causation, prediction, and search . Cambridge: MIT
press.
Tahko, T. E. (2020). Where do you get your protein? or: biochemical realization. The British journal for
the philosophy of science, 71(3), 799–825.
Taylor, E. (2015). An explication of emergence. Philosophical Studies, 172(3), 653–669.
Thomasson, A. L. (2009). The easy approach to ontology.Axiomathes, 19(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10516-008-9057-9
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the everett interpretation .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2019). Naturalness and emergence. The Monist, 102(4), 499–524.
Waters, C. K. (2008). Beyond theoretical reduction and layer-cake antireduction: How dna retooled genetics
and transformed biological practice. M. Ruse (Ed.), The oxford handbook of philosophy of biology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, J. (2010). Non-reductive physicalism and degrees of freedom.The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 61(2), 279–31. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axp040
Wilson, J. (2011). Non-reductive realization and the powers-based subset strategy. The Monist, 94(1), 121–
154.
Wilson, J. (2014). Metaphysical emergence: Weak and strong.URL http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11200/
Wilson, J. (2021). Metaphysical emergence. USA: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, M. (1985). What is this thing called ‘pain’? Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 66(3–4), 227–267.
Wilson, M. (2017). Physics avoidance: Essays in conceptual strategy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wimsatt, W. C. (2007). Re-engineering philosophy for limited beings: Piecewise approximations to reality.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Woodward, J. (2021). Explanatory autonomy: the role of proportionality, stability, and conditional irrele-
vance. Synthese, 198(1), 237–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-01998-6
123
Page 25 of 25 61


=== PAGE 26 ===

European Journal for Philosophy of Science (2024) 14:61
Woodward, J., & Hitchcock, C. (2003). Explanatory generalizations, part i: A counterfactual account.Noûs,
37(1), 1–24.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123
61 Page 26 of 25
