--- Page 1 ---

The Southern Journal of Philosophy (20071 Vol. XLV 
Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and 
the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
Robert Sinclair 
Brooklyn College, City University of New York 
Abstract 
This essay reconsiders Davidson’s critical attribution of the scheme- 
content distinction to Quine’s naturalized epistemology. It focuses on 
Davidson’s complaint that the presence of this distinction leads Quine 
to mistakenly construe neural input as evidence. While committed to 
this distinction, Quine’s epistemology does not attempt to locate a 
justificatory foundation in sensory experience and does not then equate 
neural intake with evidence. Quine’s central epistemological task is an 
explanatory one that attempts to scientifically clarify the route from 
stimulus to science. Davidson’s critical remarks wrongly assign 
concerns to Quine’s view that it does not have and further obscures the 
status of his naturalized conception of epistemology. 
Several philosophers, most notably Donald Davidson and 
Richard Rorty, have criticized Quine’s naturalized conception of 
epistemology for its alleged commitment to the dualism of 
scheme and content, what Davidson famously called the “third 
dogma of empiricism.”’ The fundamental problem with this 
dualism, at least for Davidson, is the way it encourages taking 
unconceptualized empirical input (the content side of this 
division) as evidence for our totality of beliefs (the scheme side 
of the division). Quine’s naturalized epistemology is then 
presented as mistakeningly offering sensory input as evidence 
for our system of beliefs, something that Davidson argues “non- 
propositional experience” simply cannot do. In apparent 
opposition to this reading, Roger Gibson (1999) remarks that 
Robert Sinclair is an Assistant Professor in the Department of 
Philosophy at Brooklyn College, City University of New York. His current 
research examines the interconnections between pragmatism, naturalism 
and analytic philosophy in twentieth-century America. His articles have 
appeared in Dialogue, Inquiry, Metaphilosophy, The Southern Journal 
of Philosophy, and Southwest Philosophy Review. 
455

--- Page 2 ---

Robert Sinclair 
Quine does not equate experience with sensory input, further 
suggesting that he does not then appeal to any sort of sensory 
given as the ultimate evidence for our beliefs. Related concerns 
are offered by Peter Hylton (1997) when he defends Quine’s 
adherence to the scheme-content distinction by noting its con- 
nection to his scientific worldview rather than with any concern 
in locating an empirical foundation for human knowledge. The 
central issue then turns on how we are to understand Quine’s 
apparent advocacy of the scheme-content distinction and, more 
significantly, whether this commitment leads to the disastrous 
errors suggested by Davidson. This essay deals with this specific 
interpretive issue by readdressing the motivations behind 
Quine’s commitment to the third dogma of empiricism. My main 
interpretive claim builds on the suggestive remarks made by 
both Gibson and Hylton when they locate the motives for this 
distinction within Quine’s acceptance of a scientific perspective 
in epistemology. However, unlike these commentators, I provide 
a more detailed account of Quine’s adherence to this dualism, one 
that highlights its connections to his conception of naturalized 
epistemology and that is directly situated within the context of 
Davidson’s critical remarks. More specifically, I argue that 
Quine’s core project in epistemology, of which the scheme-content 
distinction forms a part, should not be understood as concerned 
with isolating some sensory foundation in experience that 
serves to justify our system of beliefs. We should rather view 
Quine’s main epistemological task as an explanatory one aimed 
at providing a scientific account of how humans are capable of 
moving from sense experience to scientific knowledge of the 
world. It is from within this account that the scheme-content 
distinction emerges as a basic scientific finding about the 
structure of human knowledge and that then helps to further 
clarify the route from sensory stimulation to our more advanced 
scientific pronouncements. Quine’s concern with the “evidential 
support” for science, as he sometimes describes it, refers to this 
explanatory project and not the attempt to locate the ultimate 
“evidence” for science within some sensory foundation. 
I begin with a discussion of the Davidson-Quine dispute 
over the status of this third dogma within Quine’s naturalized 
epistemology. This will allow us to recognize not only Quine’s 
explicit commitment to the scheme-content distinction, but also 
how the debate itself is largely inconclusive. Quine does not 
explicitly address Davidson’s critical remarks nor does he 
clearly indicate the explanatory task of his epistemology. I then 
consider in more detail the nature of Quine’s core epistemological 
project and how it should be read as promoting the specific 
explanatory aim described above. I further demonstrate how 
this explains his lack of concern with Davidson’s specific worry 
over evidence, and how this indicates where such issues are 
properly located within Quine’s account. Lastly, I conclude that 
456

--- Page 3 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
Davidson’s critical remarks reflect a misunderstanding of the 
basic project that supports Quine’s advocacy of the scheme- 
content distinction, and attribute motives to his view that it does 
not have. In the case of at least Quine’s naturalized version of 
empiricism, Davidson’s critical attribution of the third dogma 
fails to fully appreciate his scientific reformulation of the epis- 
temological tasks of empiricism. 
1. Davidson and Quine 
on the Third Dogma 
In his “On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme,” Davidson 
famously introduced the third dogma of empiricism by offering 
this general characterization of the dualism: “The idea is ... 
that something is a language, and associated with a conceptual 
scheme, whether we can translate it or not, if it stands in a 
certain relation (predicting, organizing, facing or fitting) to 
experience (nature, reality, sensory promptings)” (1974, 191). 
Elsewhere he further indicates that Quine’s specific formulation 
of this apparent dogma is elaborated in accordance with his 
chief concern over how, on the basis of sensory stimulation, we 
are able to arrive at our current scientific theory. Among the 
many passages2 where he finds evidence of this dualism, 
Davidson emphasizes Quine’s “distinction between report and 
invention, substance and style, cues and conceptualization” and 
his further remark that 
we cannot strip away the conceptual trappings sentence by sentence 
... but we can investigate the world, and man as part of it, and 
thus find out what cues he could have of what goes on around him. 
Subtracting his cues from his worldview, we get man’s net contri- 
bution as the difference. This difference marks the extent of man’s 
conceptual sovereignty-the domain within which he can revise 
theory while saving the data. (1960,5) 
Here, Davidson finds the clear presence of a scheme-content 
dualism with Quine’s explicit emphasis on the difference between 
our worldview and cues, our theory and its data (Davidson 1989, 
161). The further issue concerns exactly why this distinction 
should be seen as detrimental to Quine’s epistemology. For 
Davidson, the main problem concerns the view of justification 
and evidence that is suggested by Quine’s position and that 
emerges from this emphasis on the division between scheme 
and content. 
The general position is that sensory experience provides all the 
evidence for the acceptance of sentences (where sentences may 
include whole theories). A sentence or theory fits our sensory 
promptings, successfully faces the tribunal of experience, predicts 
457

--- Page 4 ---

Robert Sinclair 
future experience, or copes with the pattern of our surface irrita- 
tions, provided it is borne out by the evidence. (1984,193) 
The central issue here emphasizes how accounts that adhere to 
this sort of division between theory and data are inclined to 
seek justification for our beliefs through comparison with this 
data. Such views attempt to confer a level of justification to our 
scheme of beliefs by their answerability to whatever is given in 
experience, in Quine’s case, the sensory promptings that serve 
as our ultimate “take” on what happens in our surrounding 
scene. Consequently, Quine’s advocacy of the third dogma results 
in what Davidson calls the “ultimate source of evidence” for our 
knowledge of the world consisting of the stimulation of our 
sensory surfaces (1989, 161-62). 
Davidson’s main critical point wonders whether sensory 
input can properly play this evidential role.3 In his “A Coher- 
ence Theory of Truth and Knowledge” (1990), he further explains 
how the attempt to ground our beliefs within what is empiri- 
cally given is motivated by the thought that it is sensations 
that connect our beliefs and the world, further enabling them to 
then justify our beliefs because we are aware of them. However, 
the main problem with this approach is that “justification 
seems to depend on the awareness, which is just another belief“ 
(2001b, 142). Since it is only beliefs themselves that are capable 
of providing evidential support, our sensations are revealed as 
playing no important epistemic role with regard to the justifica- 
tion of our beliefs. The relationship between sensations and belief 
should be understood only in causal terms and cannot without 
confusion be understood as providing evidence. 
This causal relation cannot be a relation of confirmation or discon- 
firmation, since the cause is not a proposition or belief, but just an 
event in the world or in our sensory apparatus. Nor can such events 
be considered in themselves evidence, unless, of course, they cause 
us to believe something. And then it is the belief that is properly 
called the evidence, not the event. (1982,486) 
Now it is here that Davidson claims Quine’s naturalized episte- 
mology makes a fatal error, since by claiming that knowledge is 
epistemologically grounded in some ultimate source of evidence 
it wrongly assigns a justificatory role to sensation. Quine’s use 
of observation sentences-sentences keyed to stimulations that 
all speakers will assent to in response to the same stimulations- 
is precisely for Davidson an attempt to utilize sensations so 
they can serve as justificatory vehicles. 
But this runs counter to the point we have just seen, that sen- 
sations only play a causal role in the production of our beliefs. 
It is on the basis of this claim that Davidson famously concludes 
that “nothing can count as a reason for holding a belief except 
458

--- Page 5 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
another belief” (2001b, 141). His argument for this claim is a 
familiar one and emphasizes how sensory or neural input lacks 
propositional content and, thus, cannot stand as a potential 
reason for a belief: 
The reason sensations, percepts and sense-data cannot provide 
epistemic support for beliefs is simple: reasons have to be geared 
conceptually to what they are reasons for. The relation of epistemic 
support requires that both relata have propositional content, and 
entities like sensations and sense-data have no propositional 
content. (1997, 2214 
Appeals to the sensory given, even in terms of Quine’s more 
scientifically acceptable neural intake or input, does not provide 
the needed content required for serving as a reason. Neural 
input then remains epistemologically irrelevant for the question 
of evidential support for our beliefs. Davidson thus concludes 
that any attempt to ground knowledge on some form of non- 
propositional “experience” is untenable, and since Quine’s 
naturalized epistemology fails to recognize this, it too fails to 
adequately deal with the question of epistemic justification. 
Quine’s response to these charges openly acknowledges his 
adherence to the third dogma, but rather than viewing this 
commitment as dogmatic, he takes it as central to a proper 
naturalist rendering of the evidential support of science. 
The third purported dogma, understood now in relation to ... 
warranted belief, remains intact. It has a descriptive and normative 
aspect, and in neither aspect do I think of it as a dogma. It is what 
makes scientific method partly empirical rather than solely a quest 
for internal coherence. It has indeed wanted some tidying up, and 
has had it. (1981,39) 
The “tidying up” that Quine refers to is his own naturalized 
account of the relation between evidence and scientific theory, 
which he argues is a more scientifically acceptable account of 
the connections between sensory input and the theoretical 
statements of advanced science. The rest of Quine’s reply 
expands on this general theme, indicating the naturalist motives 
that underlie his core epistemological project and further 
explaining how these motives have lead to the main changes in 
his developing epistemological perspective. What these remarks 
show is that the main lines of Quine’s philosophical develop- 
ment do not result in any significant change of outlook, but 
highlight his underlying interest in presenting a more satis- 
factory naturalistic depiction of the metaphorical statements 
found in his earlier “Two Dogmas of Empiricism” (1953). In that 
article, Quine had described our system of scientific knowledge 
as a “man-made fabric which impinges on experience only along 
459

--- Page 6 ---

Robert Sinclair 
the edges” where his use of “experience” was left unexplained 
(1953,421. By Word and Object (1960), Quine’s naturalist aspira- 
tions are made more explicit with his construal of experience in 
terms of the triggering of nerve endings, or the more recent 
“neural intake.” The distinction between scheme and content or 
scientific theory and evidence, which Quine openly admits is 
found within his conception of epistemology, is part of his 
continued emphasis on the “empiricist discipline” required for 
an adequate theory of knowledge (1981, 40). While this reply 
settles the question of Quine’s commitment to the scheme- 
content distinction, it fails to sufficiently clarify the grounds of 
this commitment, nor does this admission explicitly address 
Davidson’s worry over “ultimate evidence.” More specifically, 
Quine does not clarify the status of his project when he describes 
it as concerned with the “theory of evidence” (1981, 39). As a 
result, those critics who find no room for normative concerns 
over justification within Quine’s project would appear to be 
vindicated and the sort of problem Davidson raises for Quine’s 
account would seem to remain.5 
However, Quine’s remarks do indicate certain lines of thought 
that are central to his conception of epistemology and when 
further clarified can help address these issues. His adherence to 
the scheme-content distinction is presented as part of his more 
general commitment to empiricism, where Quine takes empiri- 
cism itself as a finding of science. For him, our best scientific 
theories confirm that all the evidence for science comes through 
the senses and, thus, further supports the acceptance of a 
scheme-content distinction, or divide between theory and 
evidence as fundamental to the structure of human knowledge.‘j 
Importantly, Quine does not think these claims are assumptions 
in need of further independent philosophical support. Rather, 
they constitute the inherited results of prior scientific theorizing, 
which we now find ourselves working with as we attempt to 
make further contributions to the ongoing progress of human 
knowledge. What this then suggests is that Quine’s commit- 
ments to empiricism and the scheme-content distinction are 
based on his acceptance of a scientific perspective within epis- 
temology and do not stem from any philosophical interest in 
locating an empirical foundation for scientific knowledge. 
This point gains further support from Quine’s general silence 
concerning Davidson’s worry over the status of evidence and 
justification. Quine conceives of his project as demonstrating 
how we have moved from stimulus to science and, in turn, how 
scientific theories gain support through their ability to predict 
future experience. His commitments to empiricism and the 
scheme-content distinction are part of this scientific project, 
themselves accepted as receiving support from science and as 
contributing to this scientific clarification of the connections 
between our sensory surfaces and scientific discourse. Quine 
460

--- Page 7 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
does not show any interest in isolating a sensory foundation 
that serves as the ultimate justification for our beliefs because 
this task is not part of his scientific commitment to empiricism 
and the scheme-content distinction. This view of empiricism 
contrasts sharply with Davidson’s, who takes the connection 
between empiricism and the scheme-content distinction as tied 
to the pursuit of a sensory foundation in experience. Davidson’s 
failure to note this disparity between his and Quine’s under- 
standings of empiricism is precisely why his criticism of Quine’s 
view fails. It leads him to attribute epistemic aims to Quine’s 
project that it does not share with his own conception of empiri- 
cism and its alleged third dogma. 
In order to provide additional support for these interpretive 
remarks, we need to discuss the relevant details of Quine’s 
naturalized account of knowledge. This will help further high- 
light the nature and status of his central explanatory aims and 
indicate the way Davidson’s criticisms fail to engage with Quine’s 
own conceptions of naturalized epistemology, empiricism, and 
the scheme-content distinction. 
2. Naturalized Epistemology 
and Evidence 
The main features of Quine’s naturalized account of knowledge 
are quite familiar.7 He has recently offered this brief encapsula- 
tion of his project: “The business of naturalized epistemology, for 
me, is an improved understanding of the chains of causation 
and implication that connect the bombardment of our surfaces, 
at one extreme, with our scientific output at the other” (199513, 
349). Understanding the import of such remarks requires noting 
how they highlight the main explanatory task of epistemology 
as Quine conceives it and further clarifying the status of the 
claims made in the name of this project. Naturalized epis- 
temology is presented here as providing an improved scientific 
account of the connections between the activation of our sensory 
surfaces and our theoretical discourse about the world. In 
seeking to provide this account, Quine reformulates the core 
epistemic question by describing it in terms that he takes to be 
responsive to the methodological and evidential standards 
found in the empirical sciences. His general elaboration of these 
connections emphasizes the way observation sentences are 
learned through direct association with their stimulus conditions. 
Clarifying how theory is related to such expressions is a matter 
of examining the way various hypotheses are introduced and 
tested within the context of experimental method.8 
For present purposes, the important issue involves the way 
Quine understands his project as consisting of a scientific 
reformulation of the concerns that remain relevant for episte- 
mology. Quine implements his explanatory task by attempting 
46 1

--- Page 8 ---

Robert Sinclair 
to comply with the very intersubjective methods found in empir- 
ical science itself, Set up in such terms, epistemology must now 
become responsive to the demand for external evidence, where 
“external” points to the possibility of applying the third-person 
objective method that characterizes sound empirical reasoning. 
It is such empirical constraints that he thinks all epistemo- 
logical hypotheses must now be subject to. From this perspec- 
tive, Quine views his own claims as scientific hypotheses that 
stand or fall through adherence to the same empirical standards 
of testability that are found in science more generally. We can 
then appreciate how the various technical terms that form part 
of this project, such as “observation sentence,” “neural intake” 
and others, are all chosen for their perceived ability to adhere 
to such methodological requirements. The clarification of the 
links from stimulus to science requires scientifically acceptable 
counterparts in the form of ”stimulations,” “the triggering of 
sensory receptors” and “observation ~entence.”~ The usual philo- 
sophical concepts of “experience,” “sense data,” and “the external 
world” do not permit the formulation of hypotheses that can be 
subjected to the type of empirical inquiry promoted by Quine’s 
n a t u r a1 i z e d conception of epistemology. C 1 a ri t y, increased 
precision, and the need for external evidence all contribute to 
the prediction of observable consequences, and it is then such 
requirements that Quine thinks we must strictly adhere to in 
developing a naturalized account of knowledge. By setting up 
our account of knowledge in scientific terms, we leave behind the 
unchecked speculations of the past and enjoy the same methodo- 
logical and evidential advantages found in the natural sciences. 
It is these philosophical motives that underlie Quine’s presen- 
tation of “naturalized epistemology” as a scientific clarification 
of the evidential relation between scientific theory and its 
sensory evidence. Davidson is clearly correct in noting the way 
Quine’s emphasis on the division between stimulus and science 
corresponds to the scheme-content distinction found in his third 
dogma of empiricism. Moreover, we have seen Quine’s own 
explicit acceptance of the distinction as central to his version of 
empiricism and naturalized epistemology. However, the central 
question concerns whether the presence of this division leads 
Quine’s naturalized epistemology into the problem of ”ultimate 
evidence,” where sensory input is meant to serve as justification 
for what we believe. I have already indicated some reasons for 
why the main explanatory task of Quine’s epistemology conflicts 
with this general understanding of his project. However, part of 
the problem stems from Quine’s own characterization of his 
view, since as we have seen, he does at times describe it as con- 
cerned with the evidential support of science (see Quine 1992). 
One can imagine Davidson wondering how this appeal to neural 
input clarifies the evidential support of science, when it is simply 
mistaken to view neural input as capable of serving as evidence. 
462

--- Page 9 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
Quine’s remarks may also seem to challenge my interpretation 
of his project as largely explanatory. The key here is to under- 
stand how his concern with the “evidential support” of science 
forms one part of his larger explanatory project. In order to see 
this, we should reconsider Quine’s use of the term “evidence,” 
beginning with his recent reflections on this issue: 
“Evidence” is a term that I have used informally in introductory or 
summary formulations. I have not found it useful in more detailed 
inquiry. But let me now see what, more precisely, I would make of 
it. My stated overall problem has been the quasi-epistemological 
problem, within natural science, of man’s construction of natural 
science on the datum base of neural intake. The intake is not what 
we are aware of and infer from, but it does encompass our “infor- 
mation,” in the computer engineer’s sense, as to what is going on 
around us. It is perhaps a candidate for the title of evidence, but it 
does not meet Davidson’s dictum that only a belief can be evidence 
for a belief. The runner-up for the title is the observation sentence 
that has been conditioned to that neural intake. Evidence in this 
sense meets Davidson’s condition. (1997, 575-76) 
This passage illustrates several important points. Quine’s use of 
“evidence” is generally confined to summary statements of his 
position, but the concept itself is too unclear for the more precise 
scientific formulations required of his naturalist project. That 
Quine adopts this attitude is not surprising, given both the 
motives and main task that are central to his project. In 
attempting to explain the connections between stimulation and 
science from a scientific perspective, the term “evidence” is too 
unclear to serve as part of a well-formed empirical hypothesis 
about human knowledge.1° However, within his own scientific 
account of knowledge, Quine does think that his scientific 
analogue “neural input” can be thought of as evidence in the 
sense of the causal source of our information about what is 
around us, but he explicitly recognizes that this does not meet 
Davidson’s standards.” Neural intake does not justify our 
beliefs, since we are not aware of it, nor can we infer anything 
from it. As Quine acknowledges in his earlier response to 
Davidson, “few people, statistically speaking, know about their 
nerve endings” (1981, 40). This type of “evidence” is purely 
causal and is therefore of a piece with Quine’s naturalistic 
rendering of the causal connections between our sensory surfaces 
and theory.12 His emphasis on this causal form of evidence 
indicates that while he still thinks it useful for his own project, 
his debates with Davidson have made clear to him that such 
“evidence” conflicts with Davidson’s own view of evidence.13 
An additional type of evidence is revealed once we consider 
the causal connections between observation sentences and 
neural input. Observation sentences are linked through causal 
463

--- Page 10 ---

Robert Sinclair 
conditioning to our neural input, and Quine stresses that they 
can meet Davidson’s standard of evidence because we are aware 
of them and they can then justify our beliefs. This is best seen 
with Quine’s understanding of the inferential connections 
between observation sentences and theoretical sentences, and 
how these connections reveal themselves within experimental 
method. This process is captured with what Quine calls “observa- 
tion categoricals,” whenever this, that constructions that link 
two observation sentences, where the first indicates the experi- 
mental condition and the second suggests a prediction. They 
then express the general expectation that whenever one observa- 
tion sentence holds, the other will also (Quine 1995a, 25). Simple 
examples might include: Whenever there is a raven, it is black, 
or, Wherever there is smoke, there is fire. For Quine, these con- 
structions highlight the way in which evidence for a respective 
hypothesis is to be found: “The scientist deduces from his 
hypotheses that a certain observable situation should bring 
about another observable situation; then he realizes the one 
situation and watches for the other. Evidence for or against his 
set of hypotheses ensues, however inconclusive” (2000a, 41 1). 
The consequences predicted by the observation categorical 
indicate how observation sentences through their conditioning 
to stimulus conditions yield evidence for our hypotheses about 
the w0r1d.l~ Once uttered, observation sentences become objects 
of awareness and can then serve to support or discredit a respec- 
tive prediction and hypothesis. We remain unaware of our 
neural input, or sensory stimulation, but this neural activity 
causes us to believe that something is the case, which is then 
further expressed with the utterance of an observation sentence. 
So sensory promptings cause us to have beliefs that have the 
same content as the asserted observation sentence, which is 
what then further serves as evidence supporting our respective 
belief. This would seem to meet all the requirements that 
Davidson places on an adequate conception of evidence, since 
we have awareness of observation sentences that serve to both 
justify and express the content of our beliefs. Moreover, since 
observation sentences have content, they can serve as a reason 
for our beliefs whose content they also share. Davidson’s 
strictures on evidence are than addressed by Quine’s use of 
observation sentences as the locus of evidence for our beliefs 
about the w0r1d.l~ 
This approach to the problem of evidence is then in line 
with Quine’s general explanatory aims in epistemology. He 
does not begin by accepting any preconceived philosophical 
understandings of the troublesome terms “justification” and 
“evidence” but attempts to formulate the question in what he 
takes to be scientifically acceptable terms. His interest in the 
evidential support of science includes an account of the causal 
chains from our stimulatory surfaces to our scientific pronounce- 
464

--- Page 11 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
ments and an explanation of how our expectations and predica- 
tions are supported or rejected through observation. Providing 
an explanation of the way our predictions are related to observa- 
tion is one central facet of Quine’s attempt to scientifically 
clarify the steps from sensory stimulation to the creation of 
successful scientific theories of the world. Nevertheless, his 
account does retain the resources needed to accommodate certain 
philosophical understandings of justification, most notably, 
Davidson’s conception of evidence. 
These remarks can be usefully compared with Quine’s early 
programmatic statement of his view and the reaction that 
ensued: “Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into 
place as a chapter of psychology and hence of natural science ... 
a conspicuous difference between old epistemology and the 
epistemological enterprise in this new psychological setting is 
that we can now make free use of empirical psychology” (1969, 
82-83). Here, Quine is explicitly rejecting any philosophical 
autonomy for epistemology distinct from science by advocating 
the use of empirical resources in addressing our epistemological 
concerns. This relocation of epistemology within science has led 
many to interpret Quine as forgoing any concern with the 
critical evaluation and justification of our epistemic practices 
and, instead, as favoring a psychological description of how we 
have acquired our current beliefs. We have seen reasons for why 
this conclusion is mistaken. While some of the fault here must 
lie with Quine’s own exposition of his position, it is clearly not 
his intention to remove such concerns from the province of epis- 
temology.16 Instead, he seeks to reformulate them as a scientific 
question to be addressed within his own explanatory account. 
Once reformulated, the issue becomes one of accounting for how 
our hypotheses and predications acquire evidential support 
through their contact with observation. 
However, this does further indicate that Quine rejects one 
type of philosophical concern over justification, where one 
attempts to justify science from some philosophical standpoint 
outside of science. His naturalism famously rejects this possi- 
bility, resulting in what we have seen as the justification of 
science becoming a problem for science and, therefore, a problem 
for naturalized epistemology. We should include in this rejection 
various empiricist attempts to validate science by locating its 
“ultimate” source of justification within some empirical founda- 
tion. Quine thinks that no such philosophical support for science 
is needed; it is sufficient to demonstrate-in scientific terms- 
the “sensitivity” of theories and hypotheses to empirical data. 
His core project in epistemology then focuses on clarifying how 
science actually proceeds in developing theories that remain 
responsive to observation. One of his most explicit statements 
concerning how he conceives the problem of evidence is captured 
in this passage: 
465

--- Page 12 ---

Robert Sinclair 
Some of my readers have wondered how expressions that are 
merely keyed to our neural intake, by conditioning or in less direct 
ways, could be said to convey evidence about the world. This is the 
wrong picture. We are not aware of our neural intake, nor do we 
deduce anything from it. What we have learned to do is to assert or 
assent to some observation sentences in reaction to certain ranges 
of neural intake. It is such sentences, then, thus elicited, that serve 
as experimental checkpoints for theories about the world. (1993, 
110-11)17 
These remarks emphasize points that we have already noted in 
discussing Quine’s treatment of the question of evidence. He 
locates evidence for our predictions with observation sentences, 
which are causally tied to our sensory receptors, and once 
uttered, can serve as an object of awareness supporting or 
refuting our prediction. Clearly, this conception of the problem 
is not engaged in any large scale justification of science, nor 
does it aim to isolate an empirical foundation for scientific 
knowledge. Nevertheless, Quine thinks that it provides us with 
all the justification or evidential support that one should want 
from a proper epistemological account. For him, all questions 
concerning the evidential support of science are to be handled 
from within science, and this results in locating the evidence for 
our hypotheses within the observation sentence that is keyed to 
our neural input. 
3. Empiricism and the Third Dogma 
This overview of Quine’s core explanatory project in episte- 
mology has indicated how it attempts to address the evidential 
support of science from within science rather than from a 
philosophical standpoint outside it. We can now consider how 
this understanding of Quine’s view more directly responds to 
Davidson’s critical remarks, and what this further suggests 
about both the status of empiricism and the presence of the 
scheme-content distinction within Quine’s conception of episte- 
mology. 
We have just seen that Quine’s scientific understanding of 
the evidential support of science does not locate justification or 
evidence at our sensory surfaces but finds it with the observation 
sentence that is conditioned to our sensory input. This speaks 
decisively against Davidson’s claim that a commitment to the 
scheme-content distinction leads Quine to identify evidence 
with neural intake. By not equating neural input with evidence, 
Quine further demonstrates a general lack of interest in any 
attempt to locate the empirical given.’* As we have seen, Quine 
thinks that it is enough to scientifically clarify the way theories 
are themselves responsive to observation. When noting the way 
Quine replaces “experience” with his more technical alternative 
466

--- Page 13 ---

Qume’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
“neural intake,” we should further realize that this strategic 
move is not part of what Davidson takes to be a central feature 
of the empiricist project, namely, the search for the empirical 
given, or the “ultimate” source of our evidence for our beliefs. It 
is rather, as we have already seen, a part of Quine’s scientific 
clarification of the evidential relation between scientific theory 
and sensory data. Quine does not fall prey to the question of 
empirical giveness or “ultimate evidence,” since he is not 
engaged in an epistemological project designed to elucidate the 
nature of justification by locating its foundation in experience. 
Instead, he is seeking a scientific clarification of the relation- 
ship between our sensory stimulation and our theoretical organi- 
zation of this stimulation, where this includes a discussion of 
how hypotheses gain support from experience. Importantly, once 
we have clarified how the creation and testing of scientific 
theories rests on this sensory basis, we will have provided 
science itself with all the evidential support that is required. 
We might describe his general attitude and approach to the 
problem in these terms. Quine wants to provide a fully natural- 
istic and scientifically acceptable account of the evidential 
support of science, but such a project requires appealing to the 
relevant empirical details of the evidential relations between 
observation and theory whether we are aware of these details or 
not. In attempting to scientifically improve our understanding 
of the question of evidential support, a beliefs justificatory status 
may be the result of more than simply its evidential relations to 
other beliefs. Nondoxastic perceptual, sensory, and memory 
states may also be highly relevant in the development of a theory 
of knowledge that is responsive to the empirical demands found 
with natural science.lg This does not preclude addressing the 
question of evidence promoted by Davidson, which enables us 
to make sense of critically evaluating our respective beliefs. 
But it does suggest that a full theory of the evidential support of 
science will need to meet more than the demands set by 
Davidson’s conception of evidence. From within Quine’s perspec- 
tive, Davidson’s dismissal of neural input as epistemologically 
significant is puzzling, since despite the nondoxastic status of 
sensation, any empirical details concerning the nature of our 
“sensory surfaces” will remain important in providing an empir- 
ically detailed and adequate account of both the acquisition and 
testability of our scientific theories. 
What these remarks show is that Quine’s acceptance of the 
scheme-content distinction does not lead to his confusing sensa- 
tion, or neural input, with the conception of evidence and justi- 
fication required by Davidson. Moreover, he agrees that neural 
input is incapable of serving as a reason for a belief. Davidson’s 
insistence that neural input is of no use for our concerns over 
epistemic justification misses the full import of Quine’s motiva- 
tions within epistemology because it fails to note how neural 
467

--- Page 14 ---

Robert Sinclair 
input contributes to Quine explanatory project in epistemology. 
Rather than taking sides on this issue, Quine begins by noting 
the way neural input as “evidence” is responsive to his aims as 
an epistemologist, but continues by further indicating where 
he would locate Davidson’s conception of evidence within his 
naturalized account of knowledge.20 Quine adopts a conciliatory 
tone with regard to the question of evidence, while Davidson 
seems to retain a conceptually closed and rigid attitude toward 
the problem. 
This fixed attitude stems from Davidson’s understanding of 
empiricism and its relation to the scheme-content distinction. 
It is, after all, this infamous third dogma of empiricism that 
Davidson argues leads to the epistemological search for a justi- 
ficatory foundation in experience. And we have seen that it is 
this reading of the consequences of this distinction that results 
in his critical stance toward Quine’s project. But Quine’s accep- 
tance of empiricism and the scheme-content distinction has 
none of the foundationalist motivations or specific concerns over 
justification found in Davidson’s critical remarks. The source of 
both of these commitments is to be found in Quine’s adoption of 
a scientific perspective in epistemology. We have noted that he 
takes the truth of empiricism to be a scientific finding and that 
the scheme-content distinction follows as a basic corollary of 
this commitment. Quine’s insistence on a distinction between 
theory and evidence is grounded in science itself, since he thinks 
our best scientific understanding recommends we note a differ- 
ence between our scientific theorizing and the evidence for this 
theory. This division between scheme and content or theory and 
evidence is then based on his scientific worldview, where scien- 
tific theories explain that all our knowledge is based on sensory 
stimulation, thereby marking a divide between human-made 
theoretical attempts to explain the data and the data itself.21 
Examining Quine’s emphasis on these elements of his view 
requires noting how they are situated within his scientific per- 
spective on epistemological issues. His philosophical commit- 
ments remain scientific ones that exist as part of a larger overall 
scientific theory that receives its support through the very sen- 
sory channels that Quine seeks to clarify with his own epistemo- 
logical project. Davidson’s criticisms do not then engage with 
the real source of Quine’s commitments to this view and, thus, 
do not see how they are connected to his different set of explan- 
atory concerns. With regard to Quine’s naturalized conceptions 
of epistemology and empiricism, Davidson’s critical attribution 
of the third dogma fails to fully appreciate their role within 
Quine’s scientific reformulation of the epistemological tasks of 
empiricism.21 
468

--- Page 15 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
Notes 
Davidson first makes this charge in his “On the Very Idea of a 
Conceptual Scheme” (1974). Rorty’s critical remarks can be found in 
his 1991 (51, 145). For a detailed reply to Rorty’s criticisms of Quine, see 
Hylton 1997. 
For Davidson’s further references to Quine’s view, see his 1974 
and 1990. The quote given here is discussed by Davidson in his 1989 
(161). 
Davidson (2001a, 286) has recently mentioned that it is this point 
that constitutes his central argument against empiricism, which is 
why it is my main focus here. I thus pass over Davidson’s further 
worries about the skeptical consequences of Quine’s adherence to the 
third dogma. For some useful discussions of this issue see Bergstrom 
2001, Gibson 1995, Ramberg 2001, and Tersman 2001. Davidson’s 
depiction of uexperience” and its role in justification is widely disputed. 
Philosophers such as McDowell (1994) and Pryor (2000) develop 
alternative views of perceptual experience where it proves capable of 
justifying our beliefs. My discussion should not then be read as an 
endorsement of Davidson’s overall framing of these issues. 
Also see Davidson 2001a, 286. When stated in such terms, 
Davidson appears to be making a conceptual point concerning the 
proper use of terms such as “evidence” and “justification.” While this 
issue cannot be pursued further here, this framing of the problem 
suggests a basic conflict with Quine’s insistence on the empirical 
formulation of philosophical questions and hypotheses. 
Of the many commentators who have raised this charge against 
Quine, several prominent ones would include Bonjour 1998, Kim 1993, 
and McDowell 1994. My 2004 defends an interpretation of Quine’s 
epistemology that emphasizes its normative elements. 
For Quine’s claim that empiricism is a finding of science see his 
1966 (239) and 1969 (75). 
For a recent overview see Quine’s 1995c. 
Quine’s early programmatic statement of this project is found in 
his 1969. He provides further details in his 1975, 1992, 1995a, and 
elsewhere. 
In order to avoid possible confusion over his use of “stimulation” 
or “stimulus,” Quine now favors “neural intake” as his naturalistic 
counterpart to sensory experience. This makes clear his continuing 
interest in locating the relevant stimulus at the subject’s surfaces 
rather than with objects in the subject’s surrounding environment. 
lo This explains Quine’s agreement with Davidson that in his 
theory of evidence, “evidence” is not clarified and plays no role (Quine 
1990). 
l1 For more on these differing senses of “evidence,” see Quine and 
Ullian 1978 (14-15) and Koppelberg 1998 (263-64). 
Quine makes a distinction between neural input as strictly causal 
and observation sentences as containing processed information in his 
“Grades of Theoreticity” (1970, 3). 
l3 In response to Gibson, Quine notes that Davidson’s critical 
remarks on his use of evidence led him to “fight shy of the word” (1994, 
502). He makes similar comments in a recent reply to Grayling (2000a, 
411). 
469

--- Page 16 ---

Robert Sinclair 
l4 Quine is explicit on this point in his “Response to Lehrer” (2000b, 
l5 Here I am indebted to remarks from Jonathan Adler. 
l6 For an account of Quine’s project in large harmony with my own, 
but which does not stress its connections to the third dogma, see 
Johnsen 2005. Johnsen argues that Quine never abandoned normative 
epistemology although his presentation unfortunately makes it look 
that way (2005,791. 
l7 Gibson takes this passage as demonstrating that Quine is not 
committed to the empirical given within his naturalized account of 
knowledge, but he never fully explains why this is the case, nor does he 
indicate how this point is connected to the scheme-content distinction. 
The remarks that follow are intended to pursue these issues in more 
detail. 
l8 Hylton also emphasizes that sensory stimulations are not given, 
but simply happen to us. They do not then form part of an epistemic, 
justificatory relation (1997, 78). 
412). 
l9 Koppelberg also makes this point in his 1990 (209). 
2o After reaching similar conclusions concerning Quine’s view of 
evidence, Koppelberg wonders further whether Quine accepts what he 
calls Davidson’s “doxastic requirement” on justification (1998, 264). 
Given the interpretation defended here, we should recognize that for 
Quine the question does not simply involve a choice between Davidson’s 
conception of evidence and Quine’s own emphasis on the value of neural 
input. Rather, as we have seen, Quine’s naturalized conception of 
epistemology finds room for both conceptions of evidence, and to this 
extent he accepts Davidson’s doxastic requirement. However, this 
cannot be the entire story with regard to evidence, since it remains 
important to consider the causal notions of evidence required to meet 
Quine’s interest in scientifically clarifying the relation between stimulus 
and science. The point that needs emphasizing is that rather than 
taking a side on this issue, Quine demonstrates how he thinks the 
demands of both conceptions of evidence can find a place in his natur- 
alized account of knowledge. 
21 Hylton makes this same point in criticizing Rorty’s use of the 
scheme-content distinction as a basis for attacking Quine’s natural- 
ized epistemology (1997, 80). 
22 T am grateful to Jonathan Adler for his comments on an earlier 
draft of this essay. 
References 
Bergstrom, Lars. 2001. Davidson’s objections to Quine’s empiricism. In 
Interpreting Davidson, ed. Petr Kotatko, Peter Pagin, and Gabriel 
Segal. Stanford, CA: CLSI Publications. 
Bonjour, Laurence. 1998. In defense of pure reason. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 
Davidson, Donald. 1974. On the very idea of a conceptual scheme. 
Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Associa- 
tion 47:5-20. Reprinted in Davidson 1984, 183-98. 
. 1982. Empirical content. Grazer Philosophische Studien 16-17: 
471-89. Reprinted in Davidson 2001b, 159-75. 
. 1984. Inquiries into truth and interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
470

--- Page 17 ---

Quine’s Naturalized Epistemology and the Third Dogma of Empiricism 
Davidson, Donald. 1989. The myth of the subjective. In Relativism: 
Znterpretation and confrontation, ed. Michael Krausz. Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press. Reprinted in Davidson 2001b, 39- 
52. 
. 1990. A coherence theory of truth and knowledge. In Reading 
Rorty, ed. Alan Malachowski. Cambridge: Blackwell. Reprinted in 
Davidson 2001b, 137-57. 
. 1997. Seeing through language. In Thought and language, ed. 
John Preston. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
. 2001a. Comments on Karlovy Vary papers. In Interpreting 
Davidson, ed. Petr Kotatko, Peter Pagin, and Gabriel Segal. 
Stanford, CA CLSI Publications. 
.2001b. Subjective, intersubjective, objective. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
Gibson, Roger F. 1995. Quine on the naturalizing of epistemology. In 
On Quine: New essays, ed. Paolo Leonardi and Marco Santambrogio. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
.1999. McDowell on Quine, Davidson and epistemology. In Donald 
Davidson, Truth, Meaning and Knowledge, ed. Urszula Zeglen. 
London: Routledge. 
Hylton, Peter, 1997. Rorty and Quine on scheme and content. Philo- 
sophical Topics 2567-86. 
Johnsen, Bredo. 2005. How to read “Epistemology Naturalized.” Journal 
of Philosophy 102:78-93. 
Kim, Jaegwon. 1993. What is “naturalized epistemology”? In Super- 
uenience and mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Koppelberg, Dirk. 1990. Why and how to naturalize epistemology. In 
Perspectives on Quine, ed. Robert Barrett and Roger Gibson. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
. 1998. Foundationalism and coherentism reconsidered. Erkenntnis 
49: 255-83. 
McDowell, John. 1994. Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Pryor, James. 2000. The sceptic and the dogmatist. Nolis 34:517-49. 
Quine, W. V. 1953. Two dogmas of empiricism. In From a logical point 
of view. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
. 1960. Word and object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
. 1966. Posits and reality. In The ways of paradox and other 
essays. New York Random House. 
. 1969. Epistemology naturalized. In Ontological relativity and 
other essays. New York Columbia University Press. 
. 1970. Grades of theoreticity. In Experience and theory, ed. 
Lawrence Foster and J. W. Swanson. Amherst: University of Massa- 
chusetts Press. 
.1975. The nature of natural knowledge. In Mind and language, 
ed. Samuel Guttenplan. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
. 1981. On the very idea of a third dogma. In Theories and things. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
. 1990. Comment on Davidson. In Perspectives on Quine, ed. 
Robert Barrett and Roger Gibson. Oxford: Blackwell. 
. 1992. Pursuit of truth. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press. 
. 1993. In praise of observation sentences. Journal of Philosophy 
90:107-16. 
47 1

--- Page 18 ---

Robert Sinclair 
Quine, W. V. 1994. Response to Gibson. Inquiry 37:501-502. 
. 1995a. From stimulus to science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press. 
. 199513. Reactions. In On Quine: New essays, ed. Paolo Leonardi 
and Marco Santambrogio. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
. 1995c. Naturalism: Or livine within one’s means. Dialectica 49: ., 
25 1-6 1. 
. 1997. Response to Lewis and Holdcroft. Revue Znternationale de 
Philosophie 51:575-77. 
.2000a. Response to Grayling. In Knowledge, language and logic, 
ed. Alex Orenstein and Petr Kotatko. London: Kluwer. 
.2000b. Response to Lehrer. In Knowledge, language and logic, 
ed. Alex Orenstein and Petr Kotatko. London: Kluwer. 
Quine, W. V., and J. S. Ullian. 1978. The web of belief. New York Random 
House. 
Ramberg, Bjern. 2001. What Davidson said to the Sceptic or: Anti- 
representationalism, triangulation and the naturalization of the 
subjective. In Interpreting Davidson, ed. Petr Kotatko, Peter Pagin, 
and Gabriel Segal. Stanford, CA: CLSI Publications. 
Rorty, Richard. 1991. Objectivity, relativism and truth. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 
Sinclair, Robert. 2004. When naturalized epistemology turns normative: 
Kim on the failures of Quinean epistemology. Southwest Philosophy 
Review 20:53-67. 
Tersman, Folke. 2001. Davidson and Quine’s empiricism. In Interpreting 
Davidson, ed. Petr Kotatko, Peter Pagin, and Gabriel Segal. Stan- 
ford, CA: CLSI Publications. 
472
