--- Page 1 ---

J. A. FODOR 
KAP ARCHIEF 
SPECIAL SCIENCES (OR: THE DISUNITY OF 
SCIENCE AS A WORKING HYPOTHESIS)* 
A typical thesis of positivistic philosophy of science is that all true 
theories in the special sciences should reduce to physical theories in the 
long run. This is intended to be an empirical thesis, and part of the 
evidence which supports it is provided by such scientific successes as the 
molecular theory of heat and the physical explanation of the chemical 
bond. But the philosophical popularity of the reductivist program cannot 
be explained by reference to these achievements alone. The development 
of science has witnessed the proliferation of specialized disciplines at 
least as often as it has witnessed their reduction to physics, so the wide- 
spread enthusiasm for reduction can hardly be a mere induction over 
its past successes. 
I think that many philosophers who accept reductivism do so primarily 
because they wish to endorse the generality of physics vis d vis the 
special sciences: roughly, the view that all events which fall under the 
laws of any science are physical events and hence fall under the laws of 
physics. 1 For such philosophers, saying that physics is basic science 
and saying that theories in the special sciences must reduce to physical 
theories have seemed to be two ways of saying the same thing, so that the 
latter doctrine has come to be a standard construal of the former. 
In what follows, I shall argue that this is a considerable confusion. 
What has traditionally been called 'the unity of science' is a much 
stronger, and much less plausible, thesis than the generality of physics. 
If this is true it is important. Though reductionism is an empirical 
doctrine, it is intended to play a regulative role in scientific practice. 
Reducibility to physics is taken to be a constraint upon the acceptability 
of theories in the special sciences, with the curious consequence that the 
more the special sciences succeed, the more they ought to disappear. 
Methodological problems about psychology, in particular, arise in just 
this way: the assumption that the subject-matter of psychology is part 
of the subject-matter of physics is taken to imply that psychological 
theories must reduce to physical theories, and it is this latter principle 
Synthese 28 (1974) 97-115. All Rights Reserved 
Copyright © 1974 by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht-Holland

--- Page 2 ---

98 J. A, FODOR 
that makes the trouble. I want to avoid the trouble by challenging 
the inference. 
Reductivism is the view that all the special sciences reduce to physics. 
The sense of 'red~.lce to' is, however, proprietary. It can be characterized 
as follows. 2 
Let 
(1) Six --r Szx 
be a law of the special science S. ((1) is intended to be read as something 
like 'all $1 situations bring about $2 situations'. I assume that a science 
is individuated largely by reference to its typical predicates, hence that 
if S is a special science '$1' and '$2' are not predicates of basic physics, 
I also assume that the 'all' which quantifies laws of the special sciences 
needs to be taken with a grain of salt; such laws are typically not ex- 
ceptionless. This is a point to which I shall return at length.) A necessary 
and sufficient condition of the reduction of (1) to a law of physics is that 
the formulae (2) and (3) be laws, and a necessary and sufficient condition 
of the reduction of S to physics is that all its laws be so reducible. 3 
(2a) S~x ~ Plx 
(2b) S2x ~ P2x 
(3) elx ~ P2x. 
'Pt' and 'P2' are supposed to be predicates of physics, and (3) is 
supposed to be a physical law. Formulae like (2) are often called 'bridge' 
laws. Their characteristic feature is that they contain predicates of both 
the reduced and the reducing science. Bridge laws like (2) are thus con, 
trasted with 'proper' laws like (1) and (3). The upshot of the remarks so 
far is that the reduction of a science requires that any formula which 
appears as the antecedent or consequent of one of its proper laws must 
appear as the reduced formula in some bridge law or other. 4 
Several points about the connective '~' are in order. First, whatever 
other properties that connective may have, it is universally agreed that 
it must be transitive. This is important because it is usually assumed 
that the reduction of some of the special sciences proceeds via bridge laws 
which connect their predicates with those of intermediate reducing

--- Page 3 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 99 
theories. Thus, psychology is presumed to reduce to physics via, say, 
neurology, biochemistry, and other local stops. The present point is that 
this makes no difference to the logic of the situation so long as the transi- 
tivity of '~' is assumed. Bridge laws which connect the predicates of S to 
those of S* will satisfy the constraints upon the reduction of S to physics 
so long as there are other bridge laws which, directly or indirectly, connect 
the predicates of S* to physical predicates. 
There are, however, quite serious open questions about the interpreta- 
tions of '-~' in bridge laws. What turns on these questions is the respect 
in which reductivism is taken to be a physicalist thesis. 
To begin with, if we read '-~' as 'brings about' or 'causes' in proper 
laws, we will have to have some other connective for bridge laws, since 
bringing about and causing are presumably asymmetric, while bridge 
laws express symmetric relations. Moreover, if '~' in bridge laws is 
interpreted as any relation other than identity, the truth of reductivism 
will only guaranty the truth of a weak version of physicalism, and this 
would fail to express the underlying ontological bias of the reductivist 
program. 
If bridge laws are not identity statements, then formulae like (2) 
claim at most that, by law, x's satisfaction of a P predicate and x's 
satisfaction of an S predicate are causally correlated. It follows from 
this that it is nomologically necessary that S and P predicates apply to 
the same things (i.e., that S predicates apply to a subset of the things 
that P predicates apply to). But, of course, this is compatible with a 
non-physicalist ontology since it is compatible with the possibility that 
x's satisfying S should not itself be a physical event. On this inter- 
pretation, the truth of reductivism does not guaranty the generality of 
physics vis ?tvis the special sciences since there are some events (satis- 
factions of S predicates) which fall in the domains of a special science 
(S) but not in the domain of physics. (One could imagine, for example, a 
doctrine according to which physical and psychological predicates are 
both held to apply to organisms, but where it is denied that the event 
which consists of an organism's satisfying a psychological predicate is, in 
any sense, a physical event. The up-shot would be a kind of psychophys- 
ical dualism of a non-Cartesian variety; a dualism of events and/or 
properties rather than substances.) 
Given these sorts of considerations, many philosophers have held that

--- Page 4 ---

100 a.A. FODOR 
bridge laws like (2) ought to be taken to express contingent event identi- 
fies, so that one would read (2a) in some such fashion as 'every event 
which consists of x's satisfying S1 is identical to some event which con- 
sists of x's satisfying P1 and vice versa'. On this reading, the truth of 
reductivism would entail that every event that falls under any scientific 
law is a physical event, thereby simultaneously expressing the ontological 
bias of reductivism and guaranteeing the generality of physics vis ~t vis 
the special sciences. 
If the bridge laws express event identities, and if every event that 
falls under the proper laws of a special Science falls under a bridge 
law, we get the truth of a doctrine that I shall call 'token physicalism'. 
Token physicalism is simply the claim that all the events that the sciences 
talk about are physical events. There are three things to notice about 
token physicalism. 
First, it is weaker than what is usually called 'materialism'. Materialism 
claims both that token physicalism is true and that every event falls 
under the laws of some science or other. One could therefore be a 
token physicalist without being a materialist, though I don't see why 
anyone would bother. 
Second, token physicalism is weaker than what might be called 'type 
physicalism', the doctrine, roughly, that every property mentioned in the 
laws of any science is a physical property. Token physicaiism does not 
entail type physicalism because the contingent identity of a pair of events 
presumably does not guarantee the identity of the, properties whose in- 
stantiation constitutes the events; not even where the event identity is 
nomologically necessary. On the other hand, if every event is the in- 
stantiation of a property, then type physicalism does ential token 
physicalism: two events will be identical when they consist of the in- 
stantiation of the same property by the same individual at the same time. 
Third, token physicalism is weaker than reductivism. Since this point 
is, in a certain sense, the burden of the argument to follow, I shan't 
labour it here. But, as a first approximation, reductivism is the con- 
junction of token physiealism with the assumption that there are natural 
kind predicates in an ideally completed physics which correspond to 
each natural kind predicate in any ideally completed special science. 
It will be one of my morals that the truth of reductivism cannot be in- 
ferred from the assumption that token physicalism is true. Reductivism

--- Page 5 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 101 
is a sufficient, but not a necessary, condition for token physicalism. 
In what follows, I shall assume a reading of reductivism which entails 
token physicalism. Bridge laws thus state nomologicaUy necessary con- 
tingent event identities, and a reduction of psychology to neurology would 
entail that any event which consists of the instantiation of a psycho- 
logical property is identical with some event which consists of the in- 
stantiation of some neurological property. 
Where we have got to is this: reductivism entails the generality of 
physics in at least the sense that any event which fails within the universe 
of discourse of a special science will also fall within the universe of 
discourse of physics. Moreover, any prediction which follows from the 
laws of a special science and a statement of initial conditions will also 
follow from a theory which consists of physics and the bridge laws, 
together with the statement of initial conditions. Finally, since 'reduces 
to' is supposed to be an asymmetric relation, it will also turn out that 
physics is the basic science; that is, if reductivism is true, physics is the 
only science that is general in the sense just specified. I now want to 
argue that reductivism is too strong a constraint upon the unity of 
science, but that the relevantly weaker doctrine will preserve the desired 
consequences of reductivism: token physicalism, the generality of physics, 
and its basic position among the sciences. 
II 
Every science implies a taxonomy of the events in its universe of dis- 
course. In particular, every science employs a descriptive vocabulary 
of theoretical and observation predicates such that events fall under the 
laws of the science by virtue of satisfying those predicates. Patently, not 
every true description of an event is a description in such a vocabulary, 
For example, there are a large number of events which consist of things 
having been transported to a distance of less than three miles from the 
Eiffel Tower. I take it, however, that there is no science which contains 'is 
transported to a distance of less than three miles from the Eiffel Tower' 
as part of its descriptive vocabulary. Equivalently, I take it that there is 
no natural law which applies to events in virtue of their being instantia- 
tions of the property is transported to a distance of less than three miles 
from the Eiffel Tower (though I suppose it is conceivable that there is

--- Page 6 ---

102 J.A. FODOR 
some law that applies to events in virtue of their being instantiations of 
some distinct but co-extensive property). By way of abbreviating these 
facts, I shall say that the property is transported.., does not determine 
a natural kind, and that predicates which express that property are not 
natural kind predicates. 
If I knew what a law is, and if I believed that scientific theories 
consist just of bodies of laws, then I could say that P is a natural kind 
predicate relative to S iff S contains proper laws of the form Px -* ex 
or e~ ~ P~; roughly, the natural kind predicates of a science are the 
ones whose terms are the bound variables in its proper laws. I am inclined 
to say this even in my present state of ignorance, accepting the con- 
sequence that it makes the murky notion of a natural kind viciously 
dependent on the equally murky notions law and theory. There is no 
firm footing here. If we disagree about what is a natural kind, we will 
probably also disagree about what is a law, and for the same reasons. 
I don't know how to break out of this eircle, but I think that there are 
interesting things to say about which circle we are in. 
For example, we can now characterize the respect in which reductivism 
is too strong a construal of the doctrine of the unity of science. If re- 
ductivism is true, then every natural kind is, or is co-extensive with, a 
physical natural kind. (Every natural kind is a physical natural kind if 
bridge laws express property identities, and every natural kind is co- 
extensive with a physical natural kind if bridge laws express event 
identities.) This follows immediately from the reductivist premise that 
every predicate which appears as the antecedent or consequent of a 
law of the special sciences must appear as one of the reduced predicates 
in some bridge, together with the assumption that the natural kind pred- 
icates are the ones whose terms are the bound variables in proper laws. 
If, in short, some physical law is related to each law of a special science in 
the way that (3) is related to (1), then every natural kind predicate of a 
special science is related to a natural kind predicate of physics in the way 
that (2) relates 'S 1' and '$2' to 'Pt' and 'P2'- 
I now want to suggest some reasons for believing that this consequence 
of reductivism is intolerable. These are not supposed to be knock-down 
reasons; they couldn't be, given that the question whether reductivism 
is too strong is finally an empirical question. (The world could turn out 
to be such that every natural kind corresponds to a physical natural

--- Page 7 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 103 
kind, just as it could turn out to be such that the property is transported 
to a distance of less than three miles from the Eiffel Tower determines a 
natural kind in, say, hydrodynamics. It's just that, as things stand, it 
seems very unlikely that the world will turn out to be either of these 
ways.) 
The reason it is unlikely that every natural kind corresponds to a 
physical natural kind is just that (a) interesting generalizations (e.g., 
counter-factual supporting generalizations) can often be made about events 
whose physical descriptions have nothing in common, (b) it is often the 
case that whether the physical descriptions of the events subsumed by 
these generalizations have anything in common is, in an obvious sense, 
entirely irrelevant to the truth of the generalizations, or to their in- 
terestingness, or to their degree of confirmation or, indeed, to any of 
their epistemologically important properties, and (c) the special sciences 
are very much in the business of making generalizations of this kind. 
I take it that these remarks are obvious to the point of self-certification; 
they leap to the eye as soon as one makes the (apparently radical) move 
of taking the special sciences at all seriously. Suppose, for example, 
that Gresham's 'law' really is true. (If one doesn't like Gresham's law, 
then any true generalization of any conceivable future economics will 
probably do as well.) Gresham's law says something about what will 
happen in monetary exchanges under certain conditions. I am willing 
to believe that physics is general in the sense that it implies that any event 
which consists of a monetary exchange (hence any event which falls under 
Gresham's law) has a true description in the vocabulary of physics and in 
virtue of which it falls under the laws of physics. But banal considerations 
suggest that a description which covers all such events must be wildly 
disjunctive. Some monetary exchanges involve strings of wampum. Some 
involve dollar bills. And some involve signing one's name to a check. 
What are the chances that a disjunction of physical predicates which covers 
all these events (i.e., a disjunctive predicate which can form the fight 
hand side of a bridge law of the form 'x is a monetary exchange ~...') 
expresses a physical natural kind? In particular, what are the chances 
that such a predicate forms the antecedent or consequent of some proper 
law of physics? The point is that monetary exchanges have interesting 
things in common; Gresham's law, if true, says what one of these in- 
teresting things is. But what is interesting about monetary exchanges is

--- Page 8 ---

104 J.A. rOt)OR 
surely not their commonalities under physical description. A natural 
kind like a monetary exchange couM turn out to be co-extensive With a 
physical natural kind; but if it did, that would be an accident on a cosmic 
scale. 
In fact, the situation for reductivism is still worse than the discussion 
thus far suggests. For, reductivism claims not only that all natural kinds 
are co-extensive with physical natural kinds, but that the co-extensions 
are nomologically necessary: bridge laws are laws. So, if Gresham's law 
is true, it follows that there is a (bridge) law of nature such that 'x is a 
monetary exchange ~- x is P', where P is a term for a physical natural 
kind. But, surely, there is no such law. If there were, then P would have 
to cover not only all the systems of monetary exchange that there are, 
but also all the systems of monetary exchange that there could be; a law 
must succeed with the counterfactuals. What physical predicate is a 
candidate for 'P' in 'x is a nomologically possible monetary exchange 
iff 'x'? 
To summarize: an immortal econophysicist might, when the whole 
show is over, find a predicate in physics that was, in brute fact, co- 
extensive with 'is a monetary exchange'. If physics is general - if the 
ontological biases of reductivism are true - then there must be such a 
predicate. But (a) to paraphrase a remark Donald Davidson made in a 
slightly different context, nothing but brute enumeration could convince 
us of this brute co-extensivity, and (b) there would seem to be no chance 
at all that the physical predicate employed in stating the coextensivity 
is a natural kind term, and (c) there is still less chance that the co- 
extension would be lawful (i.e., that it would hold not only for the 
nomologically possible world that turned out to be real, but for any 
nomologically possible world at all). 
I take it that the preceding discussion strongly suggests that economics 
is not reducible to physics in the proprietary sense of reduction involved 
in claims for the unity of science. There is, I suspect, nothing special 
about economics in this respect; the reasons why economics is unlikely 
to reduce to physics are paralleled by those which suggest that psychology 
is unlikely to reduce to neurology. 
ff psychology is reducible to neurology, then for every psychological 
natural kind predicate there is a co-extensive neurological natural kind 
predicate, and the generalization which states this co-extension is a law.

--- Page 9 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 10S 
Clearly, many psychologists believe something of the sort. There are 
departments of 'psycho-biology' or 'psychology and brain science' in 
universities throughout the world whose very existence is an institu- 
tionalized gamble that such lawful co-extensions can be found. Yet, as 
has been frequently remarked in recent discussions of materialism, there 
are good grounds for hedging these bets. There are no firm data for any 
but the grossest correspondence between types of psychological states 
and types of neurological states, and it is entirely possible that the nervous 
system of higher organisms characteristically achieves a given psycho- 
logical end by a wide variety of neurological means. If so, then the at- 
tempt to pair neurological structures with psychological functions is 
foredoomed. Physiological psychologists of the stature of Karl Lashley 
have held precisely this view. 
The present point is that the reductivist program in psychology is, 
in any event, not to be defended on ontological grounds. Even if (token) 
psychological events are (token) neurological events, it does not follow 
that the natural kind predicates of psychology are co-extensive with the 
natural kind predicates of any other discipline (including physics). That 
is, the assumption that every psychological event is a physical event does 
not guaranty that physics (or, afortiori, any other discipline more general 
than psychology) can provide an appropriate vocabulary for psycho- 
logical theories. I emphasize this point because I am convinced that the 
make-or-break commitment of many physiological psychologists to the 
reductivist program stems precisely from having confused that program 
with (token) physicalism. 
What I have been doubting is that there are neurological natural 
kinds co-extensive with psychological natural kinds. What seems in- 
creasingly clear is that, even if there is such a co-extension, it cannot 
be lawlike. For, it seems increasingly likely that there are nomologically 
possible systems other than organisms (namely, automata) which satisfy 
natural kind predicates in psychology, and which satisfy no neurological 
predicates at all. Now, as Putnam has emphasized, if there are any such 
systems, then there are probably vast numbers, since equivalent automata 
can be made out of practically anything. If this observation is correct, 
then there can be no serious hope that the class of automata whose psy- 
chology is effectively identical to that of some organism can be described 
by physical natural kind predicates (though, of course, if token physi-

--- Page 10 ---

106 J.A. FODOR 
calims is true, that class can be picked out by some physical predicate 
or other). The upshot is that the classical formulation of the unity of 
science is at the mercy of progress in the field of computer simulation. 
This is, of course, simply to say that that formulation was too strong. 
The unity of science was intended to be an empirical hypothesis, defeasible 
by possible scientific findings. But no one had it in mind that it should 
be defeated by Newell, Shaw and Simon. 
I have thus far argued that psychological reductivism (the doctrine 
that every psychological natural kind is, or is co-extensive with, a 
neurological natural kind)is not equivalent to, and cannot be inferred 
from, token physicalism (the doctrine that every psychological event is 
a neurological event). It may, however, be argued that one might as 
well take the doctrines to be equivalent since the only possible evidence 
one could have for token physicalism would also be evidence for re- 
ductivism: namely, the discovery of type-to-type psychophysical cor- 
relations. 
A moment's consideration shows, however, that this argument is not 
well taken. If type-to-type psychophysical correlations would be evidence 
for token physicalism, so would correlations of other specifiable kinds. 
We have type-to-type correlations where, for every n-tuple of events 
that are of the same psychological kind, there is a correlated n-tuple of 
events that are of the same neurological kind. Imagine a world in which 
such correlations are not forthcoming. What is found, instead, is that 
for every n-tuple of type identical psychological events, there is a spatio- 
temporally correlated n-tuple of type distinct neurological events. That is, 
every psychological event is paired with some neurological event or 
other, but psychological events of the same kind may be paired with 
neurological events of different kinds. My present point is that such 
pairings would provide as much support for token physicalism as type- 
to-type pairings do so long as we are able to show that the type distinct 
neurological events paired with a given kind of psychological event are 
identical in respect of whatever properties are relevant to type-identification 
in psychology. Suppose, for purposes of explication, that psychological 
events are type identified by reference to their behavioral consequences. 5 
Then what is required of all the neurological events paired with a class 
of type homogeneous psychological events is only that they be identical 
in respect of their behavioral consequences. To put it briefly, type identical

--- Page 11 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 107 
events do not, of course, have all their properties in common, and type 
distinct events must nevertheless be identical in some of their properties. 
The empirical confirmation of token physicalism does not depend on 
showing that the neurological counterparts of type identical psychological 
events are themselves type identical. What needs to be shown is only that 
they are identical in respect of those properties which determine which 
kind of psychological event a given event is. 
Could we have evidence that an otherwise heterogeneous set of neuro- 
logical events have these kinds of properties in common? Of course 
we could. The neurological theory might itself explain why an n-tuple 
of neurologically type distinct events are identical in their behavioral 
consequences, or, indeed, in respect of any of indefinitely many other 
such relational properties. And, if the neurological theory failed to do so, 
some science more basic than neurology might succeed. 
My point in all this is, once again, not that correlations between type 
homogeneous psychological states and type heterogeneous neurological 
states would prove that token physicalism is true. It is only that such 
correlations might give us as much reason to be token physicalists as 
type-to-type correlations would. If this is correct, then the epistemological 
arguments from token physicalism to reductivism must be wrong. 
It seems to me (to put the point quite generally) that the classical 
construal of the unity of science has really misconstrued the goal of 
scientific reduction. The point of reduction is not primarily to find 
some natural kind predicate of physics co-extensive with each natural 
kind predicate of a reduced science. It is, rather, to explicate the physical 
mechanisms whereby events conform to the laws of the special sciences: 
I have been arguing that there is no logical or epistemologieal reason 
why success in the second of these projects should require success in 
the first, and that the two are likely to come apart in fact wherever the 
physical mechanisms whereby events conform to a law of the special 
sciences are heterogeneous. 
III 
I take it that the discussion thus far shows that reductivism is probably 
too strong a construal of the unity of science; on the one hand, it is 
incompatible with probable results in the special sciences, and, on the

--- Page 12 ---

108 s.A. FODOR 
other, it is more than we need to assume if what we primarily want 
is just to be good token physicalists. In what follows, I shall try to sketch 
a liberalization of reductivism which seems to me to be just strong 
enough in these respects. I shall then give a couple of independent reasons 
for supposing that the revised doctrine may be the right one. 
The problem all along has been that there is an open empirical pos- 
sibility that what corresponds to the natural kind predicates of a reduced 
science may be a heterogeneous and unsystematic disjunction of pre- 
dicates in the reducing science, and we do not want the unity of science 
to be prejudiced by this possibility. Suppose, then, that we allow that 
bridge statements may be of the form 
(4) Sx ~ Plxv P2x v... v Pnx, 
where 'P1 v P2 v... v Pn' is not a natural kind predicate in the reducing 
science. I take it that this is tantamount to allowing that at least some 
'bridge laws' may, in fact, not turn out to be laws, since I take it that a 
necessary condition on a universal generalization being lawlike is that 
the predicates which consitute its antecedent and consequent should pick 
out natural kinds. I am thus supposing that it is enough, for purposes 
of the unity of science, that every law of the special sciences should be 
reducible to physics by bridge statements which express true empirical 
generalizations. Bearing in mind that bridge statements are to be con- 
strued as a species of identity statements, (4) will be read as something 
like 'every event which consists of x's satisfying S is identical with some 
event which consists of x's satisfying some or other predicate belonging 
to the disjunction 'P1 v P2 v... v Pn'.' 
Now, in cases of reduction where what corresponds to (2) is not a law, 
what corresponds to (3) will not be either, and for the same reason. 
Namely, the predicates appearing in the antecedent or consequent will, by 
hypothesis, not be natural kind predicates. Rather, what we will have is 
something that looks like (5) (see next page). 
That is, the antecedent and consequent of the reduced law will each be 
connected with a disjunction of predicates in the reducing science, and, if 
the reduced law is exceptionless, there will be laws of the reducing science 
which connect the satisfaction of each member of the disjunction as- 
sociated with the antecedent to the satisfaction of some member of the 
disjunction associated with the consequent. That is, if Six ~ S2x is

--- Page 13 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 109 
(5) Law of special science X: S~x 
e0~ ~ 8 o 
Disjunctive predicate 
of reducing science: P~x v P2x...P,x 
I > 
> 
i > 
> S~x 
e*x. e* x... e*x 
'l I 
exceptionless, then there must be some proper law of the reducing science 
which either states or entails that Plx ~ P* for some P*, and similarly 
for P2 x through P,x. Since there must be such laws, it follows that each 
disjunct of 'P1 v P2 v... v P,' is a natural kind predicate, as is each 
disjunct of 'P* v P* v... v P*'. 
This, however, is where push comes to shove. For, it might be argued 
that if each disjunct of the P disjunction is lawfully connected to some 
disjunct of the P* disjunction, it follows that (6) is itself a law. 
(6) Plxv Pzx v ... v P,x ~ P~x v P]xv... v P*x. 
The point would be that (5) gives us Plx --+ P~x, P2x * Pmx, etc., and 
the argument from a premise of the form (P = R) and (Q D S) to a con- 
clusion of the form (P v Q) = (R v S) is valid. 
What I am inclined to say about this is that it just shows that 'it's 
a law that ' defines a non-truth functional context (or, equivalently 
for these purposes, that not all truth functions of natural kind predicates 
are themselves natural kind predicates). In particular, that one may not 
argue from 'it's a law that P brings about R' and 'it's a law that Q brings 
about S' to 'it's a law that P or Q brings about R or S'. (Though, of 
course, the argument from those premises to 'P or Q brings about R or S' 
simpliciter is fine.) I think, for example, that it is a law that the irradiation 
of green plants by sunlight causes carbohydrate synthesis, and I think 
that it is a law that friction causes heat, but I do not think that it is a 
law that (either the irradiation of green plants by sunlight or friction) 
causes (either carbohydrate synthesis or heat). Correspondingly, I doubt 
that 'is either carbohydrate synthesis or heat' is plausibly taken to be a 
natural kind predicate.

--- Page 14 ---

110 J.A. FODOR 
It is not strictly mandatory that one should agree with all this, but 
one denies it at a price. In particular, if one allows the full range of 
truth functional arguments inside the context 'it's a law that ', 
then one gives up the possibility of identifying the natural kind predicates 
of a science with those predicates which appear as the antecedents or the 
consequents of its proper laws. (Thus (6) would be a proper law of physics 
which fails to satisfy that condition.) One thus inherits the need for an 
alternative construal of the notion of a natural kind, and I don't know 
what that alternative might be like. 
The upshot seems to be this. If we do not require that bridge state- 
ments must be laws, then either some of the generalizations to which the 
laws of special sciences reduce are not themselves lawlike, or some laws 
are not formulable in terms of natural kinds. Whichever way one takes (5), 
the important point is that it is weaker than standard reductivism: it does 
not require correspondences between the natural kinds of the reduced and 
the reducing science. Yet it is physicalistic on the same assumption that 
makes standard reductivism physicalistic (namely, that the bridge state- 
ments express true token identies). But these are precisely the properties 
that we wanted a revised account of the unity of science to exhibit. 
I now want to give two reasons for thinking that this construal of the 
unity of science is right. First, it allows us to see how the laws of the 
special sciences could reasonably have exceptions, and, second, it allows 
us to see why there are special sciences at all. These points in turn. 
Consider, again, the model of reduction implicit in (2) and (3). I 
assume that the laws of basic science are strictly exceptionless, and I 
assume that it is common knowledge that the laws of the special sciences 
are not. But now we have a painful dilemma. Since '4' expresses a rela- 
tion (or relations) which must be transitive, (1) can have exceptions only 
if the bridge laws do. But if the bridge laws have exceptions, reductivism 
looses its ontological bite, since we can no longer say that every event 
which consists of the instantiation of an S predicate is identical with some 
event which consists of the instantiation of a P predicate. In short, 
given the reductionist model, we cannot consistently assume that the 
bridge laws and the basic laws are exceptionless while assuming that the 
special laws are not. But we cannot accept the violation of the bridge laws 
unless we are willing to vitiate the ontological claim that is the main point 
of the reductivist program.

--- Page 15 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 111 
We can get out of this (salve the model) in one of two ways. We can 
give up the claim that the special laws have exceptions or we can give up 
the claim that the basic laws are exceptionless. I suggest that both alter- 
natives are undesirable. The first because it files in the face of fact. There 
is just no chance at all that the true, counter-factual supporting generaliza- 
tions of, say, psychology, will turn out to hold in strictly each and every 
condition where their antecedents are satisfied. Even where the spirit is 
willing, the flesh is often weak. There are always going to be behavioral 
lapses which are physiologically explicable but which are uninteresting 
from the point of view of psychological theory. The second alternative is 
only slightly better. It may, after all, turn out that the laws of basic science 
have exceptions. But the question arises whether one wants the unity of 
science to depend upon the assumption that they do. 
On the account summarized in (5), however, everything works out 
satisfactorily. A nomologically sufficient condition for an exception to 
Six ~ S2x is that the bridge statements should identify some occurrence 
of the satisfaction of S 1 with an occurrence of the satisfaction of a P 
predicate which is not itself lawfully connected to the satisfaction of any 
P* predicate. (I.e., suppose S~ is connected to a P' such that there is no 
law which connects P' to any predicate which bridge statements as- 
sociate with $2. Then any instantiation of S~ which is contingently 
identical to an instantiation of P' will be an event which constitutes an 
exception to S~x ~ S2x.) Notice that, in this case, we need assume no 
exceptions to the laws of the reducing science since, by hypothesis, 
(6) is not a law. 
In fact, strictly speaking, (6) has no status in the reduction at all. 
It is simply what one gets when one universally quantifies a formula whose 
antecedent is the physical disjunction corresponding to $1 and whose con- 
sequent is the physical disjunction corresponding to $2. As such, it will be 
true when $1 ~ $2 is exceptionless and false otherwise. What does the 
work of expressing the physical mechanisms whereby n-tuples of events 
conform, or fail to conform, to $1 ~ $2 is not (6) but the laws which 
severally relate elements of the disjunction P1 v P2 v... v P, to elements 
of the disjunction P* v P* v... v P*. When there is a law which relates 
an event that satisfies one of the P disjuncts to an event which satisfies 
one of the P* disjunets, the pair of events so related conforms to S~ ~ S 2. 
When an event which satisfies a P predicate is not related by law to an

--- Page 16 ---

112 J.h. FODOR 
event which satisfies a P* predicate, that event will constitute an ex- 
ception to St ~ $2. The point is that none of the laws which effect 
these several connections need themselves have exceptions in order that 
$1 ~ $2 should do so. 
To put this discussion less technically: we could, if we liked, require 
the taxonomies of the special sciences to correspond to the taxonomy of 
physics by insisting upon distinctions between the natural kinds postulated 
by the former wherever they turn out to correspond to distinct natural 
kinds in the latter. This would make the laws of the special sciences ex- 
ceptionless if the laws of basic science are. But it would also loose us 
precisely the generalizations which we want the special sciences to express. 
(If economics were to posit as many kinds of monetary systems as there 
are kinds of physical realizations of monetary systems, then the generali- 
zations of economics would be exceptionless. But, presumbaly, only 
vacuously so, since there would be no generalizations left to state. 
Graham's law, for example, would have to be formulated as a vast, open 
disjunction about what happens in monetary system1 or monetary 
systemn under conditions which would themselves defy uniform charac- 
terization. We would not be able to say what happens in monetary 
systems tourt court since, by hypothesis, 'is a monetary system' cor- 
responds to no natural kind predicate of physics.) 
In fact, what we do is precisely the reverse. We allow the generaliza- 
tions of the special sciences to have exceptions, thus preserving the natural 
kinds to which the generalizations apply. But since we know that the 
physical descriptions of the natural kinds may be quite heterogeneous, 
and since we know that the physical mechanisms which connect the 
satisfaction of the antecedents of such generalizations to the satisfaction 
of their consequents may be equally diverse, we expect both that there 
will be exceptions to the generalizations and that these exceptions will be 
'explained away' at the level of the reducing science. This is one of the 
respects in which physics really is assumed to be bedrock science; 
exceptions to its generalizations (if there are any) had better be random, 
because there is nowhere 'further down' to go in explaining the mechanism 
whereby the exceptions occur. 
This brings us to why there are special sciences at all. Reducitivism 
as we remarked at the outset, flies in the face of the facts about the 
scientific institution: the existence of a vast and interleaved conglomerate

--- Page 17 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 113 
of special scientific disciplines which often appear to proceed with only 
the most token acknowledgment of the constraint that their theories 
must turn out to be physics 'in the long run'. I mean that the acceptance 
of this constraint, in practice, often plays little or no role in the validation 
of theories. Why is this so? Presumably, the reductivist answer must be 
entirely epistemological. If only physical particles weren't so small 
(if only brains were on the outside, where one can get a look at them), then 
we would do physics instead of palentology (neurology instead of 
psychology; psychology instead of economics; and so on down). There 
is an epistemological reply; namely, that even if brains were out where 
they can be looked at, as things now stand, we wouldn't know what to 
look for: we lack the appropriate theoretical apparatus for the psycho- 
logical taxonomy of neurological events. 
If it turns out that the functional decomposition of the nervous system 
corresponds to its neurological (anatomical, biochemical, physical) de- 
composition, then there are only epistemological reasons for studying 
the former instead of the latter. But suppose there is no such correspon- 
dence? Suppose the functional organization of the nervous system cross- 
cuts its neurological organization (so that quite different neurological 
structures can subserve identical psychological functions across times or 
across organisms). Then the existence of psychology depends not on the 
fact that neurons are so sadly small, but rather on the fact that neurology 
does not posit the natural kinds that psychology requires. 
I am suggesting, roughly, that there are special sciences not because 
of the nature of our epistemic relation to the world, but because of the 
way the world is put together: not all natural kinds (not all the classes 
of things and events about which there are important, counterfactual sup- 
porting generalizations to make) are, or correspond to, physical natural 
kinds. A way of stating the classical reductionist view is that things which 
belong to different physical kinds ipso facto can have no projectible de- 
scriptions in common; that if x and y differ in those descriptions by virtue 
of which they fall under the proper laws of physics, they must differ in 
those descriptions by virtue of which they fall under any laws at all. But 
why should we believe that this is so? Any pair of entities, however dif- 
ferent their physical structure, must nevertheless converge in indefinitely 
many of their properties. Why should there not be, among those con- 
vergent properties, some whose lawful inter-relations support the

--- Page 18 ---

114 J.A. FODOR 
generalizations of the special sciences? Why, in short, should not the 
natural kind predicates of the special sciences cross-classify the physical 
natural kinds ? 6 
Physics develops the taxonomy of its subject-matter which best suits its 
purposes: the formulation of exceptionless laws which are basic in the 
several senses discussed above. But this is not the only taxonomy which 
may be required if the purposes of science in general are to be served: e.g., 
if we are to state such true, counterfactual supporting generalizations as 
there are to state. So, there are special sciences, with their specialized 
taxonomies, in the business of stating some of these generalizations. If 
science is to be unified, then all such taxonomies must apply to the same 
things. If physics is to be basic science, then each of these things had 
better be a physical thing. But it is not further required that the taxonomies 
which the special sciences employ must themselves reduce to the taxonomy 
of physics. It is not required, and it is probably not true. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
NOTES 
* I wish to express my gratitude to Ned Block for having read a version of this paper 
and for the very useful comments he made. 
1 I shall usually assume that sciences are about events, in at least the sense that it is the 
occurrence of events that makes the laws of a science true. But I shall be pretty free with 
the relation between events, states, things and properties. I shall even permit myself 
some latitude in construing the relation between properties and predicates. I realize 
that all these relations are problems, but they aren't my problem in this paper. Ex- 
planation has to start somewhere, too. 
9. The version of reductionism I shall be concerned with is a stronger one than many 
philosophers of science hold; a point worth emphasizing since my argument will be 
precisely that it is too strong to get away with. Still, I think that what I shall be at- 
tacking is what many people have in mind when they refer to the unity of science, and I 
suspect (though I shan't try to prove it) that many of the liberalized versions suffer 
from the same basic defect as what I take to be the classical form of the doctrine. 
a There is an implicit assumption that a science simply is a formulation of a set of laws. 
I think this assumption is implausible, but it is usually made when the unity of science 
is discussed, and it is neutral so far as the main argument of this paper is concerned. 
4 I shall sometimes refer to 'the predicate which constitutes the antecedent or conse- 
quent of a law'. This is shorthand for 'the predicate such that the antecedent or con- 
sequent of a law consists of that predicate, together with its bound variables and the 
quantifiers which bind them'. (Truth functions of elementary predicates are, of course, 
themselves predicates in this usage.)

--- Page 19 ---

SPECIAL SCIENCES 115 
5 I don't think there is any chance at all that this is true. What is more likely is that 
type-identification for psychological states can be carried out in terms of the 'total 
states' of an abstract automaton which models the organism. For discussion, see Block 
and Fodor (1972). 
6 As, by the way, the predicates of natural languages quite certainly do. For discussion, 
see Chomsky (1965). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Block, N. and Fodor, J., 'What Psychological States Are Not', Philosophical Review 81 
(1972) 159-181. 
Chomsky, N., Aspects of the Theory ofSyntaes, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1965.
