=== PAGE 1 ===




=== PAGE 2 ===

THE DEVIL IN THE DETAILS


=== PAGE 3 ===

OXFORD STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
General Editor: Paul Humphreys, University of Virginia
The Book of Evidence
Peter Achinstein
Science, Truth, and Democracy
Philip Kitcher
The Devil in the Details: Asymptotic Reasoning
in Explanation, Reduction, and Emergence
Robert W. Batterman


=== PAGE 4 ===

THE DEVIL IN THE DETAILS
Asymptotic Reasoning in Explanation,
Reduction, and Emergence
Robert W. Batterman
OXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
2002


=== PAGE 5 ===

OXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Oxford 
New York
Athens 
Auckland 
Bangkok 
Bogota 
Buenos Aires 
Cape Town
Chennai 
Dares Salaam 
Delhi 
Florence 
Hong Kong 
Istanbul 
Karachi
Kolkata 
Kuala Lumpur 
Madrid 
Melbourne 
Mexico City 
Mumbai Nairobi
Paris 
Sao Paulo 
Shanghai 
Singapore 
Taipei 
Tokyo 
Toronto Warsaw
and associated companies in
Berlin 
Ibadan
Copyright © 2002 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
AH rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced.
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Batterman, Robert W.
The devil in the details : asymptotic reasoning in explanation, reduction,
and emergence / Robert W. Batterman
p. cm.
ISBN 0-19-514647-6
1. Reasoning. 2. Science—Philosophy.
3. Science—Methodology. 1. Title.
Q175.32.R45 B37 2002
153.4'3-dc21 
2001047453
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper


=== PAGE 6 ===

For Carolyn


=== PAGE 7 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 8 ===

Acknowledgments
This book is the result of many years of trying to understand certain aspects
of the relations that obtain between distinct physical theories. Much of my
research has been guided by the clear and fascinating work of Professor Sir
Michael Berry. As is clear to anyone who reads this book, my intellectual debt
to Professor Berry is very great indeed.
I also owe much to my teacher Lawrence Sklar, who taught me, among many
other things, how to approach philosophical issues in the foundations of physical
theory. My aim, unfortunately only asymptotically realized, has been to apply
this knowledge to gain insight into some of these philosophical debates.
Mark Wilson, too, has been a great help and a source of encouragement. I
want to especially thank him for many discussions that have helped me sharpen
my presentation of the issues considered in the book.
Many people have aided me in my research. I wish to thank William Wimsatt
for many discussions about intertheoretic reduction. Roger Jones has helped
me get clear about many of the issues discussed in this book. William Taschek
and Diana Raffman listened to my ramblings about multiple realizability and
universality for so long that it is difficult to express sufficiently my gratitude
for their tremendous help and patience. Justin D'Arms was of great help in
getting clear about many aspects of the arguments that appear in this book.
Sylvia Berryman has been a superb colleague. She read and provided valuable
comments on virtually every chapter of the book. I would also like to thank
Daniel Farrell, Dion Scott-Kakures, Joseph Mendola, George Pappas, and Alex
Rueger for helpful comments and discussions, both substantive and strategic,
about the writing of this book.
Several anonymous referees provided valuable criticism and commentary. I
hope that I have been able to address at least some of their worries.
I would also like to acknowledge the generous support of the National Science
Foundation for several grants that allowed me to pursue the research for this
book.
Some of the material in this book has been taken from previously pub-
lished papers. I wish to acknowledge Blackwell Publishers for permission to
use material from "Explanatory Instability," Nous, 36, pp. 325-348, (1992).
Similar thanks to Kluwer Academic Publishers for permission to use material
from "Theories Between Theories ...," Synthese, 103, pp. 171-201, (1995) and
to Oxford University Press for permission to use of material from "Multiple
Realizability and Universality," British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
51, pp. 115-145, (2000).
Finally, I would like to thank Carolyn for once glancing accidentally at a
page of this book, and for giving me the title. I also want to thank Monty for
taking me for walks to clear my head.


=== PAGE 9 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 10 ===

Contents
1 Introduction 
3
2 Asymptotic Reasoning 
9
2.1 The Euler Strut 
9
2.2 
Universality 
13
2.3 Intertheoretic Relations 
17
2.4 
Emergence 
19
2.5 Conclusion 
22
3 Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
23
3.1 Different Why-Questions 
23
3.2 Hempelian Explanation and Its Successors 
25
3.3 Conclusion 
35
4 Asymptotic Explanation 
37
4.1 The Renormalization Group (RG) 
37
4.2 The General Strategy 
42
4.3 
"Intermediate Asymptotics" 
44
4.4 
Conclusion: The Role of Stability 
57
5 Philosophical Models of Reduction 
61
5.1 Nagelian Reduction 
62
5.2 Multiple Realizability 
65
5.3 Kim's "Functional Model of Reduction" 
68
5.4 A Metaphysical Mystery 
71
5.5 Multiple Realizability as Universality 
73
5.6 Conclusion 
76
6 Intertheoretic Relations—Optics 
77
6.1 
"Reduction2" 
78
6.2 
Singular Limits 
80
6.3 Wave and Ray Theories 
81
6.4 Universality: Diffraction Catastrophe
Scaling Laws 
93


=== PAGE 11 ===

x 
CONTENTS
6.5 Conclusion 
95
7 Intertheoretic Relations—Mechanics 
99
7.1 Classical and Quantum Theories 
100
7.2 The WKB Method 
104
7.3 Semiclassical "Emergents" 
109
7.4 
Conclusion 
110
8 Emergence 
113
8.1 Emergence and the Philosophy of Mind 
114
8.2 The Rainbow Revisited: An Example
of Emergence? 
115
8.3 A New Sense of Emergence 
121
8.4 Tenet 5: Novel Causal Powers? 
126
8.5 Conclusion 
128
9 Conclusions 
131
Bibliography 
137
Index 
141


=== PAGE 12 ===

THE DEVIL IN THE DETAILS


=== PAGE 13 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 14 ===

Introduction
Methodological philosophy of science concerns itself, among other things, with
issues about the nature of scientific theories, of scientific explanation, and of
intertheoretic reduction. Philosophers of science frequently have attempted to
identify and "rationally reconstruct" distinct types of reasoning employed by
scientists as they go about their business. Philosophical questions often asked
in these contexts include: What counts as an explanation? When does one
theory replace or reduce another? What, for that matter, is a theory? All too
often, however, these reconstructions end up being quite far removed from the
actual science being done. Much of interest remains in the details and gets lost
in the process of philosophical abstraction.
Recently, though, philosophers of science have begun to provide more nu-
anced and scientifically better informed approaches to these types of method-
ological questions. I intend this discussion to be one that pays close attention
to a certain type of reasoning that plays a role in understanding a wide range
of physical phenomena—one that I think has largely been missed by philoso-
phers of science both in the past and even of late. Somewhat ironically (given
the last sentence of the last paragraph), this type of reasoning involves, at its
heart, a type of abstraction—a means for ignoring or throwing away various
details. It is, though, a type of reasoning that is motivated from within the
scientific enterprise, and not, as old-style rational reconstructions of scientific
reasoning, motivated by external philosophical programs and prejudices. I call
this kind of reasoning "asymptotic reasoning," and I hope to show how crucial it
is to the scientific understanding of many aspects of physical phenomena. Once
this is properly recognized, it will inform our understanding of many aspects of
scientific methodology.
The idea that scientific understanding often requires methods which elim-
inate detail and, in some sense, precision, is a theme that runs throughout
this book. Suppose we are interested in explaining some physical phenomenon
governed by a particular physical theory. That theory may say a lot about
the nature of the phenomenon: the nature of its evolution, and what sorts of
details—for example, initial and boundary conditions—are required to "solve"
3
1


=== PAGE 15 ===

4 
The Devil in the Details
the governing equations, and so on. One might think that the theory will there-
fore enable us to account for the phenomenon through straightforward deriva-
tion from the appropriate initial data, given the governing equation(s).1 For
some types of why-questions this may very well be the case. However, I will
show that, with respect to other critically important why-questions, many the-
ories are explanatorily deficient. This is true even for those theories that are
currently taken to be so wellconfirmed as to constitute paradigms of scientific
achievement.
The kind of explanatory questions for which the detailed accounts simply
provide explanatory "noise" and for which asymptotic methods fill in the ex-
planatory lacunae are questions about the existence of patterns noted in nature.
Details are required to account for why a given instance of a pattern can arise,
but such details obscure and even block understanding of why the pattern itself
exists. Physicists have a technical term for these patterns of behavior. They call
them "universal." Many systems exhibit similar or identical behavior despite
the fact that they are, at base, physically quite distinct. This is the essence
of universality. Examples abound in the literature on the thermodynamics of
phase transitions and critical phenomena. Such wildly diverse systems as fluids
and magnets exhibit the same behavior when they are in certain critical states.
Asymptotic methods such as the renormalization group provide explanations
for this remarkable fact. They do so by providing principled reasons grounded
in the fundamental physics of the systems for why many of the details that gen-
uinely distinguish such systems from one another are irrelevant when it comes
to the universal behavior of interest.
While most discussions of universality and its explanation take place in the
context of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, we will see that universal
behavior is really ubiquitous in science. Virtually any time one wants to explain
some "upper level" generalization, one is trying to explain a universal pattern
of behavior. Thus, this type of explanatory strategy—what I call "asymptotic
explanation"—should play a role in the various philosophical debates about the
status of the so-called special sciences. I will argue that the infamous multiple
realizability arguments that feature prominently in these discussions are best
understood in the context of trying to explain universal behavior. Multiple
realizability is the idea that there can be heterogeneous or diverse "realizers" of
"upper level" properties and generalizations. But this is just to say that those
upper level properties and the generalizations that involve them—the "laws"
of the special sciences—are universal. They characterize similar behavior in
physically distinct systems.
The reference here to the status of the special sciences will immediately call
to mind questions about relationships between distinct theories. If, for instance,
psychology is a genuine science, what is its relationship to physics? So-called
nonreductive physicalists want to maintain the irreducibility of the science of
the mental to more fundamental physical theory, while at the same time holding
on to the idea that at base there is nothing other than physics—that is, they
1This idea is at the center of many extant conceptions of scientific explanation.


=== PAGE 16 ===

Introduction 
5
maintain that we don't need to reify mental properties as ontologically distinct
from physical properties. This is one member of a truly thorny set of issues.
The debates in the literature focus largely on questions about the reduction
of one theory to another. I will argue that this problematic needs rethinking.
Questions about reduction—what is its nature, and whether it is possible at
all—are much more subtle than they are often taken to be.
Understanding the nature of intertheoretic reduction is, surely, an impor-
tant topic in methodological philosophy of science. But most of the literature
on reduction suffers, I claim, from a failure to pay sufficient attention to de-
tailed features of the respective theories and their interrelations. Those cases
for which something like the philosophers' (Nagelian or neo-Nagelian) models of
reduction will work are actually quite special. The vast majority of purported
intertheoretic reductions, in fact, fail to be cases of reduction. It is best to think
about this in the context of a distinction between types of reductions recognized
first by Thomas Nickles (1973). On the usual philosophical models, a typically
newer, more refined theory, such as quantum mechanics, is said to reduce a
typically older, and coarser theory, such as classical mechanics. Thus, classical
mechanics is said to reduce to quantum mechanics. On the other hand, Nick-
les noted that physicists often speak of the reduction relation as the inverse
of this. They hold that the more refined theory reduces to the coarser theory
in some sort of correspondence limit. Thus, on this view, quantum mechanics
is supposed to reduce to classical mechanics in an appropriate limit. The so-
called correspondence principle in quantum mechanics is a paradigm example
of this type of reductive limit. Somehow, quantum mechanics is supposed to
"go over into" classical mechanics in some limit as "things get big" or, perhaps,
as Planck's constant approaches a limiting value.
However, there are deep and subtle problems here. These limiting relations
can be of two sorts. Roughly, some theories will "smoothly approach" another
in a relevant correspondence limit. For other theory pairs, the limit can be
singular. This means that the behavior at the limit is fundamentally different
from the behavior as the limit is being approached. I think that a case can
be made that philosophical models of reduction will apply only if the limiting
relation between the theory pairs is smooth or regular. Thus, any hope for
a philosophical reduction will depend on the satisfaction of the "physicists' "
limiting relation. If the relationship is singular, however, things are much more
complicated. In fact, I will argue that this is an indication that no reduction of
any sort can obtain between the theories.
Despite the failure of reductive relations between some theories, much of
interest, both physical and philosophical, can be gained by studying the asymp-
totic behavior of theories in these singular correspondence limits. I will discuss
several examples of this throughout the book. One that will receive a lot of
attention is the relationship between the wave and ray theories of light. A spe-
cific example here will occupy much of our attention. This is the example of
the rainbow. Certain features of rainbows can be fully understood only through
asymptotic methods. In effect, these are universal features that "emerge" in the
asymptotic domain as the wave theory approaches the ray theory in the limit


=== PAGE 17 ===

6 
The Devil in the Details
as the wavelength of light approaches zero. They inhabit (to speak somewhat
metaphorically) an asymptotic borderland between theories. I will argue that a
third explanatory theory is required for this asymptotic domain. The phenom-
ena inhabiting this borderland are not explainable in purely wave theoretic or
ray theoretic terms. The accounts required to characterize and explain these
borderland phenomena deserve the title "theory." In part, this is because the
fundamental wave theory is explanatorily deficient. As we will see, the theory
of the borderland incorporates, in well-defined ways, features of both the wave
and ray theories. Asymptotic reasoning plays a key explanatory and interpretive
role here.
In general, when asymptotic relations between theories are singular, we can
expect such "no man's lands" where new phenomena exist and where new ex-
planatory theories are required. This talk of "new phenomena" and the necessity
of "new theories," together with my use of the term "emergent" earlier suggests
that asymptotic investigations may also inform various philosophical debates
about the nature and status of so-called emergent properties. I will argue that
this is indeed the case.
One important aspect of the "received" opinion about emergent properties
is that they are best understood in mereological—part/whole—terms: A prop-
erty of a whole is emergent if it somehow transcends the properties of its parts.
Furthermore, symptoms of this type of transcendence include the unexplainabil-
ity and unpredictability of the emergent features from some underlying, "base"
or fundamental theory. Likewise, the received view holds that the emergent
properties are irreducible to that base theory. My discussion of the asymp-
totic nature of the new phenomena and new theories will lead to a different
understanding of emergent properties. Part/whole relations will turn out to
be inessential, or unnecessary, for emergence. Some phenomena for which no
part/whole relations are discernible must reasonably be considered emergent.
What is essential is the singular nature of the limiting relations between the
"base" theory and the theory describing the emergents. The singular nature of
this limiting relationship is, as just noted, the feature responsible for the failure
of the physicists' conception of reduction. Emergence depends, therefore, on
a failure of reducibility. This clearly fits with the received view, although the
proper understanding of reduction is, as I have suggested, distinct from most of
the "standard" views.
We will see, however, that while reductive failure of a certain type is neces-
sary for emergence, it does not entail (as it is typically taken to) the necessary
failure of explainability. Emergent properties are universal. It is legitimate to
search for, and expect, explanations of their universality. Contrary to received
opinion, such properties are not brute and inexplicable features of the world. As
we will see in several places throughout the book, reduction and explanation,
when properly understood, do not march in lock-step. Asymptotic explanations
are possible even for phenomena that are in an important sense irreducible and
emergent.
The preceding discussion is intended to give the reader a brief indication of
the various topics considered in the following pages. The unifying theme, as


=== PAGE 18 ===

Introduction 
7
I've indicated, is the role played by asymptotic reasoning. The claim is that
by focusing on this ubiquitous form of scientific reasoning, new insights can be
gained into old philosophical problems. Thus, speaking negatively, I hope to
show that (a) philosophers of science have, by and large, missed an important
sense of explanation, (b) extant philosophical accounts of emergence must be
refined in various ways, and (c) issues about reductive relations between theories
are much more involved than they are typically taken to be. More positively,
we will see that asymptotic reasoning leads to better informed accounts of at
least certain aspects of explanation, reduction, and emergence.
It is important here, I think, to say a few things about the nature and scope
of the discussions to follow. I do not intend to provide detailed discussions of
the many different accounts of explanation, reduction, and so on that appear in
the philosophical literature. Instead, I will concentrate on providing a positive
proposal, motivated through an examination of what I take to be representative
or core positions.
As a result, this is a short book. It also involves fairly technical discussions
in some places. As I've already noted, the key to understanding the impor-
tance of asymptotic reasoning is to examine in some detail certain examples in
which it is used. These are, by their very nature, described in mathematical
terms. Asymptotic methods, in mathematical physics and in the mathematics
of the applied sciences, have only recently received clear and systematic formu-
lations. Nevertheless, I believe that such methods (broadly construed) are far
more widespread in the history of science than is commonly realized. They play
important roles in many less technical contexts. However, to best understand
these methods, it is necessary to investigate the more technical arguments ap-
pearing in recent work by physicists and applied mathematicians. It is my hope,
though, that even the reader who skims the technical discussions will be able
to get a tolerably clear idea of how these methods are supposed to work.
The devil is truly in the details. And, even though the aim is to under-
stand the importance of systematic methods for throwing details away, this
understanding is achievable only through fairly close examinations of specific
examples.


=== PAGE 19 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 20 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning
This chapter will introduce, via the consideration of several simple examples,
the nature and importance of asymptotic reasoning. It is necessary that we
also discuss an important feature of many patterns or regularities that we may
wish to understand. This is their universality. "Universality," as I've noted,
is the technical term for an everyday feature of the world—namely, that in
certain circumstances distinct types of systems exhibit similar behaviors. (This
can be as simple as the fact that pendulums of very different microstructural
constitutions all have periods proportional to the square root of their length.
See section 2.2.) We will begin to see why asymptotic reasoning is crucial to
understanding how universality can arise. In addition, this chapter will begin
to address the importance of asymptotics for understanding relations between
theories, as well as for understanding the possibility of emergent properties.
Later chapters will address all of these roles and features of asymptotic reasoning
in more detail.
2.1 The Euler Strut
Let us suppose that we are confronted with the following physical phenomenon.
A stiff ribbon of steel—a strut—is securely mounted on the floor in front of
us. Someone begins to load this strut symmetrically. At some point, after a
sufficient amount of weight has been added, the strut buckles to the left. See
figure 2.1. How are we to understand and explain what we have just witnessed?
Here is an outline of one response. At some point in the weighting process
(likely just prior to the collapse), the strut reached a state of unstable equilib-
rium called the "Euler critical point." This is analogous to the state of a pencil
balancing on its sharpened tip. In this latter case, we can imagine a hypothet-
ical situation in which there is nothing to interfere with the pencil—no breeze
in the room, say. Then the pencil would presumably remain in its balanced
state forever. Of course, in the actual world we know that it is very difficult to
maintain such a balancing act for any appreciable length of time. Similarly,
9
2


=== PAGE 21 ===

10
The Devil in the Details
Figure 2.1: Buckling strut
molecular collisions will "cause" the strut to buckle either to the left or to the
right. Either of these two buckled states is more stable than the critical state in
that the addition of more weight will only cause it to sag further on the same
side to which it has already collapsed.
So, in order to explain why the strut collapsed to the left, we need to give a
complete causal account that (1) characterizes the details of the microstructural
makeup of the particular strut, (2) refers to the fact that the strut had been
weighted to the critical point, and (3) characterizes the details of the chain of
molecular collisions leading up to the one water vapor molecule, the culprit,
that hits the strut on its right side. If we were actually able to provide all
these details, or at least some relevant portion of them, wouldn't we have an
explanation of what we observed? Wouldn't we understand the phenomenon we
have witnessed?
Both common sense and at least one prominent view of the nature of expla-
nation and understanding would have it that we would now understand what we
have seen. By providing this detailed causal account, we will have shown how
the particular occurrence came about. We will have displayed the mechanisms
which underlie the phenomenon of interest. On this view, the world is generally
opaque. Providing accounts like this, however, open up "the black boxes of
nature to reveal their inner workings" (Salmon, 1989, p. 182). We can call this
view a causal-mechanical account.
On Peter Railton's version of the causal-mechanical account, the detailed
description of the mechanisms that provides our explanation is referred to as an
"ideal explanatory text."
[A]n ideal text for the explanation of the outcome of a causal pro-
cess would look something like this: an inter-connected series of


=== PAGE 22 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning 
11
law-based accounts of all the nodes and links in the causal network
culminating in the explanandum, complete with a fully detailed de-
scription of the causal mechanisms involved and theoretical deriva-
tions of all of the covering laws involved.... It would be the whole
story concerning why the explanandum occurred, relative to a cor-
rect theory of the lawful dependencies of the world. (Railton, 1981,
p. 247)
For the strut, as suggested, this text will refer to its instability at the critical
point, to the fact that it is made of steel with such and such atomic and molecular
structure, and to the details of the collision processes among the "air molecules"
leading up to the buckling.
But how satisfying, actually, is this explanation? Does it really tell us the
whole story about the buckling of the strut? For instance, one part of the
"whole story" is how this particular account will bear on our understanding of
the buckling of an "identical" strut mounted next to the first and which buckled
to the right after similar loading. Was what we just witnessed a fluke, or is the
phenomenon repeatable? While we cannot experiment again with the very same
strut—it buckled—we still might like to know whether similar struts behave in
the same way. Going a bit further, we can ask whether our original causal-
mechanical story sheds any light on similar buckling behavior in a strut made
out of a different substance, say, aluminum? I think that the story we have told
has virtually no bearing whatsoever on these other cases. Let me explain.
Let's consider the case of a virtually identical strut mounted immediately
next to the first. What explains why it buckled to the right after having been
loaded just like the first one? On the view we are considering, we need to
provide an ideal explanatory text, which, once again, will involve a detailed
account of the microstructural make-up of this strut, reference to the fact that
it has been loaded to its critical point, and, finally, a complete causal story of all
the molecular collisions leading up to the striking on the left side by a particular
dust particle. Most of these details will be completely different than in the first
case. Even though both struts are made of steel, we can be sure that there
will be differences in the microstructures of the two struts—details that may
very well be causally relevant to their bucklings. For instance, the location of
small defects or fractures in the struts will most likely be different. Clearly, the
collision histories of the various "air molecules" are completely distinct in the
two cases as well. After all, they involve different particles. The two explanatory
texts, therefore, are by and large completely different. Had we been given the
first, it would have no bearing on our explanation of the buckling of the second
strut.
In the case of an aluminum strut, the explanatory texts are even more dis-
joint. For instance, the buckling load will be different since the struts are made
of different materials. Why should our explanation of the behavior of a steel
strut bear in any way upon our understanding of the behavior of one composed
of aluminum?
At this point it seems reasonable to object: "Clearly these struts exhibit


=== PAGE 23 ===

12 
The Devil in the Details
similar behavior. In fact, one can characterize this behavior by appeal to Euler's
formula:1
How can you say the one account has nothing to do with the other? Part of
understanding how the behavior of one strut can bear on the behavior of another
is the recognition that Euler's formula applies to both." (Here Pc is the critical
buckling load for the strut. The formula tells us that this load is a function
of what the strut is made of as well as certain of its geometric properties — in
particular, the ration I/L2.)
I agree completely. However, the focus of the discussion has shifted in a
natural way from the particular buckling of the steel strut in front of us to
the understanding of buckling behavior of struts in general. These two foci
are not entirely distinct. Nevertheless, nothing in the ideal explanatory text
for a particular case can bear upon this question. "Microcausal" details might
very well be required to determine a theoretical (as opposed to a measured
phenomenological) value for Young's modulus E of the particular strut in front
of us, but what, in all of these details, explains why what we are currently
witnessing is a phenomenon to which Euler's formula applies? The causal-
mechanical theorist will no doubt say that all of the microcausal details about
this strut will yield an understanding of why in this particular case the Euler
formula is applicable: These details will tell us that E is what it is, and when
all the evidence is in, we will simply see that P is proportional to I/L2.
But, so what? Do we understand the phenomenon of strut buckling once
we have been given all of these details? Consider the following passage from
a discussion of explanation and understanding of critical phenomena. (The
technical details do not matter here. It is just important to get the drift of the
main complaint.)
The traditional approach of theoreticians, going back to the founda-
tion of quantum mechanics, is to run to Schrodinger's equation when
confronted by a problem in atomic, molecular, or solid state physics!
One establishes the Hamiltonian, makes some (hopefully) sensible
approximations and then proceeds to attempt to solve for the en-
ergy levels, eigenstates and so on.... The modern attitude is, rather,
that the task of the theorist is to understand what is going on and to
elucidate which are the crucial features of the problem. For instance,
if it is asserted that the exponent a depends on the dimensionality,
d, and on the symmetry number, n, but on no other factors, then
the theorist's job is to explain why this is so and subject to what
provisos. If one had a large enough computer to solve Schrodinger's
equation and the answers came out that way, one would still have no
understanding of why this was the case! (Fisher, 1983, pp. 46-47)
*E is Young's modulus characteristic of the material. / is the second moment of the strut's
cross-sectional area. L is the length of the strut.


=== PAGE 24 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning 
13
If the explanandum is the fact that struts buckle at loads given by Euler's
formula, then this passage suggests, rightly I believe, that our causal-mechanical
account fails completely to provide the understanding we seek. All of those
details that may be relevant to the behavior of the particular strut don't serve
to answer the question of why loaded struts in general behave the way that they
do. Actually, what does the explaining is a systematic method for abstracting
from these very details.
The point of this brief example and discussion is to motivate the idea that
sometimes (actually, very often, as I will argue) science requires methods that
eliminate both detail and, in some sense, precision. For reasons that will become
clear, I call these methods "asymptotic methods" and the type(s) of reasoning
they involve "asymptotic reasoning."
2.2 
Universality
The discussion of Euler struts in the context of the causal-mechanical view
about explanation leads us to worry about how similar behaviors can arise in
systems that are composed of different materials. For instance, we have just
seen that it is reasonable to ask why Euler's formula describes the buckling load
of struts made of steel as well as struts made of aluminum. In part this concern
arises because we care whether such a phenomenon is repeatable. Often there
are pragmatic reasons for why we care. For instance, in the case of buckling
struts, we may care because we intend to use such struts or things like them
in the construction of buildings. But despite (and maybe because of) such
pragmatic concerns, it seems that science often concerns itself with discovering
and explaining similar patterns of behavior.
As I noted in chapter 1, physicists have coined a term for this type of phe-
nomenon: "universality." Most broadly, a claim of universality is an expression
of behavioral similarity in diverse systems. In Michael Berry's words, saying
that a property is a "universal feature" of a system is "the slightly pretentious
way in which physicists denote identical behaviour in different systems. The
most familiar example of universality from physics involves thermodynamics
near critical points" (Berry, 1987, p. 185).
There are two general features characteristic of universal behavior or uni-
versality.
1. The details of the system (those details that would feature in a complete
causal-mechanical explanation of the system's behavior) are largely irrel-
evant for describing the behavior of interest.
2. Many different systems with completely different "micro" details will ex-
hibit the identical behavior.
The first feature is, arguably, responsible for the second. Arguments involving
appeal to asymptotics in various forms enable us to see how this is, in fact, so.
It is clear that we can think of the Euler formula as expressing the existence of
universality in buckling behavior. The formula has essentially two components.


=== PAGE 25 ===

14 
The Devil in the Details
First, there is the system—or material—specific value for Young's modulus.
And second, there are the "formal relationships" expressed in the formula.
To see how ubiquitous the concept of universality really is, let us consider
another simple example. We want to understand the behavior of pendulums.
Particularly, we want to understand why pendulums with bobs of different col-
ors and different masses, rods of different lengths, often composed of different
materials, all have periods (for small oscillations) that are directly proportional
to the square root of the length of the rod from which the bob is hanging. In
other words, we would like to understand why the following relation generally
holds for the periods, 9, of pendulums exhibiting small oscillations:2
One usually obtains this equation by solving a differential equation for the
pendulum system. The argument can be found near the beginning of just about
every elementary text on classical mechanics. In one sense this is an entirely
satisfactory account. We have a theory—a well-confirmed theory at that—
which through its equations tells us that the relevant features for the behavior
of pendulum systems are the gravitational acceleration and the length of the
bob. In a moment, we will see how it is possible to derive this relationship
without any appeal to the differential equations of motion. Before getting to
this, however, it is worthwhile asking a further hypothetical question. This will
help us understand better the notion of universality and give us a very broad
conception of asymptotic reasoning.
Why are factors such as the color of the bob and (to a large extent) its
microstructural makeup irrelevant for answering our why-question about the
period of the pendulum? There are many features of the bob and rod that
constitute a given pendulum that are clearly irrelevant for the behavior of inter-
est. What allows us to set these details aside as "explanatory noise"? Suppose,
hypothetically, that we did not have a theory that tells us what features are
relevant for specifying the state of a pendulum system. Suppose, that is, that
we were trying to develop such a theory to explain various observed empirical
regularities "from scratch," so to speak. In such a pseudo-history would a ques-
tion about the relevance of the color of the bob to its period have seemed so
silly? The very development of the theory and the differential equation that
describes the behavior of pendulums involved (the probably not so systematic)
bracketing as irrelevant many of the details and features that are characteristic
of individual systems.
Next, suppose we are in a state of knowledge where we believe or can make
an educated guess that the period of the pendulum's swing depends only on the
mass of the bob, the length of the pendulum, and the gravitational acceleration.
In other words, we know something about classical mechanics—for instance, we
have progressed beyond having to worry about color as a possible variable to be
2Here "l" denotes the length of the rod and "g" is the acceleration due to gravity.


=== PAGE 26 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning 
15
considered. Can we, without solving any differential equations—that is, without
appeal to the detailed theory—determine the functional relationship expressed
in equation (2.1)? The answer is yes; and we proceed to do so by engaging
in dimensional analysis (Barenblatt, 1996, pp. 2-5). In effect, the guess we
have just made is sufficient to answer our why-question about the period of a
pendulum.
We have a set of objects that represent units of length, mass, and time. These
are standards everyone agrees upon—one gram, for instance, is 1/1000 of the
mass of a special standard mass in a vault in the Bureau of Weights and Measures
in Paris. Given these standards we will have a system of units for length, mass,
and time (where L is the dimension of length, M is the dimension of mass, and T
is the dimension of time). For our pendulum problem we have guessed that only
the length / of the pendulum, its mass m, and the gravitational acceleration g
should be relevant to its period 9. Note that l, m, and g are numbers holding for
a particular choice of a system of units of measurement (e.g., centimeters, grams,
and seconds). But in some sense that choice is arbitrary. Dimensional analysis
exploits this fundamental fact—namely, that the physics should be invariant
across a change of fundamental units of measurement.
The dimensions for the quantities involved in our problem are the following:3
Now, consider the quantity l/g. If the unit of length is decreased by a factor
of a, and the unit of time is decreased by a factor of b, then the numerical value
of length in the numerator increases by a factor of a and the numerical value of
acceleration in the denominator increases by a factor ab-2. This implies that
the value of the ratio l/g increases by a factor of b2. Hence, the numerical value
of l/g increases by a factor of 6. Since the numerical value for the period, 8,
would also increase by a factor of b under this scenario (decreasing the unit of
time by a factor of b), we know the quantity
remains invariant under a change in the fundamental units. This quantity n is
dimensionless. In the jargon of dimensional analysis, we have "nondimensional-
ized" the problem.
In principle, n depends (just like 9 under our guess) upon the quantities l,
m, and g: II = n(l, m, g). If we decrease the unit of mass by some factor c, of
course, the numerical value for mass will increase by that same factor c. But,
in so doing, neither n nor l nor g will change in value. In particular, n(l, m, g)
is independent of m. What happens to n if we decrease the unit of length by
some factor a leaving the unit of time unchanged? While the value for length
will increase by a factor of a, the quantity II, as it is dimensionless, remains
unchanged. Hence, n(l,m,g) is independent of l. Finally, what happens to II
3


=== PAGE 27 ===

16 
The Devil in the Details
if we decrease the unit of time by a factor of b while leaving the unit of length
invariant. We have seen that this results in the numerical value for acceleration
g increasing by a factor of b - 2. However, II and l, and m remain unchanged.
This establishes the fact that n(l, m, g) is independent of all of its parame-
ters. This is possible only if II is a constant:
Hence,
which, apart from a constant, just is equation (2.1). The constant in (2.4) can
be easily determined by a single measurement of the period of oscillation of a
simple pendulum.
This is indeed a remarkable result. To quote Barenblatt: "[I]t would seem
that we have succeeded in obtaining an answer to an interesting problem from
nothing — or, more precisely, only from a list of the quantities on which the
period of oscillation of the pendulum is expected to depend, and a comparison
(analysis) of their dimensions" (Barenblatt, 1996, p. 5). No details whatsoever
about the nature of individual pendulums, what they are made of, and so on,
played any role in obtaining the solution.
This example is really a special (degenerate) case. In most problems, the
equation for the dimensionless quantity of interest, II, that results from the
analysis will not equal a constant, but rather will be a function of some other
dimensionless parameters:
In such cases, the analysis proceeds by trying to motivate the possibility that
one or more of the ni's can be considered extremely small or extremely large.
Then one can further reduce the problem by taking a limit so that the ni can be
replaced by a constant: ni (0) = C or ni(oo) = C. This would yield an equation
which, one hopes, can be more easily solved. This recipe, however, involves a
strong assumption — one that is most often false. This is the assumption that
the limits ni(0) or ni(oo) actually exist. As we will see, when they do not,
dimensional analysis fails and interesting physics and mathematics often come
into play.
The appeal to limiting cases, whether regular (where the limits ni(0) or
ni(oo) do exist) or singular (where those limits fail to exist), constitutes paradigm
instances of asymptotic reasoning. We will see many examples of such reasoning
later. The important point to note here has to do with the relationship between
universality and asymptotic reasoning of this sort. It is often the case that the


=== PAGE 28 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning 
17
result of this kind of reasoning about a given problem is the discovery of some
relationship like (2.3) or, more generally, like (2.5). In other words, asymptotic
analysis often leads to equations describing universal features of systems. This
happens because these methods systematically eliminate irrelevant details about
individual systems.
Before leaving this section on universality, let me try to forestall a particular
misunderstanding of what universality is supposed to be. As the discussion of
the "pseudo history" of the pendulum theory is meant to show, it is not only a
feature of highly technical physical phenomena. Universality as expressed in 1
and 2 holds of everyday phenomena in science. While many everyday patterns
exhibit universality, they are not, therefore, mundane. The simple observable
fact that systems at different temperatures tend toward a common temperature
when allowed to interact with each other is an everyday occurrence. As an in-
stance, just think of a glass of ice water coming to room temperature. Surely
this regularity is universal—whether we consider ice or a rock at a cooler tem-
perature interacting with the warmer room, the same pattern is observed. One
should not be misled by the everyday nature of this pattern into thinking that
the explanation for the pattern is at all trivial. Deep results in statistical me-
chanics involving asymptotics are necessary to explain this phenomenon. (This
particular explanation will be discussed in section 8.3.) I think that despite the
everyday occurrences of universal behavior, philosophers of science have not, by
and large, understood how such patterns and regularities are to be explained.
I will have much more to say about this type of explanation in chapter 4 and
elsewhere throughout the book.
Let's turn now to a brief discussion of what may seem to be a completely
different topic—theoretical reduction. As we will see, however, there are inti-
mate connections between questions about the explanation of universality and
the various ways different theories may be related to one another.
2.3 Intertheoretic Relations
Philosophers of science have always been concerned with how theories of one
"domain" fit together with theories of some other. Paradigm examples from
physics are the relations obtaining between classical thermodynamics and sta-
tistical mechanics; between the Newtonian physics of space and time and the
"theory" of relativity; between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics; and
between the ray theory of light and the wave theory. Most philosophical discus-
sions of these interrelations have been framed in the context of questions about
reduction. Do (and if so how) the former members of these pairs reduce to the
latter members? "Reduction," here, is typically understood as some variant of
the following prescription:
A theory T' reduces to a theory T if the laws of T" are derivable (in
some sense) from those of T.


=== PAGE 29 ===

18 
The Devil in the Details
This conception of reduction may require the identification (or nomic corre-
lation) of properties in the reduced theory (T') with those in the reducing (T).
With this requirement may come all sorts of difficulties, both conceptual and
technical in nature. Much also will depend upon what sort of derivability is
required and how strict its requirements are. These are all details that I think
we can safely avoid at this point in the discussion. Most philosophical accounts
of reduction along these lines also require that the reducing theory explain the
reduced theory—or at least explain why it works as well as it does in its domain
of applicability.
For example, the special theory of relativity is supposed to reduce Newtonian
space and time. This reduction is accomplished by "deriving" Newtonian laws
where the derivation involves some kind of limiting procedure. In particular, one
shows that the Newtonian theory "results" when velocities are slow compared
with the speed of light. In so doing the reduction also is supposed to explain the
(approximate) truth of the Newtonian conception of space and time. It explains
why, for instance, we can think of space and time as divided unambiguously
into spaces at distinct times, even though according to special relativity the
conception of absolute simultaneity required for this conception does not exist.
Clearly questions about the relationships between properties and concepts in
the two theories will immediately come to the fore.
Physicists, typically, use the term "reduction" in a different way than do
philosophers.4 For each of the theory pairs mentioned in the earlier paragraph,
the physicist would speak of the second member of the pair reducing to the first.
Reduced and reducing theories are inverted in comparison to the philosophers'
way of understanding reduction. For example, physicists refer to the "fact"
that quantum mechanics reduces to classical mechanics in some kind of corre-
spondence limit—say where we let Planck's constant h —> O.5 Another example
is the reduction of special relativity to Newtonian space and time in the limit
(v/c)2 —> 0.
In general this other sense of reduction has it that a "more refined," more en-
compassing (and typically more recent) theory, Tf, corresponds to a "coarser,"
less encompassing (and typically earlier) theory, Tc, as some fundamental pa-
rameter (call it e) in the finer theory approaches a limiting value. Schematically,
the physicists' sense of reduction can be represented as follows:
The equality in (2.6) can hold only if the limit is "regular." In that case, on my
view, it is appropriate to call the limiting relation a "reduction." If the limit in
(2.6) is singular, however, the schema fails and I think it is best to talk simply
about intertheoretic relations. Let me give a brief explication of these notions.
If the solutions of the relevant formulas or equations of the theory Tf are
such that for small values of e they smoothly approach the solutions of the
4See (Nickles, 1973) for an important discussion of these different senses.
5There are questions about what this can really mean: How can a constant change its
value? There are also questions about whether the claim of reduction is true, even once we
have decided what to say about the varying "constant" problem.


=== PAGE 30 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning 
19
corresponding formulas in Tc, then schema (2.6) will hold. For these cases we
can say that the "limiting behavior" as e —> 0 equals the "behavior in the limit"
where e = 0. On the other hand, if the behavior in the limit is of a fundamentally
different 
character than the nearby solutions one obtains as e —> 0, then the
schema will fail.
A nice example illustrating this distinction is the following: Consider the
quadratic equation
Think of e as a small expansion or perturbation parameter. The equation has
two roots for any value of e as e —> 0. In a well-defined sense, the solutions
to this quadratic equation as e —> 0 smoothly approach the solutions to the
"unperturbed" (e = 0) equation
namely, x = 0, —1. On the other hand, the equation
has two roots for any value of e > 0 but has for its "unperturbed" solution only
one root; namely, x = 9. The equation suffers a reduction in order when e = 0.
Thus, the character of the behavior in the limit e = 0 differs fundamentally
from the character of its limiting behavior. Not all singular limits result from
reductions in order of the equations, however. Nevertheless, these latter singular
cases are much more prevalent than the former.
The distinction between regular and singular asymptotic relations is the same
as that discussed in the last section between problems for which dimensional
analysis works, and those for which it does not. The singular cases are generally
much more interesting, both from a physical and a philosophical perspective, in
that it is often the case that new physics emerges in the asymptotic regime in
which the limiting value is being approached.
From this brief discussion, we can see that asymptotic reasoning plays a
major role in our understanding of how various theories "fit" together to de-
scribe and explain the workings of the world. In fact, the study of asymptotic
limits is part and parcel of intertheoretic relations. One can learn much more
about the nature of various theories by studying these asymptotic limits than
by investigating reductive relations according to standard philosophical models.
This point of view will be defended in chapters 6 and 7.
2.4 
Emergence
Questions about reduction and the (im)possibility of identifying or otherwise
correlating properties in one theory with those in another are often related to
questions about the possibility of emergent properties. In this section I will
briefly characterize what I take to be a widely held account of the nature of


=== PAGE 31 ===

20 
The Devil in the Details
emergence and indicate how I think it will need to be amended once one takes
asymptotic limiting relations into account.
It is a presupposition of the "received" account of emergence that the world
is organized somehow into levels. In particular, it is presupposed that entities at
some one level have properties that "depend" in some sense on properties of the
entities' constituent parts. Jaegwon Kim (1999, pp. 19-20) has expressed the
"central doctrines of emergentism" in the following four main claims or tenets:
1. Emergence of complex higher-level entities: Systems with a higher-level of
complexity emerge from the coming together of lower-level entities in new
structural configurations.
2. Emergence of higher-level properties: All properties of higher-level entities
arise out of the properties and relations that characterize their constituent
parts. Some properties of these higher, complex systems are "emergent,"
and the rest merely "resultant."
3. The unpredictability of emergent properties: Emergent properties are not
predictable from exhaustive information concerning their "basal condi-
tions." In contrast, resultant properties are predictable from lower-level
information.
4. The unexplainability/irreducibility of emergent properties: Emergent prop-
erties, unlike those that are merely resultant, are neither explainable nor
reducible in terms of their basal conditions.
Kim also notes a fifth tenet having to do with what sort of causal role emergent
properties can play in the world. Most emergentists hold that they must (to be
genuinely emergent) play some novel causal role.
5. The causal efficacy 
of the emergents: Emergent properties have causal
powers of their own—novel causal powers irreducible to the causal powers
of their basal constituents (1999, p. 21).
It is evident from tenets 1-4 that the relation of the whole to its parts is
a major component of the contemporary philosophical account of emergentism.
Paul Teller (1992, p. 139), in fact, holds that this part/whole relationship is
fundamental to the emergentist position: "I take the naked emergentist intuition
to be that an emergent property of a whole somehow 'transcends' the properties
of the parts." Paul Humphreys in "How Properties Emerge" (1997) discusses
a "fusion" operation whereby property instances of components at one level
"combine" to yield a property instance of a whole at a distinct higher level.
While Humphreys speaks of fusion of property instances at lower levels, he
rejects the idea that emergents supervene on property instances at the lower
levels.
The part/whole aspects of the emergentist doctrine are clearly related to the
conception of the world as dividing into distinct levels. I have no quarrel with
the claim that the world divides into levels, though I think most philosophers are


=== PAGE 32 ===

Asymptotic Reasoning 
21
too simplistic in their characterization of the hierarchy.6 However, I do disagree
with the view that the part/whole aspects stressed in tenets 1 and 2 are essential
for the characterization of all types of emergence and emergent properties. There
are many cases of what I take to be genuine emergence for which one would be
hard-pressed to find part/whole relationships playing any role whatsoever. I
also think that many of these cases of emergence do not involve different levels
of organization. It will come as no surprise, perhaps, that these examples arise
when one considers asymptotic limits between different theories.
The third and fourth tenets of emergentism refer to the unpredictability and
the irreducibility/unexplainability of genuinely emergent properties. Much of
the contemporary literature is devoted to explicating these features of emergen-
tism.7 By considering various examples of properties or structures that emerge
in asymptotic limiting situations,-we will see in chapter 8 that these tenets of
emergentism also require emendation. In the course of this discussion we will
also come to see that the close connections between reduction and explanation
must be severed. In many instances, it is possible to explain the presence of
some emergent property or structure in terms of the base or underlying theory;
yet the property or structure remains irreducible.
Furthermore, attention to asymptotic limits will reveal that there are bor-
derlands between various theories in which these structures and properties play
essential explanatory roles. Recognition of this fact may take us some distance
toward interpreting (or re-interpreting) the fifth tenet of emergentism noted
by Kim. This is the claim that emergent properties must possess novel causal
powers—powers that in some sense are not reducible to the causal powers of
their basal constituents. Instead of speaking of novel causal efficacy, I think
it makes more sense to talk of playing novel explanatory roles. Reference to
these emergent structures is essential for understanding the phenomenon of in-
terest; and, furthermore, no explanation can be provided by appealing only to
properties of the "basal constituents," if there even are such things in these
cases.
One example I will discuss in detail is that of the rainbow. There are certain
structural features of this everyday phenomenon that I believe must be treated
as emergent. Such features are not reducible to the wave theory of light. The
full explanation of what we observe in the rainbow cannot be given without
reference to structures that exist only in an asymptotic domain between the
wave and ray theories of light in which the wavelength of the light A —> 0. This
is a singular limiting domain, and only attention to the details of this asymptotic
domain will allow for a proper understanding of the emergent structures.
Furthermore, we will see that the emergent structures of interest—those
that dominate the observable phenomena—typically satisfy the requirements of
universality. In other words, the emergent structures are by and large detail-
6A notable exception is William Wimsatt. See his article Wimsatt (1994) for an extended
discussion of the idea of levels of organization.
7Kim (1999, pp. 2-3) argues, persuasively I think, that so-called nonreductive physicalism
discussed in the philosophy of mind/psychology literature is the modern brand of emergentism.
This literature focuses on questions of reduction and explanation.


=== PAGE 33 ===

22 
The Devil in the Details
independent and are such that many distinct systems—distinct in terms of their
fundamental details—will have the same emergent features.
2.5 
Conclusion
This chapter has suggested that our philosophical views about explanation,
reduction, and emergence would better represent what actually takes place in
the sciences were they to recognize the importance of asymptotic reasoning.
The explanation of universal phenomena, as much of the rest of the book will
try to argue, requires principled means for the elimination of irrelevant details.
Asymptotic methods developed by physicists and mathematicans provide just
such means. Furthermore, much of interest concerning intertheoretic relations
can be understood only by looking at the asymptotic limiting domains between
theory pairs. This is something upon which virtually no philosophical account
of theory reduction focuses. Chapters 6 and 7 discuss in detail the importance
of this view of intertheoretic relations. Finally, chapter 8 will expand on the
claims made here to the effect that genuinely emergent properties can be found
in the singular asymptotic domains that exist between certain pairs of theories.


=== PAGE 34 ===

Philosophical Theories of
Explanation
Section 2.2 focused on explicating in a fairly intuitive way the sense of universal-
ity that is often of interest in many contexts. In particular, universal behavior
often seems surprising and therefore cries out for explanation. In this chapter I
want to argue that the (asymptotic) methods developed over time by physicists
and applied mathematicians to explain instances of universality constitute a
type of explanation that has been virtually overlooked in the extant philosoph-
ical literature on scientific explanation. These methods do, indeed, represent a
distinct form of explanatory reasoning.
3.1 Different Why-Quest ions
To begin, it is useful to make explicit a distinction that played an important, if
somewhat implicit, role in the discussion of the behavior of struts in section 2.1.
In asking for an explanation of a given phenomenon such as the buckling of a
strut, one must be careful to distinguish between two why-questions that might
be being asked. In an earlier article, Batterman (1992), I called these type (i)
and type (ii) why-questions. A type (i) why-question asks for an explanation of
why a given instance of a pattern obtained. A type (ii) why-question asks why,
in general, patterns of a given type can be expected to obtain. Thus, a request
to explain an instance of universality is a request to provide an answer to a type
(ii) why-question.
I could continue to discuss this in terms of explaining the behavior of struts.
However, another example will make more clear the role played by limits and
asymptotic reasoning.
So, consider the following game, sometimes called "the chaos game."1 To
play the game, one marks off three vertices of a triangle on a piece of paper.
'This example is discussed in quite some detail in Batterman (1992) .
23
3


=== PAGE 35 ===

24
The Devil in the Details
Figure 3.1: Sierpinski triangle
Label the first "A" and assign it the numbers 1 and 2, label the second "B" and
assign it the numbers 3 and 4, and label the third "G" and assign it the numbers
5 and 6. Choose one point (actually it doesn't matter whether the point is even
in the "triangle space") as a starting point and begin rolling a six-sided die.
Suppose we chose point A as our starting point and the first roll landed on the
number 4. This number is assigned to point B. The rules say to move halfway
from the starting point toward point B and make a mark. This is now our new
"starting point." On the next roll we do the same thing. Suppose the die landed
on 5. We move halfway toward point C and make a mark there. Continuing
to play, we find after many iterations the pattern shown in figure 3.1 called
the "Sierpinski triangle." The Sierpinski triangle is a fractal—a figure with a
noninteger dimension approximately equal to 1.58.
The question is: Why do we get this pattern when we play the chaos game?
Of course, this is an ambiguous question. Do we mean to be asking a type
(i) question or a type (ii) question? If the former, then we are asking for an
explanation of why the individual dots on the page appear where they do. If the
latter, we are asking for an account of why, whenever we play the chaos game,
we get patterns that look like this—patterns, that is, characterized by a fractal
dimension of 1.58.
Suppose we meant to be asking the type (i) question. What counts as a
decent answer? That is, what is the explanation for the appearance of the
pattern on the page? Well, we started at point A and rolled a long sequence


=== PAGE 36 ===

Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
25
of numbers from the set {1,2,3,4,5,6}. This corresponds to a long sequence of
A's, B's, and C's. In particular, the sequence was: B, C, C, B, A, B, B, B, C, A,
B, A, A, B, C, .... After each roll we followed the rules of the game. These facts
apparently explain why each dot on the page appeared where it did. In the end,
we simply see that we get a pattern like that in figure 3.1. We might further fill
in this account by specifying the initial conditions of the die, the equation that
describes its motion, and so on. Were we to be able to do all of this, we will
have provided one of Railton's complete ideal explanatory texts.2 We will have
given a causal-mechanical explanation of the appearance of the pattern on the
page.
On the other hand, had we meant to ask the type (ii) question, the answer
just given would be of no help. This is true for the same reason that the detailed
story about the buckling behavior of a particular strut in no way can explain
why struts, in general, buckle the way that they do. The causal-mechanical
details of a given system cannot provide an explanation of universal behavior.
Before discussing what does answer the type (ii) question about the pattern
displayed in figure 3.1, it is best to back-track a bit and discuss various features
of rival philosophical accounts of scientific explanation.
3.2 
Hempelian Explanation and Its Successors
Contemporary views about explanation and understanding are all the results of
reactions one way or another to Carl Hempel's influential account of explanation.
In fact, as is well known, most discussions begin with some brief explication of
the Hempelian Deductive-Nomological (D-N) model. I am not going to try to
do justice to all of the niceties of Hempel's own views or to the responses and
theories of his successors. Nevertheless, let me briefly offer what I hope is not
too much of a caricature of these different accounts.
Hempelian Models
Hempel held that explanations are essentially arguments or derivations. He was
motivated, in part, by a desire to have a model that would be appropriate to
different scientific theories. With the advent of the quantum theory, for example,
one apparently needs an account of scientific explanation that doesn't depend
on an appeal to mechanism as traditionally understood.3 We need, that is, an
account of explanation that will apply to phenomena for which (as far as we
know) there are no mechanisms—no gears or pulleys—to which we can point.
Thus, Hempel's aim was to develop a model that, quite generically, required an
appeal to generalities or laws.
Hempel conceived of explanation primarily on the model of solving initial
value problems for ordinary differential equations. For example, we explain why
2Recall the discussion of section 2.1.
3 By "mechanism" here, I mean to refer to action-by-contact "deterministic causes" such
as gears, pulleys, incline planes, and so on.


=== PAGE 37 ===

26 
The Devil in the Details
the planets obey Kepler's laws by deductively deriving those laws or approxima-
tions to them (there are interesting issues here) from Newton's laws of motion.
D-N explanations such as this have the following schematic form:
On this view, explanation involves the deductive subsumption of the explanan-
dum E under the (dynamical) laws Li of the appropriate theory together with
certain contingent matters of fact Cj—typically initial conditions.
In essence, the idea is that one has an explanation of some fact or phe-
nomenon when one can derive that fact from the appropriate laws and initial
conditions. Thus, in the case of laws represented by (ordinary) differential equa-
tions, we have an explanation of some fact, say, why the system is in state Sf
at time tf, if we can solve the equations of motion given the system's state at
some other time ti.
Hempel thought that phenomena governed by deterministic laws would have
explanations that conformed to the D-N schema. In particular, the laws Li are
to be "strictly universal" in form. Schematically, Hempel took these to have the
logical form of universal conditionals:
This contrasts with another type of law found in theories that govern inde-
terministic (or, perhaps, incompletely characterized)4 phenomena. These laws,
according to Hempel (1965, pp. 378-380), are of probabilistic or statistical
form. On Hempel's view these laws have the form of conditional probability
statements: P(F\G) = r—the probability of a's being F given that G equals
r.5
On Hempel's view, explanations of phenomena governed by statistical or
probabilistic laws conform to what he called the "Inductive-Statistical" (I-S)
model:
In this model the inference is not deductive as the double line indicates.
Furthermore, the degree of support of the explanandum Ga, given the explanans,
can be at most r.
4Possibly, classical statistical mechanics is an example of such a theory. There are many
issues of deep consequence in how to characterize this theory. See Sklar (1993) for details.
5Of course, Hempel was well aware that the distinction between lawlike and accidental
generalizations cannot be characterized by appeal to logical form alone. Nevertheless, he did
hold that there was an important distinction between laws in deterministic theories and those
in statistical or probabilistic theories. Furthermore, at least part of the distinction between
these types of laws could be captured in terms of their logical form.


=== PAGE 38 ===

Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
27
Hempel further required that for an argument of the I-S form to be explana-
tory, the value of r needs to be high. "[A]n argument of this kind will count
as explanatory only if the number r is fairly close to one" (1965, p. 390). This
requirement leads to one serious problem (among several) with I-S explanations:
There is no nonarbitrary value in the real interval between zero and one (other
than 1/2, perhaps). What could count as the cutoff below which the argument
fails to explain and above which it would be explanatory?
Even worse, it seems that some happenings are objectively improbable. An
a-decay of a given [7238 nucleus in a specific one-hour time span (and in the
absence of external radiation) is exceedingly improbable. (The half-life of U238
is on the order of 109 years.) Nevertheless, if we witness such a decay and
would like to explain its occurrence, it seems that the best we can say is that
the quantum theory tells us that the probability of that event is exceedingly
small. Surely, being told that there is such a small chance, and that there are
no hidden variables that would allow us to determine with certainty whether
and when such a decay will occur, is crucial explanatory information. If the
event is objectively improbable, then it is unlikely, although not impossible, for
it to occur. And we shouldn't expect our theory of explanation to tell us that
its occurrence was likely. This is one of the motivations behind Railton's (1981)
Deductive-Nomological-Probabilistic (D-N-P) model of explanation. Let me
now briefly discuss some aspects of this model before returning to the discussion
of the chaos game.
Railton's D-N-P Model
Railton's D-N-P model is motivated in part by a desire to address the question
of how one can explain events or happenings that are objectively improbable.
The model is less of a departure from the D-N model than is Hempel's own I-S
model in that it retains the view that explanatory arguments are deductive in
form. However, it pays a price for this. Unlike the I-S model, the D-N-P model
is restricted in scope to those phenomena that are objectively indeterministic
or probabilistic. Thus, for Railton, the D-N model forms the backbone of the
ideal explanatory texts that are required for full explanations of deterministic
phenomena, while the D-N-P model plays this role if the phenomenon is inde-
terministic. This fact is reflected in the form probabilistic laws are taken to
have according to the D-N-P model.
Statistical or probabilistic laws have a completely different logical form from
Hempel's statements of conditional probability, P(F\G) = r. For Railton a
genuinely probabilistic law is, just like a deterministic law, a statement having
the form of a universal conditional:6
D-N-P explanations now take the following form. First, there must be derivation
from the underlying theory of a probabilistic law of the form (3.1). Given this,
6"Pr(F(x,t)) = r" says "the probability that x is F at t is r."


=== PAGE 39 ===

28 
The Devil in the Details
the rest of the argument fits the following schema:
The addendum in the last line is the explanandum; for instance, that the partic-
ular U238 nucleus decayed at a certain time. Strictly speaking, it is not part of
the argument, nor does it follow deductively from the premises. Nevertheless its
inclusion is necessary if we want to string together D-N-P and (possibly) D-N
arguments so as to provide the skeleton of ideal explanatory texts for a given
phenomenon.
Railton departs from the strictly Hempelian view that explanations are
"purely arguments." Deductive arguments of the D-N and D-N-P forms of-
ten play key roles in explanation on this view, but they are not (or usually not)
by themselves sufficient for explanation. Nor are arguments of these forms al-
ways necessary. Sometimes all that is required for an answer to a why-question
to be considered explanatory is that the answer remove some degree of uncer-
tainty about the form of the explanatory text. The key for Railton, and this is
why his view fits the causal-mechanical mold, is to be able to provide (arbitrary
parts of) the appropriate ideal explanatory text. These texts, as we've seen, are
detailed causal-mechanical accounts of the workings of the mechanisms leading
to the occurrence of the explanandum phenomenon. This means that part of
what it is to give the causal-mechanical details is the providing of D-N and
D-N-P arguments — depending on whether the mechanisms are deterministic or
probabilistic in nature.
We've seen what the ideal explanatory text for the presence of the given
instance of the dot pattern on the paper after one round of the chaos game
will look like. It will contain D-N argument patterns as its backbone, since
the rolling of a die isn't usually taken to be an indeterministic or irreducibly
probabilistic mechanism. It seems perfectly reasonable to me to hold that such
a text provides much, if not most, of the explanatory information about the
occurrence of that one instance. It tells us all of the gory details about why
each dot appears where it does.
However, we have also seen that such a text cannot answer the type (ii) why-
question. It gives us no reason to believe that the next time we play the game
we will get similar behavior — that is, a pattern with the same fractal dimension.
So what does explain it?
Note that it is not the case that every sequence of rolls of a fair die will yield
triangle patterns of the appropriate sort — patterns that we must in some sense
expect to occur. After all, a perfectly possible outcome might be the sequence:
A, B, A, B, A, B, A, B, A, B, A, B . . . (or some other intuitively "nonrandom"
sequence). We expect sequences like these to be unlikely outcomes of the re-
peated rolling of a fair die and it is possible to make precise this assessment
of likelihood or probability. Sequences of rolls are sequences of results that are


=== PAGE 40 ===

Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
29
independent and identically distributed: Each roll is probabilistically indepen-
dent of any other, and each outcome (each number on the die and, hence, each
letter A, B, and C) has the same probability of obtaining (respectively, 1/6 for
the number and 1/3 for the letter).
For sequences having these properties, one can appeal to various limit the-
orems of probability theory. For example, a version of the strong law of large
numbers holds. One version says that we can expect (with probability one) that
the relative frequency of A's in an infinite sequence of rolls will equal 1/3—the
probability of A on a single roll:7
By appealing to limit theorems like this, it is possible to argue that patterns like
that seen in figure 3.1 are with probability one the expected outcomes of playing
the chaos game. It looks like we can give an I-S-like explanation for the generic
appearance of the triangle pattern by demonstrating that such patterns are highly
probable—in fact, they have unit probability—in an ensemble of sequences of the
kind described.8
But the causal-mechanical theorist, particularly one of Railton's stripe, finds
herself in a bind here. She cannot appeal to this probabilistic fact to answer the
type (ii) why-question. After all, given the deterministic nature of the mecha-
nisms operating in the game, the appropriate schema is the D-N schema. But,
if the term "probability" can appear at all in such a schema, it must be used
in an expression synonymous with certainty (probability one) or impossibility
(probability zero). However, these senses are not measure-theoretic. It is pos-
sible, even though the measure-theoretic probability is zero, to have a sequence
that fails to yield the triangle pattern. There are infinitely many of them, in
fact.
The appeal to limit theorems of this ilk is not restricted to "artificial" or
"mathematical" examples like the chaos game.9 Many instances of I-S argu-
ments utilizing a probability one result can be found in physics. In statistical
mechanics and ergodic theory, the aim of theoretical investigation is often to
try to justify the appeal to such limit theorems as a result of instabilities in
the dynamical evolutions of the various systems. The probability one results re-
quired for explanatory arguments of this type block the objection raised earlier
about the arbitrariness of the degree of inductive support conferred upon the
explanandum by the explanans that should be required, in Hempel's I-S model,
for genuine explanation. If the explanandum has probability one, then as far as
7 "An" is the random variable taking the value 1, if the nth roll results in A (i.e., in the die
showing a 1 or a 2) and the value 0, otherwise.
8As I will argue, this isn't the whole story. We also must require an account of why the
probability one "law" holds.
9Though, as I've described it here, this is not strictly a mathematical example. It requires
at the very least, some connection with the dynamics of the die rolling mechanism. See
Batterman (1992) for a discussion of more "physical" examples.


=== PAGE 41 ===

30 
The Devil in the Details
statistical explanation goes, there can be no question of having a higher degree
of support.
I think that something very much like this partial explanatory strategy func-
tions in many situations in physics. The appeal to (physically relevant) limit
theorems is essential. What justifies these appeals, and the limiting relations
themselves, are often deep asymptotic properties of the behaviors of systems
composed of many components. Indeed, what is most important is an account,
grounded in fundamental theory, that tells us why the probability one claim
holds. This account will involve asymptotic analysis.10
Before continuing the discussion of these issues, however, I need to address
a second fundamental development in philosophical views of explanation, one
that also clearly has its roots in Hempel's D-N model. This is the recognition
of the explanatory virtues of unification.
Unification Theories
Causal-mechanical explanations have been characterized as "local" in the fol-
lowing sense:
[T]hey show us how particular occurrences come about; they explain
particular phenomena in terms of collections of particular causal pro-
cesses and interactions—or, perhaps, in terms of noncausal mecha-
nisms, if there are such things. (Salmon, 1989, p. 184)
However, there is a view emerging out of the Hempelian D-N tradition de-
fended by Michael Friedman (1974) and Philip Kitcher (1989) (among others)
that characterizes explanation "globally," taking it essentially to be a species of
unification.
Both views—the causal-mechanical and the unification—hold, I believe, that
part of the aim of a theory of explanation is to explicate the concept of scientific
understanding.11 On the causal-mechanical conception, scientific understand-
ing is a local affair. As we've seen, one gains understanding of a given part
of the world (considered initially as an opaque black box) by elucidating the
mechanisms that operate within that black box.
The goals of the unification theory vis-a-vis scientific understanding are quite
different. On this account, roughly speaking, understanding is achieved by re-
ducing the number of independent assumptions one must make when explaining
the way things are in the world. Unification is a global concept: "Explanations
10As one can see, my main complaint with Railton's account of explanation, and with causal-
mechanical accounts in general, is that they miss the role played by asymptotic reasoning. One
can criticize Railton for his strict elimination of probabilities from explanations of deterministic
phenomena as I have done in Batterman (1992). But, the point here is more fundamental.
The attention to all of the causal details required for an ideal explanatory text simply won't
allow for an appeal to the limit theorems that are applicable, precisely because those details
can and must be ignored.
nAn alternative view is that of Schurz and Lambert (1994), who offer a unification-based
account of understanding that does not depend upon a model of explanation.


=== PAGE 42 ===

Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
31
serve to organize and systematize our knowledge in the most efficient and co-
herent possible fashion. Understanding ... involves having a world-picture—a
scientific Weltanschauung—and seeing how various aspects of the world and
our experience of it fit into that picture" (Salmon, 1989, p. 182).
From this superficial description, it is already clear that the two accounts
present two quite different senses of explanation and understanding. Neverthe-
less, Salmon argues that
[t]hese two ways of regarding explanation are not incompatible with
one another; each one offers a reasonable way of construing explana-
tions. Indeed, they may be taken as representing two different, but
compatible, aspects of scientific explanation. Scientific understand-
ing is, after all, a complex matter; there is every reason to suppose
that it has various different facets. (1989, p. 183)
It would be nice if these two senses of explanation 
and understanding
mapped nicely onto the two types of why-questions highlighted. Unfortunately,
while I think one can profitably understand the causal-mechanical conception as
providing appropriate responses to type (i) but not type (ii) questions, it is not
straightforward (and perhaps not even possible) to see the unification models
as always providing appropriate answers to type (ii) questions about universal
behavior.
However, the contrast between the two explanatory models has sometimes
been pitched in just this way (though not in so many words). Consider an
example discussed by Kitcher in his article "Explanatory Unification and the
Causal Structure of the World" (1989). The example concerns a party trick in
which a cord is wrapped around a pair of scissors in such a way that it appears to
be knotted. Yet if the victim of the trick makes an nonobvious twist at the start
of trying to untie it, the cord is easily removed. One would like an account of
why the victim typically cannot disentangle the cord from the scissors. Kitcher
says,
[W]e could, of course, provide the causal details, showing how the
actions actually performed lead to ever more tangled configurations.
But this appears to omit what should be central to the explanation,
namely the fact that the topological features of the situation allow for
disentanglings that satisfy a specifiable condition, so that sequences
of actions which do not satisfy that condition are doomed to failure.
(1989, p. 426)
This is meant to suggest that "even when causal histories are available, they
may not be what the explanation requires" (Kitcher, 1989, p. 426). I take it
that the spirit of this objection is exactly the same as my criticisms of possible
causal-mechanical attempts to explain universal behavior.
But can the unification theories answer type (ii) why-questions? Here we
need at least to sketch a version of the unification theory. I will focus on Kitcher's
version since it is the most developed and has received the most attention in
the literature.


=== PAGE 43 ===

32 
The Devil in the Details
Both Kitcher and Friedman hold that arguments which unify "phenomena"
provide understanding and count as explanatory in virtue of their unifying abil-
ity. Kitcher's version of explanatory unification is based on the idea that the
same relatively small set of patterns of derivation is used repeatedly to derive
many different conclusions—explananda.
Understanding the phenomena is not simply a matter of reducing
the "fundamental incomprehensibilities" but of seeing connections,
common patterns, in what initially appeared to be different situa-
tions.... Science advances our understanding of nature by showing
us how to derive descriptions of many phenomena, using the same
patterns of derivation again and again, and, in demonstrating this,
it teaches us how to reduce the number of types of facts we have to
accept as ultimate (or brute). (Kitcher, 1989, p. 432. Emphasis in
original.)
On this view, a derivation counts as an explanation if it is a member of a
distinguished set of derivations E(K), called the "explanatory store over K."
Here K is, roughly, the set of statements accepted by the scientific community,
and E(K] is the set of derivations that best "systematizes" K. The criterion, of
course, for systematization is unification (Kitcher, 1989, p. 431). The challenge
for the unification theorist is to make the notion sufficiently precise as to be
actually useful and enlightening.
For present purposes, one need not go into the details of Kitcher's proposal.
Nevertheless, it is worth pointing out a few key features. First, whether a
given derivation counts as an explanation depends, crucially, on its being a
member of the set E(K) that best unifies our "scientific knowledge" K. That
is, a given D-N argument, say, will not be explanatory unless it is a member of
E(K). This reflects the global nature of explanatory unification. Second, at base
there are two competing criteria for unification. The conception of unification
endorsed by Kitcher involves the idea that the explanatory store E(K) "is a
set of derivations that makes the best tradeoff between minimizing the number
of patterns of derivation employed and maximizing the number of conclusions
generated" (1989, p. 432). Third, it is instructive to characterize the unification
proposal as a kind of "explanatory internalism." This terminology comes from
Jaegwon Kim's discussion of explanation in his article "Explanatory Knowledge
and Metaphysical Dependence" (1994). Let me elaborate on this aspect of
explanatory unification.
Kim contrasts explanatory internalism with "explanatory externalism" or
"explanatory realism." An internalist model of explanation treats explanation
as
an activity internal to an epistemic corpus: whether or not some-
thing is an explanation—a good, "true" or "correct" explanation—
depends on factors internal to a body of knowledge, not what goes
on in the world—except, of course, for the truth of the statements
comprising the explanans.... A realist about explanation believes


=== PAGE 44 ===

Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
33
that some objective relation between the [explanandum event and
the event(s) invoked as its explanation] underlies, or grounds, the
explanatory relation between their descriptions. (Kim, 1994, p. 57)
As Kim sees it, Kitcher's account is internalist because whether a given
derivation counts as an explanation depends on its inclusion in E(K), where, as
we have seen, E(K) is determined solely by "factors internal to the epistemic
system, such as the number of argument patterns required to generate the given
class of arguments, the 'stringency' of the patterns, etc., not on any objective
relations holding for events or phenomena involved in the putative explanations"
(Kim, 1994, p. 64).
Now how might a unification theorist try to answer the type (ii) why-question
about the existence of the triangle pattern in figure 3.1? It seems that what
the theory requires is that she add the argument pattern (I-S) to the explana-
tory store E(K), with the further stipulation that the probability in the law
schema, r, is unity. The justification for doing this would be that there are
many different probability one type claims that get used in diverse areas involv-
ing deterministic theories, so that adding this one pattern will better unify our
scientific knowledge K. Thus, the unification theorist explains the existence of
the triangle pattern by pointing out that there is an argument schema in E(K)
that tells us to expect the pattern with probability one.
However, in a very important sense, I think this misses the point. The
problem is that there is more to understanding why the pattern emerges than is
provided by noting that it can be expected with probability one. One would like
to know why the probability one result—the statistical law—itself holds. An-
swering this would provide the ultimate explanation for the universal behavior.
Recall that Railton's model has the virtue of demanding that the law appearing
in the D-N-P schema be derived from a fundamental probabilistic theory such
as quantum mechanics. I think that something similar must be required here
as well. We need to understand, by appeal to fundamental theory, why the
probability one claim holds. I will consider the nature of various "arguments"
that lead in different cases to conclusions of that form later. They all have the
following feature in common. Asymptotic analyses show that many, if not most,
of the details required for characterizing the types of systems in question are
irrelevant. But in each case that reasoning may be very different and the form
of the limiting "laws" may also be quite different. (I will have much more to say
about this.) I do not think that the purely internalist account of explanatory
unification can easily respect these differences. That is to say, I don't think
the unification theorist can simply add to E(K) some schema that says "use
asymptotic analysis."
It is worth returning briefly to Kitcher's example of the party trick involving
the "knotted scissors." I think that his own discussion of what is explanatory
in this situation is suggestive, but also that it doesn't really fit the unification
scheme. Recall that what we would ultimately like to explain is the fact that the
victim of the trick fails to untie the "knot." Kitcher says that what is central to
the explanation is "the fact that topological features of the situation allow for


=== PAGE 45 ===

34 
The Devil in the Details
disentanglings that satisfy a specifiable condition, so that sequences of actions
which do not satisfy that condition are doomed to failure" (1989, p. 426). For
Kitcher, the explanation involves identifying the particular phenomenon (the
failure to disentangle the cord in a given case) as "belonging to a class—typically
defined in terms of some language that does not occur in the initial posing of
the question.... The failure to untangle the telephone cord is explained by using
topological notions to characterize the initial configuration of the wire" (1989,
p.427). Thus, "[w]e explain a victim's frustration with the telephone cord by
identifying the topological features of the 'knot,' and noting that only certain
kinds of actions will produce the desired result" (1989, p.427).
If we add to the explanatory store E(K) a generalization (an axiom?) to
the effect that all cord-plus-scissors systems having topological property P are
such that only twists of kind Q result in untanglings, then it is easy to "explain"
why the particular victim fails to untangle the "knot."12 What may make this
seem like some sort of advance is, as Kitcher stresses, the fact that we have
appealed to terms from a "language" (the language of topology) different than
that used to pose the initial why-question. But is the generalization itself the
conclusion of some further derivation that is an instance of a pattern in E(K)?
It seems that the only instance of an argument pattern in E(K) that would
have this generalization as a conclusion is one in which the generalization itself
would have to appear as a premise. Hence, it looks like the unification model is
incapable of explaining the generalization.
Suppose, though, that we have analyzed the topological structure of an ab-
stract space in which one can represent all possible manipulations of the cord
and scissors. Suppose, further, that our analysis has yielded some conclusions
about the stability of the "knot" under similar but distinct manipulations. Then
we may be able to understand why the majority of such manipulations fail to
untangle the cord. That is, we may understand why the generalization we added
to E(K) is true. Such an analysis gives us an idea of what detailed features of
the "knot" are irrelevant for the characterization of the dominant behavior of
interest. In a certain sense it allows us to classify all (or at least most) of the
causal details Kitcher mentions as explanatory "noise" which can be ignored.
Understanding of universal behavior is achieved, at least in part, when one has
a topological analysis of an appropriate abstract space providing principled rea-
sons for ignoring certain details. It is an appeal to stabilities of a certain kind
in such a space that ultimately grounds the feeling that the victim's failure to
untie the "knot" is explained by derivation from the generalization that makes
reference to the topological property P. However, I do not believe that such an
analysis can easily be construed itself as a derivation of the generalization from
other statements in K.
12This proposal fits with an argument by Todd Jones in which he argues that sometimes (in
cases where multiple realizability of upper-level properties or laws blocks "reduction"), "the
explanatory store must either include such high-level generalizations as axioms, or be capable
of generating them with other high-level patterns" (1995, p. 27). I argue in Batterman (2000)
that instances of multiple realizability are profitably understood as instances of universality.
This will be discussed in more detail in chapter 5.


=== PAGE 46 ===

Philosophical Theories of Explanation 
35
Of course, all of this is still very vague. The case we are imagining is too
underdescribed. Here I hope to have shown only that there are serious concerns
about how the purely internalist model of explanatory unification can provide
explanations for patterns of a certain sort. It remains to be seen whether the
vague suggestions about appeals to asymptotic analyses and to stabilities of
mathematical structures in appropriate abstract spaces provide the beginning
of a theory of understanding—one that will account for the worries expressed by
Fisher in the passage quoted in section 2.1. We need to examine more specific
examples and see if something like this suggestion is correct.
3.3 
Conclusion
I have considered how various philosophical models of explanation fare when it
comes to the explanation of universality. I have argued that neither the causal-
mechanical models nor the unification models manage to do a very good job.
As we have seen, the local causal-mechanical models are worse off than the
global approaches that appeal to unification. However, both models virtually
ignore the sort of asymptotic reasoning that, as we will see, is necessary for an
explanation of universal behavior.
In the next chapter I will discuss the explanation of the universality of critical
phenomena provided by renormalization group arguments in physics.13 This is
an example of one of the best understood and most systematic explanations of
universality. However, there are many other examples in which reasoning similar
to the renormalization group analysis plays the essential role in explanation. I
will examine some other, superficially very different, examples and will try to
outline the basic features of "asymptotic explanation."
[ have discussed this example in different contexts in two articles, Batterman (1998, 2000).
13


=== PAGE 47 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 48 ===

Asymptotic Explanation
In this chapter I will present several examples of explanation in which asymp-
totic reasoning plays an essential role. After discussing the renormalization
group explanation of the universality of critical phenomena, I will, in section 4.2
highlight those features of asymptotic explanation that are likely to generalize.
Then in section 4.3 I present two more examples involving explanatory asymp-
totic reasoning in the long-time regime. Finally, in section 4.4 I will sum up the
discussion of asymptotic explanation and discuss the important role played by
stability considerations. We can see from this discussion that asymptotic expla-
nation does, in fact, represent a distinct form of explanation largely missed by
current philosophical conceptions.
4.1 
The Renormalization Group (RG)
I remarked earlier that the most familiar examples of the use of the term "uni-
versality" appear in the physics of critical phenomena. It is worth understand-
ing how physicists have explained the remarkable fact that systems of very
different microscopic constitution exhibit identical behavior under certain cir-
cumstances. Physicists and mathematicians have developed a fairly systematic
strategy through which this explanation can be effected. It is called the renor-
malization group.
While the details of this explanatory strategy can seem quite daunting, the
basic idea is very simple. In this and the next section I will try to emphasize
exactly what is crucial and "new" (at least from the point of view of philo-
sophical models of explanation) about the renormalization group analysis, and
"asymptotic explanation" in general.
To see how the explanation is supposed to go, I must first introduce a few
details about critical phenomena in systems such as fluids, gases, and magnets.
Experimentally it is found that certain dimensionless numbers, so-called critical
exponents, apparently characterize the (virtually) identical behavior of systems
as diverse as fluids and magnets near their respective critical points. The critical
37
4


=== PAGE 49 ===

38
The Devil in the Details
point for a fluid in a container, for instance, is a point below which it is impossi-
ble to pass, by increasing pressure at fixed temperature, from the gaseous phase
to the liquid phase without going through a state in which both gas and liquid
are simultaneously present in the container, and above which such a transition
from gas to liquid is possible without passing through a regime in which both
gas and liquid are simultaneously present. That is, for fixed T > Tc (the critical
temperature), one no longer observes a vapor phase followed by a liquid phase
as the pressure is increased. Instead, there is a unique "fluid" phase. Figure 4.1
illustrates this. In the figure the lines represent values of P and T for which two
phases are simultaneously present. The point A is a "triple point" at which all
three phases can coexist.
The critical exponent describes the behavior of the density of the fluid as a
function of temperature near the critical point. It describes a universal property
in that the same behavior is observed almost without regard for the chemical
constitution of the fluid. More remarkable, still, is the fact that the same
critical exponent apparently describes the behavior of magnets as they undergo
a transition from the ferromagnetic state with positive net magnetization below
the critical point to the paramagnetic phase with zero magnetization above the
critical point. Surely, one would like an explanation of this universal behavior.
Modern statistical physics (RG arguments) provides such an account.
We see here, explicitly, the two features of universality highlighted in sec-
tion 2.2. First, the details of the microstructure of a given fluid are largely irrel-
evant for describing the behavior of the particular system of interest. Second,
many different systems (other fluids and even magnets) with distinct microstruc-
tures exhibit identical behavior characterized by the same critical exponent. As
we will see, the RG analysis of critical phenomena will explain why the differ-
ent systems exhibit the same behavior (the second feature) by utilizing the fact
that at the critical point, the details of the microstructure of any one individual
system are virtually irrelevant for its behavior at that point (the first feature).
Figure 4.1: Temperature-pressure phase diagram for a "fluid"


=== PAGE 50 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
39
The critical behavior of a fluid is best characterized (at least at the simplest
level) in terms of what is called the "order parameter." In this case the order
parameter is the difference in densities of the vapor and liquid present in the
container of "fluid": V = pliq — pvap. Below the critical temperature, Tc, V
is nonzero, indicating the simultaneous presence of the two phases of the fluid;
while above Tc the order parameter V vanishes. Figure 4.2 illustrates the key
points. In particular, the vertical lines tie together values for coexisting liquid
and vapor densities, (p l i q) and (pvap) respectively.1
One universal aspect of the behavior of fluids near the critical point is the
shape of the coexistence curve drawn in figure 4.2. The key question concerns
the shape of this curve near the critical temperature Tc. To begin to answer
this, one considers the "reduced" temperature
which gives the difference in temperature from the critical temperature in di-
mensionless units. One makes the assumption (well supported by experimental
data) that as T approaches Tc from below, the order parameter V vanishes as
some power B of \t\:
If the coexistence curve were parabolic near Tc, then (3 would be equal to 1/2.
Experiments have shown, however, that the exponent B is not equal to 1/2,
but rather has a value near 0.33 that is also, apparently, not a simple rational
fraction. Furthermore, the same number appears to characterize the coexis-
tence curves for different fluids and even, as noted earlier, coexistence curves
for magnets where the order parameter is the net magnetization, M. The mag-
netization is positive below the critical temperature Tc, the system being in a
ferromagnetic phase and is zero above Tc with the system in a paramagnetic
phase:
We can ask about a given fluid, say F, why near its critical temperature
its density varies with temperature the way that we observe it to. We might
attempt to answer this starting from fundamental physics by appealing to the
Schrodinger equation for the fluid considered to be some sort of collection of
molecules interacting according to certain specified force laws. This would be
an attempt to fill in part of a causal-mechanical ideal explanatory text. If we
were lucky in our attempt to solve the equation we might, in fact, be able to
derive the fact that for fluid F, VF ~ |t|°.33. On the other hand, as has been
repeatedly noted, such a derivation is not an explanation of the universality I
am discussing. In no way can it answer the question of why the same exponent
describes the critical behavior of fluids F', F", and so on.
The desired explanation is provided by the RG. To see how this goes, first
note that every system, each different fluid, say, is represented by a function—its
so-called Hamiltonian. This characterizes the kinds of interactions between
JNote that the vertical "tie lines" in figure 4.2 are not part of the "coexistence curve."


=== PAGE 51 ===

40
The Devil in the Details
Figure 4.2: The coexistence curve: Density vs. temperature for a Fluid
the system's components (or degrees of freedom), the effects of external fields,
and so on. Usually, the different components of a gas or fluid are correlated with
one another only very weakly. In other words, they interact significantly only
with nearby components and they remain virtually uncorrelated with remote
components. However, when a system is near its critical point, the "length" of
the range of correlations between the different components increases despite the
fact that the interactions remain local. In fact, at the critical point, this so-
called correlation length diverges to infinity. The divergence of the correlation
length is intimately associated with the system's critical behavior. It means that
correlations at every length scale (between near as well as extremely distant
components) contribute to the physics of the system as it undergoes a phase
transition. This is a highly singular mathematical problem and is, in effect,
completely intractable. It is relatively easy to deal with correlations that obtain
between pairs of particles, but when one must consider correlations between
three or more—even more than 1023—particles, the situation is hopeless.
The guiding idea of the renormalization group method is to find a way of
turning this singular problem into a tractable, regular problem by transform-
ing the problem into an analysis of the topological structure of an appropriate
abstract space—the space of Harhiltonians.2 One introduces a transformation
on this space that changes an initial physical Hamiltonian describing a real sys-
tem into another Hamiltonian in the space. The transformation preserves, to
some extent, the form of the original Hamiltonian so that when the thermody-
namic parameters are properly adjusted (renormalized), the new renormalized
Hamiltonian describes a possible system exhibiting similar behavior. Most im-
portantly, however, the entire process effects a reduction in the number of coupled
components or degrees of freedom within the correlation length. Figure 4.3 gives
an idea of what is involved here for a spin system modeled on a lattice. In this
particular example, the number of degrees of freedom is reduced by a factor of
four every time the transformation is iterated.
2See Pfeuty and Toulouse (1977) for a nice discussion of how the RG works.


=== PAGE 52 ===

Asymptotic Explanation
41
This kind of analysis is possible because at criticality the divergence of the
correlation length means that no characteristic length scale is associated with
the system. As a result, the system at criticality exhibits self-similar behavior—
roughly, it looks the same at different length scales. This is seen in figure 4.3.
Thus, the new renormalized Hamiltonian describes a "system" that presents
a more tractable problem and is easier to deal with. By repeated application of
this renormalization group transformation, the problem becomes more and more
tractable until one hopefully can solve the problem by relatively simple methods.
In effect the renormalization group transformation eliminates degrees of freedom
(microscopic details) that are inessential or irrelevant for characterizing the
system's behavior at criticality.
In fact, if the initial Hamiltonian describes a system at criticality, then each
renormalized Hamiltonian must also be at criticality. The sequence of Hamil-
tonians thus generated defines a trajectory in the abstract space that in the
Figure 4.3: The operations of the renormalization group: (a) Block formation
(partial integration); (b) Spatial rescaling/contraction; (c) Renormalization of
parameters


=== PAGE 53 ===

42 
The Devil in the Details
limit as the number of transformations goes to infinity ends at a fixed point.
The behavior of trajectories in the neighborhood of the fixed point can be
determined by an analysis of the stability properties of the fixed point. This
analysis also allows for the calculation of the critical exponents characterizing
the critical behavior of the system. It turns out that different physical Hamil-
tonians can flow to the same fixed point. Thus, their critical behaviors are
characterized by the same critical exponents. This is the essence of the expla-
nation for the of critical behavior. Hamiltonians describing different physical
systems lie in the basin of attraction of the same renormalization group fixed
point. This means that if one were to alter, even quite considerably, some
of the basic features of a system (say, from those of fluid F to fluid F'), the
resulting system (F') will exhibit the same critical behavior. This stability un-
der perturbation is a reflection of the fact that certain details concerning the
microconstituents of the systems are individually largely irrelevant for the sys-
tems' behaviors at criticality. Instead, their collective properties dominate their
critical behavior, and these collective properties are characterized by the fixed
points of the renormalization group transformation (and the local properties of
the flow in the neighborhood of those points). We can, through this analysis,
understand both how universality arises and why the diverse systems display
identical behavior.
By telling us what (and why) various details are irrelevant for the behavior
of interest, this same analysis also identifies those physical properties that are
relevant for the universal behavior being investigated. For instance, it turns out
that the critical exponent can be shown to depend on the spatial dimension of the
system and on the symmetry properties of the order parameter. So, for example,
systems with one spatial dimension or quasi-one-dimensional systems such as
polymers, exhibit different exponents than (quasi-) two-dimensional systems like
films. The universal behaviors of these systems are, in turn, different than that
exhibited by three-dimensional systems such as fluids. The details here aren't
crucial for understanding the main point:
• The RG type analysis demonstrates that many of the details that distin-
guish the physical systems from one another are irrelevant for their uni-
versal behavior. At the same time, it allows for the determination of those
physical features that are relevant for that behavior. Finally it allows for
the quantitative determination of the nature of the universal behavior by
enabling one to identify the critical exponents.
4.2 
The General Strategy
It is possible to extract from this example several general features that are
present in many explanations of universality offered by physicists. The explana-
tion in the example is effected by developing reasons, grounded in the fundamen-
tal physics of fluids, for ignoring detailed microphysical information about any
actual system or systems being investigated. The RG is a method for extracting


=== PAGE 54 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
43
structures that are, with respect to the behavior of interest, detail independent.
Of course, many features remain system or detail dependent. In the previous
example, each fluid will have a different critical temperature Tc that depends
essentially on its microstructural constitution. Nevertheless, the RG method
allows for a construction of a kind of limiting macroscopic phenomenology—an
upper level generalization, perhaps—that is not tied to any unique microstruc-
tural account. The microscopically distinct systems can be grouped into distinct
universality classes depending on the macroscopic phenomenology they exhibit.
Nigel Goldenfeld et al. (1989, p. 368) argue that the principles of RG
theory constitute a "general framework for extracting phenomenological rela-
tions among macroscopic observables from microscopic models that may not be
precisely definable." It is a
method to study the asymptotic behavior of a system, e.g., in the
macroscopic limit, where the scale of observation is much larger than
the scale of microscopic description.... It should be stressed that phe-
nomenology is not a second-rate incomplete description of a given
system, but the most complete description modulo microscopic un-
known factors over which we can never have ultimate detailed knowl-
edge. (Goldenfeld et al., 1989, p. 369)
While this last remark seems to reflect limitations on knowability, the RG type
arguments are not essentially epistemic in nature. They demonstrate, as I've
said, that the explanation of universal behavior involves the elucidation of prin-
cipled physical reasons for bracketing (or setting aside as "explanatory noise")
many of the microscopic details that genuinely distinguish one system from
another. In other words, it is a method for extracting just those features of
systems, viewed macroscopically, that are stable under perturbation of their
microscopic details.
As the example from the last section shows, it is essential that the micro-
scopic details do not themselves greatly influence the phenomenological behavior
of the system. For instance, the exact structure of the molecules in a given fluid
and the precise nature of the forces characterizing the molecular interactions are
not important for the critical behavior of that particular fluid. Instead, in the
asymptotic regime where many molecules find themselves correlated—that is,
where the correlation length diverges—it is the collective or correlated behavior
that is salient and dominates the observed phenomenological behavior. In order
to "see" the stable, universal phenomenological structures, one must investi-
gate the appropriate limiting regime. It is, therefore, an essential feature of the
method that it describes the relationship between two asymptotically related
descriptions of the system.3
In sum, the following features are apparently characteristic of RG type ex-
planations of universal behavior.
3In many instances, the asymptotic relation between the different "levels of description"
will depend on differing length scales. But there is no essential reason that length (or size)
must be the asymptotic parameter. Long-time behavior or increasing complexity might, for
example, be appropriate parameters for some investigations. See the examples in section 4.3.


=== PAGE 55 ===

44 
The Devil in the Details
• As the universal behavior is in some sense emergent in an asymptotic
regime, the explanation involves some kind of asymptotic analysis.
• The universality is the result of the stability under perturbation of the
underlying microscopic physical details.
• The stability under perturbation (or "structural stability") is explained
by the underlying microscopic physics of the systems being investigated.
4.3 "Intermediate Asymptotics"
We have seen that on Goldenfeld's view, the RG is a method for extracting
a macroscopic phenomenology (involving universal behavior) from microscopic
models. In so doing, we not only can discover what universal macroscopic
regularities hold of the system of interest (if we haven't already observed this
empirically),4 but we also can explain, in terms of the underlying microscopic
theory, why those macroscopic generalizations hold. Part of what gets shown is
that the macroscopic description is insensitive to the microscopic details. One
way of understanding this may be to hold that there is no unique microscopic
story underlying the macroscopic phenomenology. Given that, one might as
well use the "simplest" microscopic model. Goldenfeld et al. put the point as
follows:
A macroscopic description of a system may be insensitive to micro-
scopic details. Thus there is no unique microscopic picture that is
consistent with the macroscopic phenomenology. In fact, there is an
equivalence class of microscopic models all of which have the same
macroscopic phenomenology. One could say that this fact is episte-
mologically important, but this is also very useful in practice. If one
is solely interested in studying universal, macroscopic properties of
a system, one can choose the most convenient or simplest (in some
sense) microscopic model. (Goldenfeld et al., 1989, p. 359)
There is clearly a pragmatic element involved here. If what we care about
is the macroscopic phenomenology, then we can try to proceed with RG-like
asymptotic arguments. Nevertheless, there is more to it than simple pragmatic
questions of interest. There are reasons why we so often focus on universal
behavior as the subject of investigations.
In studying a phenomenon of physical interest, such as the period of pen-
dulums discussed in section 2.2, we often seek to find relationships between the
quantity of interest and the other parameters that govern the behavior of the
system. Following Barenblatt (1996), let us call the quantity of interest a and
the governing parameters a1,... ,ak,b1,... ,bm. The distinction between the
4We have already seen an example of "discovering" the form of the generalization given
only background knowledge of the subject. This was the example of dimensional analysis
applied to the pendulum's period in section 2.2.


=== PAGE 56 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
45
ai's and the bj's is that the ai's have dimensions that are independent of the
other parameters, whereas the dimensions of the bj 's are expressible as products
of powers of the dimensions of the a i . 5 The investigator looks for relationships
of the form
One way of (partially) defining such a function would be provide a table of
values containing the values for the ai's and the bj's that are of interest and the
corresponding value for a in each case. In the age of modern computers with
the ability to run impressive numerical calculations, it is often claimed that this
is what is required to answer our questions about the quantity a. Barenblatt
puts the point as follows:
Please, it is often said, formulate the problem whose solution you
need and you will obtain without special effort a set of tables of
all the numerical values you need with the desired (and, of course,
paid for) accuracy. To understand this point properly [that is, to
see what's wrong with this point of view] we have to recall that
the crucial step in any field of research is to establish what is the
minimum amount of information that we actually require about the
phenomenon being studied. All else should be put aside in the study.
This is precisely the path taken by the natural sciences since Newton.
Features that are not repeated from case to case and cannot be
experimentally recorded are always deliberately thrown out. Thus,
the researcher is actually not so much interested in a table of values
of the function f ... as in the principal physical laws that determine
the major features of this relationship. These principal laws, the
basic features of the phenomena can often be seen and understood
when analysing the intermediate asymptotics. (Barenblatt, 1996,
pp. 91-92)
This attitude resonates with Fisher's discussion of the understanding afforded
by the "modern" theorist (section 2.1). Understanding of universal features,
as I have been arguing, often requires more than simply providing a numerical
calculation from the fundamental governing equation.
For Barenblatt, the elucidation of the "principal laws" and "basic features"
provides the desired understanding. These laws and features are determined
by analyzing the intermediate asymptotics of the governing equations. We now
need to see what he means by this. We can begin to understand this if we think
of an Impressionist painting such as Seurat's pointillist "A Sunday Afternoon
on the Island of La Grande Jatte." A characteristic of this painting and of the
Impressionists, in general, is the fact that if you are too close, you get lost in
5We have already seen this in our discussion of the pendulum's period. The parameters are
m, l, 0, and g. We have [m] = M, [l] = L, [0] — T. These dimensions are all clearly indepen-
dent of one another. On the other hand, the dimension of g, the gravitational acceleration,
is definable in terms of the product of powers of the first three: [g] = M0L1T-2. Thus, the
first three parameters would be members of the ai's and the last is a member of the bj's.


=== PAGE 57 ===

46 
The Devil in the Details
the details—all you see are the various colored points. But also, as with any
painting, if you are too far away, you cannot discern the image either. The "best"
view—the view where one can best appreciate the image (or "understand" it)—
is to be had at some intermediate distance from the canvas.6
Something analogous is involved in "any scientific study."
Thus, the primary thing in which the investigator is interested is
the development of the phenomenon for intermediate times and dis-
tances away from the boundaries such that the effects of random
initial features or fine details in the spatial structure of the bound-
aries have disappeared but the system is still far from its final equi-
librium state. This is precisely where the underlying laws governing
the phenomenon (which are what we are in fact primarily interested
in) appear most clearly. Therefore intermediate asymptotics are of
primary interest in every scientific study. (Barenblatt, 1996, p. 94)
This last claim is probably a bit too strong. However, I think that, broadly
construed, it is true of much of what gets studied in physics and other sciences
to which mathematicians have applied their skills. In particular, I think, as
should be obvious by now, that any investigation that remotely addresses a
question related to understanding universal behavior will involve intermediate
asymptotics as understood by Barenblatt. Therefore, it is well worth the effort
to examine a few explicit examples of this type of asymptotic reasoning.
Technically, we can understand intermediate asymptotics as follows: Sup-
pose we are interested in a certain property of a system for which there are
two constant parameters that we believe play a role in determining the nature
of that property. If these governing constants, Xi
(1) and Xi
(2) , have the dimen-
sions of a certain independent variable Xi that also appears in the problem, then
an intermediate asymptotics is an asymptotic representation of the property of
interest as xi/Xi
(1) —> 0 while x i / X i
( 2 ) —> oo (Barenblatt, 1996, p. 90) .
I will now discuss two relatively simple, but still very technical examples.
Both might be grouped under the heading of modeling the spreading of some-
thing (heat in the first example, and water in the second) through some medium.
I am interested in finding the principal laws and basic features that determine
the nature of the spreading in the intermediate asymptotic regime.
Heat
In this section I will show, using a relatively simple example, how it is possible
that the investigation of an appropriate asymptotic regime can yield solutions
describing the salient features of a phenomenon of interest. I will begin by
considering the heat diffusion equation in one dimension.7 Consider an idealized
6I am virtually ignorant of theories of art interpretation. So nothing here is meant to deny
that part of "understanding" the painting is appreciating the details of how it was painted.
Nevertheless, there does seem to be a range of distances at which the picture is best discerned.
7The discussion that follows is taken largely from discussions in Barenblatt (1996) and
Goldenfeld et al. (1989).


=== PAGE 58 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
47
situation: Suppose that we have an infinite metal bar of circular cross section
which has a thermal diffusivity of n.8 We are interested in the temperature
distribution 9(x, t) in the bar at different places x and times t after some amount
of heat has been locally introduced at some point x = 0 (say, by holding a match
or lighter underneath the bar at that point). The equation governing this heat
conduction is the following partial differential equation:
We assume that the initial temperature distribution is given by the following
Gaussian initial condition:
where / is the width of the initial distribution and M0 is the "mass" of the
initial distribution. That is, M0 is the area under the initial distribution (4.2).
It is the initial amount of heat released into the bar and satisfies the following
equation:
The heat equation (4.1) is derived from a conservation law, so that the "mass"
MO remains constant for all times t.
Now the exact solution to equation (4.1), given initial condition (4.2), is
given by the following equation:
However, we are interested in the long time 
behavior of the solution. In
this asymptotic regime (4.4) becomes
Note that the asymptotic solution (4.5) lacks a parameter that appeared
in the full solution (4.4): namely, the width l of the initial distribution. As a
result, we can also arrive at the solution (4.5) by letting l —> 0 keeping t fixed.
In this degenerate limit, the initial condition becomes a delta function:
This means that the solution (4.5) to the long-time asymptotic behavior of the
heat equation for a wide variety of different 
initial conditions—initial distribu-
tions of different widths l —is given by the special degenerate solution with initial
condition given by (4.6).
8K is a property of the material of which the bar is made.


=== PAGE 59 ===

48
The Devil in the Details
Figure 4.4: 6 vs. x
Recall Goldenfeld et al.'s (1989, p. 359) remark that "[i]f one is solely inter-
ested in studying universal macroscopic properties of a system, one can choose
the most convenient or simplest (in some sense) microscopic model." In the cur-
rent context—where instead of large-system limiting behavior we are concerned
with long-time behavior—this means that we might as well use the delta func-
tion initial condition. The long-time behavior of solutions to the heat equation
is insensitive to the details of how the heat was introduced into the bar. The
"macroscopic phenomenology" (that is, the "shape" of long-time heat distribu-
tions) does not depend on details at the "microscopic level" (the "shape" of the
initial distribution). We can see that very special idealized initial conditions
have much broader relevance than is often thought.
The solution (4.5) possesses the important property of self-similarity, which
means that the temperature distributions along the bar at different times can
be obtained from one another by a similarity or scaling transformation.9 The
0 vs. x plot of (4.5) for different times is given in figure 4.4. Moreover, self-
similarity entails that when plotted in the "self-similar" (dimensionless) coordi-
nates (x/fkt,0\fkt/M 0), 
each of these curves is represented by a single curve
as shown in figure 4.5.
Let us consider the problem of obtaining the temperature distributions at
various locations and times from a different perspective—pure dimensional anal-
ysis. Suppose that all we know is that the temperature at point x at time t
should be a function of the time t, the distance x from the source, the thermal
diffusivity K, the width l of the initial distribution, and the "mass" or quantity
of heat Mo :10
If this were known, then even without knowing that the phenomenon was gov-
erned by the heat equation (4.1), we can arrive at a solution having the same
9Let u(x, t) be some observable that is a function of space and time. A similarity transfor-
mation has the following form: u(x, t) ~ ta f ( x t
B ) , as t —> oo for some function /.
10This is just the perspective from which we analyzed the period of the pendulum in sec-
tion 2.2.


=== PAGE 60 ===

Asymptotic Explanation
49
Figure 4.5: Plot in "self-similar" coordinates
form as the self-similar solution (4.5).
This can be accomplished using dimensional analysis. Here is another case in
which much information can be gained despite having only limited background
theoretical information. Arguments of this form play a major role in the de-
velopment of mathematical models.11 Dimensional analysis, as I emphasized
earlier, is a form of asymptotic reasoning—a fact I believe is not that widely
recognized.
To do dimensional analysis on this problem, first choose a system of units
(8 = degrees Celsius, meters, seconds). This specific choice of units is, of course,
largely arbitrary. What matters is that it is a member of the class of units
(Q,L,T), where © is the dimension for temperature and is independent of the
dimensions L—of length, and T—of time). Then the dimensions of the various
quantities assumed to be involved in the problem (the variables and parameters)
are:12
Note next that the dimensions of the variable t and the parameters K and
MO are independent of one another—neither can be expressed as products of
powers of the dimensions of the other two. On the other hand, the dimensions of
the remaining variables and parameters can be expressed as products of powers
of these three independent dimensional quantities:
11 It is important to note again that the simplification provided by dimensional analysis does
not work for all, or even most, problems. The reasons for this are crucial, having to do with
the singular nature of the limiting situation. They will be considered further in section 4.3.
12 Remember that
= "the dimension of <


=== PAGE 61 ===

50 
The Devi] in the Details
Now form the dimensionless parameters:
Dimensional analysis lets us express the functional relationship (4.7) using the
dimensionless IPs in (4.9) as follows:
In the limit l —> 0 we have the idealized delta function distribution that corre-
sponds to letting n2 —> 0. Then we have
and using (4.9) we get
So, by dimensional analysis alone we have discovered that the solution to our
problem has self-similar form with the function Fs, sometimes called the "scaling
function," to be determined. Compare the form of (4.11) with that of (4.5).
Clearly, we know that the relationship between the plots of figure 4.4 and the
plot of figure 4.5 must obtain. The solution is self-similar.
Had we access to the heat equation (4.1) (as we, in fact, do), we could now
substitute this form into that equation and find that we can easily solve for
Fs. The benefit of dimensional analysis here is that after the substitution we
have only to solve an ordinary differential equation to find the unknown scaling
function Fs rather than the original partial differential equation. The result is:
where
For the special s-function initial condition in which l = 0, namely that given
by equation (4.6), we have self-similarity, and Fs is the scaling function for that
solution. In other words,
But, for any initial condition in which l = 0, the solution must be given by
which is not self-similar. In the previous discussion of the (t —> oo) limiting
solution (4.5), we saw that the two solutions coincided. It was legitimate to
assume n2 —> 0 for sufficiently long times. Given this assumption, we see that


=== PAGE 62 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
51
It is this assumption, therefore, that "allows us to determine the long time
behavior of the [heat] equation, starting from initial conditions with l = 0, from
the similarity solution" (Goldenfeld et al, 1989, p. 292).
The assumption that n2 —> 0 reflects our "common sense" belief that the
heat diffusion process "forgets" the form of the initial distribution once the mean
squared distance (x)2 >> l (Goldenfeld et al., 1989, p. 292). Thus, asymptotic
analysis here introduces a kind of time asymmetry not present in the exact heat
equation, which is time reversal invariant.
For situations in which similar assumptions are legitimate, one can proceed
as follows using dimensional analysis: First, nondimensionalize the problem
and form the relevant dimensionless parameters n and ni. There will then be
a solution to the problem of the form
If the assumption that some ni —> 0, say n2,is legitimate (i.e., that in this limit
F is nonsingular),13 then we know that
Barenblatt (1996) calls asymptotics where this assumption is valid, "interme-
diate asymptotics of the first kind." These situations allow for the relatively
easy construction of similarity solutions through traditional dimensional anal-
ysis. Similarity solutions are important. They are solutions to a degenerate
idealized problem—in our case, this was the solution to the heat equation with
the special S-function initial condition given by (4.6). But these solutions are not
just important as solutions to some idealized special case. As we've seen, these
self-similar solutions are also solutions to non-self-similar problems—problems
where, for example, l = 0. The existence of intermediate asymptotics of the
first kind demonstrates that the process under investigation has solutions that
stabilize in some asymptotic domain. And so the idealized (far from actual)
self-similar solutions have genuine physical significance.
One way to better understand this notion of stability is epistemological—
though let me stress that this epistemological characterization is really a conse-
quence of a more fundamental, mathematical conception of stability. Note that
within the asymptotic regime, t —> oo, it is not possible to retrodict the actual
history of the temperature evolution. That is, one cannot decide whether14
(i) u was a delta function at t = 0, or (ii) u was a Gaussian distri-
bution with width l at t = 0, or (iii) u was a Gaussian distribution
with width l at t = 10. These and many other histories all give rise
to the same distribution u(x) [namely, that given by equation (4.5)
or equation (4.11)] at sufficiently long times, i.e, in the intermediate
asymptotic regime. (Goldenfeld et al., 1989, p. 304)
13This is something that we virtually never know in advance. Where it fails, we may have
intermediate asymptotics of the second kind, or no self-similar solutions at all. I will have
more to say about intermediate asymptotics of the second kind in section 4.3.
14 In my example the function u in this passage is the temperature distribution 9.


=== PAGE 63 ===

52 
The Devil in the Details
In finding these self-similar solutions, we find Barenblatt's principal laws
and basic features. Intermediate asymptotics of the first kind—dimensional
analysis—is just the simplest kind of asymptotic investigation leading to such
principal laws and basic features.
It is clear how poorly the causal-mechanical accounts of explanation would
fare in explaining the emergence of this long-time asymptotic behavior. On
those accounts, one must exhibit the ideal explanatory text—all the details—of
the evolution of the temperature distribution in the bar. Given any one initial
condition, the amount of computational effort involved in providing the details
of the initial transient behavior and of how these transients subsequently decay
will be enormous. However, even forgetting about these "practical" consider-
ations, such causal-mechanical explanations will become lost in the details of
the distinct transient behaviors. Such phenomena are not repeatable, and their
explanations can contribute nothing to an understanding of why the long-time
behavior for each system will be the same. That is, each distinct initial distri-
bution will give rise to different transient behavior and, therefore, to completely
different explanations.
Water
We have just seen how intermediate asymptotics of the first kind can lead to the
relatively simple discovery of the principal features of a phenomenon being mod-
eled. Unfortunately, as I have hinted, the applicability of simple dimensional
analysis and the existence of this type of asymptotics is the exception rather
than the rule. In most situations, the assumption that justifies equation (4.14)
is illegitimate. In other words, more often than not, the aim to simplify via
"reduction" by neglecting small parameters leads to a singular problem. A.
C. Fowler (1997) argues that a major part of applied mathematical modeling
depends on this sort of asymptotic reasoning (he calls it simplification by "re-
duction"). As the following passage indicates, he expresses a view about detailed
numerical "solutions" and their explanatory value consonant with that I have
been developing.
Reduction is the process whereby a model is simplified, most often by
the neglect of various small terms. In some cases, their neglect leads
to what are called singular perturbations ..., whose effect can be
understood by using the method of matched asymptotic expansions.
In particular, it is often possible to break down a complicated model
into simpler constituent processes, which, for example, operate on
different space and time scales. Analytic dissection in this way leads
to an overall understanding that is not so simply available through
numerical computations, and indeed it also provides a methodology
for simplifying such computations. (Fowler, 1997, p. 7)
In fact, the most interesting cases are cases for which the perturbation problem
is singular.


=== PAGE 64 ===

Asymptotic Explanation
53
For such problems dimensional analysis will completely fail to yield a self-
similar solution. If, despite this, it is still possible to find some sort of self-
similar solution, then we are dealing with what Barenblatt calls "intermediate
asymptotics of the second kind."
An apparently slight modification to the heat diffusion problem leads to just
such a situation. As we will see, the problem is that the l —> 0 limit is not
regular. The length l appearing in the initial distribution affects the nature of
the solution, no matter how small. It represents another "essential length" in
the problem.
There is a very deep analogy, explicitly discussed by both Goldenfeld (1989)
and Barenblatt (1996), between the situation here and necessity for a second
(typically microscopic) length scale in the renormalization group arguments one
finds in quantum field theory and statistical mechanics. My example, of the RG
explanation of the universality of critical phenomena discussed in section 4.1, is
a case in point.
Let me briefly describe the modification to the problem discussed and then
consider some of its consequences. Once again, this is one of the simplest exam-
ples that has been rigorously investigated. Consider the problem of describing
the shape (height vs. radial distance) of a mound of water filtering through
a porous rock medium such as sandstone, over an impermeable (nonporous)
bedrock. We assume that the groundwater mound is axially symmetric so that
all we care about is how the height of the mound changes over time as the
mound spreads out through the ground in a radial direction r.
Figure 4.6 gives some of the relevant details. Assume for simplicity that in
the initial mound of water, all of the rock pores are full, and that outside of the
initial mound they are all empty of water, though filled with gas. Under the
influence of the earth's gravity, the mound of water will begin to spread out and
lose height as in figure 4.6. Thus, before the final equilibrium state of uniform
(zero) height is reached in the distant future, there will be a time dependent
Figure 4.6: Spreading of a groundwater mound


=== PAGE 65 ===

54 
The Devil in the Details
radius, ro(t), such that for r < r0 the height of the mound will be decreasing
with time, and for r > r0 the mound height will be increasing with time:
For r - r0 it is clear that dh/dt = 0.
Note, also, that as water enters a pore in the rock, only a fraction a of the
pore will become filled — not all of the gas will be displaced. Likewise, as water
leaves a pore, there remains, because of capillary forces, a thin layer of water.
So a fraction, a0, of water is left behind. The equation describing the change in
height over time is:15
Equation (4.16) is a special case (in cylindrical coordinates) of a more general
equation called the "modified porous medium equation" (Goldenfeld et al., 1989,
p. 295).
where
It is intimately related to the heat equation, in that for a0 = 0—or equivalently,
e = 0—the one-dimensional modified porous medium equation (4.17) reduces to
the heat equation (4.1). Thus, if water, upon leaving a pore of the rock, left no
residual wetting layer, the equations would be the same and we would have the
similarity solution discussed in section 4.3. In the general case, however, the
groundwater equation (4.16) or (4.17) is nonlinear, whereas the heat equation
is linear. In fact, there is a fundamental asymmetry in this problem that is not
present in the heat diffusion scenario. The physics of the situation, and not any
artifact of the mathematics, is responsible for the asymmetry.16
Let us assume an initial condition similar to (4.2) such that the initial "mass"
of u,
is proportional to the volume of water in the mound. Note a crucial difference
between equations (4.3) and (4.19). The former holds for all times, whereas
the latter holds only for the initial time t = 0. This is to be expected, given
that as the groundwater mound spreads out, some water remains behind in the
15k and K0 are constants depending, respectively, on a and a — a0.
16In particular, the responsibility lies with the fact expressed by equation (4.15) and with
the existence of distinct constants a and a0.


=== PAGE 66 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
55
pores that are being exited and is, therefore, no longer available to fill pores
at later times — another consequence of the fundamental difference between the
two scenarios.
Without going into the details, were one to try to do dimensional analysis
on this problem in analogy with that of the heat equation, one would find three
dimensionless groups:
related by
As before, we seek a self-similar solution in the n2 —> 0 limit, hoping to be
able to represent the long-time behavior solutions to (4.16) or (4.17) for a wide
range of initial conditions of the form (4.2) to an idealized degenerate solution
when l = 0. Unfortunately, this procedure leads to a contradiction, as both
Barenblatt and Goldenfeld demonstrate.
However, if one postulates that as n2 —> 0 a solution of the form:17
with 7 and 6 constants, it is possible to find a self-similar solution, despite
the failure of conventional dimensional analysis to provide one. In this case we
have "asymptotics of the second kind." The exponents 7 and 5 are completely
analogous to the critical exponents that describe the universal behavior of a fluid
at its critical point. Renormalization group arguments are used to determine
these in the context of critical phenomena, and Goldenfeld et al. (1989) have
demonstrated that the exponents assumed to exist in the postulated solution for
asymptotics of the second kind can be determined using completely analogous
renormalization group arguments. In fact, renormalization group arguments
provide the justification for the postulated form (4.20) of the solution.
The self-similar solution has the form:18
If the limit n2 —> 0 is achieved by letting l — > 0, then u(x, t) will be either zero
or infinity, depending on the sign of the exponent 7. Hence, equation (4.21) is
meaningful only if
Since the only way this can happen is if MO depends on / in such a way that
in the limit l —> 0 the product M0ly remains finite, it follows that the mass of
the distribution isn't conserved when e = 0 in equation (4.18). This, in turn,
17See Barenblatt (1996, p. 351).
18Note that in this problem 5 = 0.


=== PAGE 67 ===

56 
The Devil in the Details
is just a further indication of the fundamental difference between this problem
and the temperature distribution problem of section 4.3.
As we saw, in the discussion of the "stability" of the intermediate asymptotic
solution to the temperature distribution problem, it is impossible to retrodict,
from the form of the asymptotic solution, the nature of the initial situation that
gave rise to that solution. Nevertheless, since the "mass" of the distribution in
that problem is conserved over time, one knows the mass, call this m(0) = M0, of
the initial distribution given the mass of the distribution, m(t), in the asymptotic
regime t >> 0. They are equal. In this sense, we might say that the initial mass
of heat remains "observable" even in the asymptotic domain. However, in the
current groundwater problem, MO must be a function of the initial distribution
width / for equation (4.22) to be satisfied. The inability to retrodict is, therefore,
even more pronounced—the initial mass m(0) is "unobservable" in principle.
One cannot determine it from knowledge of the mass, m(t), for any time t >> 0.
Furthermore, in the limit l —> 0 the initial mass diverges. This singular limit
is a reflection of the fundamental physics of the situation and is not an artifact
of the mathematical model. The singular nature of limit in these situations will
often give rise to divergences in various approximation schemes that may be
employed to determine the characteristic exponents such as 7. However, these
divergences, common in asymptotic approximation schemes (including the sin-
gular perturbation theory often employed in the renormalization of quantum
field theory and statistical physics) are reflections of features of the approxi-
mations employed to deal with a physically singular problem. The exact forms
of the divergences are not themselves physically significant. In other words, it
is true that the "blow ups," or divergences that perturbative approximations
engender when trying to determine, say, the values for critical exponents such
as 7, are the result of the singular nature of the physics. But the particular
nature or form that these divergences adopt is an artifact of the approximation
scheme employed and isn't fully determined by the physics.
The purpose of this discussion here, despite the technicalities, is really quite
simple. Even in cases where dimensional analysis (the simplest kind of asymp-
totic investigation into the nature of a physical phenomenon) fails, asymptotic
investigations may still be able to provide the "principal physical laws" govern-
ing the phenomenon. The primary tool in the applied mathematician's tool-
box is what Fowler calls "reduction." This just is asymptotic reasoning in one
form or another. What I find to be extremely interesting, from the point of
view of scientific explanation and understanding, is the close analogy—indeed,
the equivalence—between the methods used by applied mathematicians to find
self-similar solutions in the long-time regime, and the renormalization group ar-
guments typically employed by physicists in extreme foundational contexts in-
volving micro/macro descriptions.19 I've argued here and elsewhere Batterman
(1998, 2000) that the reasoning involved in renormalization group arguments is
ubiquitous, yet this asymptotic reasoning is often overlooked in discussions of
explanation by philosophers of science. It involves, essentially, the investigation
19See, for example, Goldenfeld et al. (1989).


=== PAGE 68 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
57
of the physical problem in an asymptotic regime and results in the exhibition of
features emergent in that regime whose mathematical representations are stable
under certain sorts of perturbations or fundamental changes.
4.4 
Conclusion: The Role of Stability
We have seen that in striving to understand some observed regularity in a phys-
ical system, one looks to display the "principal laws" and basic features that
underlie that phenomenon. The aim of asymptotic reasoning is to do just this.
As Barenblatt notes, one feature of crucial importance is the reproducible ob-
servability of the phenomenon of interest. In other words, any experiment in
which that phenomenon is manifest must be repeatable.
Of course, this does not mean that there are no observable results that are
not reproducibly observable. Many physical systems surely exhibit observable
behavior that is not reproducible. Consider the repeated measurement for some
observable quantity on a given system. Typically, one will find a spread of values
hopefully peaked around some one value. If that spread is relatively small, we
can take the most probable value to be the value for that quantity.20 The
different exact values actually observed in any given experimental trial likely
differ from this most probable value because of various fluctuations that are
beyond the control of the experimenter. A mathematical representation or model
of the system (or at least of that aspect of the system that is under scrutiny)
will be a good one, in part, if it is stable in some sense under perturbation of
those details responsible for the fluctuations observed.
This idea of stability under perturbation, or structural stability, is extremely
important. In a crucial sense it is what leads us to take the principal features
resulting from asymptotic analysis to be explanatory. We have already seen
explicitly how this works in the case of the the RG explanation of critical phe-
nomena in section 4.1. It is worth elaborating in a more general setting on this
issue.
It is true that a certain kind of stability is guaranteed simply by investigating
the system and its equations in the intermediate asymptotic regime. If one finds
intermediate asymptotic solutions, self-similarity, or scaling laws, then virtually
by definition, the observed phenomenon, and the solutions to the governing
equations themselves, will be insensitive to various changes to the initial and
boundary conditions. But a stronger sort of robustness is also required.
It is surely a goal of scientific explanation to find or "derive" the govern-
ing equation for the phenomenon being investigated. Applied mathematicians
would call this "constructing a model." In most practical cases, this aspect of
mathematical physics is often a matter of educated guesswork. It is here that the
physicist's experience and intuition play their most prominent roles. However,
it is extremely unlikely that the equation one finds is the "real" equation that
governs the behavior of the system. Typically, things are much too complicated
20We can say that that value for the quantity is reproducibly observable, if we, as seems
reasonable, are willing to think of this in a statistical sense.


=== PAGE 69 ===

58 
The Devil in the Details
for us to expect this to be the case. Thus, the equation one finds (if, indeed,
one finds one at all)21 is more likely than not an approximation to the "true" or
"real" equation. In fact, I'm not really convinced that it makes sense to speak
of the "true" governing equation.22
Despite this somewhat irrealist attitude, facts about the structural stability
of the right aspects of a given equation or model may very well provide evidence
that we are on the right track, so to speak. That is, they can tell us that
the governing equation and the "solution" we have found is a good one. The
idea of a structurally stable solution is, roughly speaking, the idea that because
the coefficients of the differential equations we take to govern the behavior of
the phenomenon of interest are never determined precisely, the global structure
of the solutions to those equations ought to be relatively insensitive to small
changes in the forms or values of those coefficients.
As noted though, not every behavior of a system will be reproducibly ob-
servable. Hence, one should not expect every solution of the equation to possess
this kind of insensitivity to perturbations of the equation's form.23 Chen et al.
believe, rightly on my view, that
[i]f there are unstable or irreproducible aspects in the actual system
being modeled, then a good mathematical model of the system must
have features unstable with respect to the perturbation correspond-
ing to that causing instability in the actual system. Thus a good
model should be structurally stable with respect to the reproducibly
observable aspects, but must be unstable with respect to the hard-
to-reproduce aspects of the actual system. (Chen et al., 1994, p.
117)
Chen et al. make a distinction between "physically small perturbations of
the system" that correspond to small tweaks of the actual physical system—
those that produce only minor effects on its reproducible observables—and "the
corresponding p-small perturbations of the model." They "require the structural
stability of the model only against p-small perturbations." Further, they require
of the model only the stability of reproducibly observable features (1994, p. 118).
21If one is trying without having any governing equations at hand to investigate a problem
using the recipe of dimensional analysis or the more general recipe of intermediate asymptotics
that may apply when the physics is singular (like that in the ground water problem), then
the robustness being discussed here is also necessary.
22Recall the discussion in section 4.3 about the nonuniqueness of a microscopic description
underlying a given macroscopic phenomenology.
23When formulating the original conception of structural stability, Andronov and Pontrya-
gin (1937) argued that only structurally stable models will make good potential models for
predictive and explanatory purposes. This idea, backed by an amazing theorem of global
analysis proved by Piexoto (1962), came to have the status of methodological dogma. See
Smale (1980) for a good clear discussion of some aspects of structural stability. The "stability
dogma" has been rightly questioned of late. See Guckenheimer and Holmes (1983, p. 259).
Particularly so, after it was realized that Piexoto's theorem does not generalize to systems—
differential equations—on manifolds of dimension greater than two. These considerations lead
to the restricted notion of structural stability being discussed and advocated by Chen et al.
(1994, pp. 116-118).


=== PAGE 70 ===

Asymptotic Explanation 
59
This leads to the following conjecture which corresponds to a weakening of the
"stability dogma" mentioned in footnote 23.
• Structural Stability Hypothesis: For a good model, only structurally stable
consequences of the model are reproducibly observable (Chen et al., 1994,
p. 118).
Conversely, one must also hold that "solutions structurally stable against p-
small perturbations describe reproducibly observable phenomena" (Chen et al.,
1994, p. 118) . Of course, they are well aware of the potential tautology when
these two claims are asserted. But this is meant to be a definition of a good
model and needs to be assessed from that perspective.
There is certainly no guarantee that asymptotic analysis will result in the
discovery of structurally stable scaling solutions in an appropriate asymptotic
regime. Nevertheless, the existence of such solutions—the principal laws or ba-
sic features that explain the universal phenomenon of interest—is a reflection of
the fact that the process governing the behavior has stabilized in a very impor-
tant way in the asymptotic regime where the details of the initial and boundary
conditions play no significant role. A demonstration of the restricted struc-
tural stability expressed in the stability hypothesis, serves to warrant claims
to the effect that our mathematical "guesses" genuinely are describing physical
features of the world. We can conclude that one reason (and, perhaps, the es-
sential reason) that asymptotic analyses so often provide physical insight is that
they illuminate structurally stable aspects of the phenomenon and its govern-
ing equations (known or not).24 Hence, we have principled reasons for ignoring
many, if not most, of the details that we cannot control. As a result, we can be
confident that our theories adequately mirror or represent the world.
The explanations I have been discussing involve, essentially, methods for ex-
tracting structurally stable features of the equations that purportedly model or
govern the phenomenon of interest. These features are often emergent in appro-
priate asymptotic domains, and their perspicuous mathematical representation
constitutes an essential component of our understanding of the world.
24 James Woodward (2000) and others have noted the importance of a kind of robustness
and stability in their discussions of causality and explanation. Naturally, I feel that these
authors are completely right to be focusing on stability as an explanatory virtue. I believe,
however, that the present considerations have a different focus and provide an account of
explanation that Woodward, for example, seems to ignore. Woodward stresses the importance
for explanation of a kind of invariance and robustness that may be present in a given regularity
to some degree or other. Thus, he discusses how "nonlaw-like" regularities may, because of
their robustness, play crucial explanatory roles. Woodward is not concerned to answer why-
questions about the universality or degree of universality of the regularities that he discusses.
That is, he does not, as far as I can tell, ask the question why the regularity has the robustness
that it has or has it to the degree that it has. I have been concentrating on this question. We
have seen that stable structures are likely to emerge in asymptotic limits precisely because the
existence of limiting solutions tells us that many of the details of particular cases are irrelevant
for the regularity, that is, the phenomenon of interest. Thus our focus on asymptotic reasoning
provides at least a partial justification for why it is important to focus on the structural
stability and robustness in the explanatory contexts upon which Woodward and others have
focused.


=== PAGE 71 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 72 ===

Philosophical Models of
Reduction
Section 2.3 introduced the general schema that operates in most philosophical
models of reduction. This schema received its most influential statement in the
seminal work of Ernest Nagel (1961). Very roughly, the reduction of one theory,
T', to another, T, requires the explanation of the laws of T' by the laws of T,
where explanation is to be understood in terms of the deductive-nomological
model. That is, T' reduces to T if the laws of T' are derivable from those of T.
In this chapter I will first run rather quickly over some familiar ground.
We will discuss how the Nagelian model was emended and extended to make
it better fit what many take to be actual intertheoretic reductions. Then in
section 5.2 I will discuss, again rather briefly, the well-known objection to re-
ductionist strategies based on the multiple realizability argument most often as-
sociated with Jerry Fodor's (1974) "Special Sciences" article. I will also present
and discuss Jaegwon Kim's understanding of the import of multiple realizabil-
ity. As we will see, Fodor and Kim come to opposite conclusions about what
that possibility really shows. Section 5.3 discusses an alternative conception of
reduction proposed by Kim. He calls this the "functional model of reduction."
On this view, practically all special sciences will turn out to be reducible to
lower level physical theory. Once we see the motivations behind Kim's model,
we will have a clear understanding of the stark philosophical disagreement be-
tween reductionists such as Kim and nonreductive physicalists such as Fodor
and Block. Section 5.4 addresses the explanatory question at the heart of this
disagreement. Next, in section 5.5 I will present a response to the multiple
realizability argument that depends on understanding multiple realizability as
a kind of universality. In the concluding section, I will begin to suggest that in
the majority of cases of so-called intertheoretic reductions, it is perhaps best to
give up on philosophical conceptions of reduction altogether. Perhaps reduction
as it has been traditionally understood is just not the right sort of relation to
be worrying about. The next chapter will then explore what I take to be the
61
5


=== PAGE 73 ===

62 
The Devil in the Details
best means for understanding interesting relations between theories.
5.1 
Nagelian Reduction
In the The Structure of Science, Nagel asserts that "[r]eduction ... is the ex-
planation of a theory or a set of experimental laws established in one area of
inquiry, by a theory usually though not invariably formulated for some other
domain" (1961, p. 338). Nagel distinguishes two types of reductions on the
basis of whether or not the vocabulary of the reduced theory is a subset of the
reducing. If it is—that is, if the reduced theory T' contains no descriptive terms
not contained in the reducing theory T and the terms of T' are understood to
have approximately the same meanings that they have in T, then Nagel calls
the reduction of T' by T "homogeneous." In this case, while the reduction may
very well be enlightening in various respects, and is part of the "normal devel-
opment of a science," most people believe that there is nothing terribly special
or interesting from a philosophical point of view going on here (Nagel, 1961, p.
339).
Lawrence Sklar (1967, pp. 110-111) points out that, from a historical per-
spective, this attitude is somewhat naive. The number of actual cases in the
history of science where a genuine homogeneous reduction takes place are few
and far between. Nagel, himself, used as a paradigm example of homogeneous
reduction the reduction of the Galilean laws of falling bodies to Newtonian
mechanics. But, as Sklar points out, what actually can be derived from the
Newtonian theory are approximations to the laws of the reduced Galilean the-
ory. The approximations, of course, are, strictly speaking, incompatible with
the actual laws and so, despite the fact that no concepts appear in the Galilean
theory that do not also appear in the Newtonian theory, there is, strictly speak-
ing, no deductive derivation of the laws of the one from the laws of the other.
Hence, again strictly speaking, there is no reduction on the deductive Nagelian
model.
One way out of this problem for the proponent of Nagel-type reductions
is to make a distinction between explaining a theory (or explaining the laws
of a given theory) and explaining it away (Sklar, 1967, pp. 112-113). Thus,
we may still speak of reduction if the derivation of the approximations to the
reduced theory's laws serves to account for why the reduced theory works as
well as it does in its (perhaps more limited) domain of applicability. This is
consonant with more sophisticated versions of Nagel-type reductions in which
part of the very process of reduction involves revisions to the reduced theory.
Let me consider this process as a natural consequence of trying to deal with
what Nagel calls "heterogeneous" reductions.
The task of characterizing reduction is more involved when the reduction
is heterogeneous—that is, when the reduced theory contains terms or concepts
that do not appear in the reducing theory. Nagel takes, as a paradigm example
of heterogeneous reduction, the (apparent) reduction of thermodynamics, or at


=== PAGE 74 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
63
least some parts of thermodynamics, to statistical mechanics.1 For instance,
thermodynamics contains the concept of temperature (among others) that is
lacking in the reducing theory of statistical mechanics.
Nagel notes that "if the laws of the secondary science [the reduced theory]
contain terms that do not occur in the theoretical assumptions of the primary
discipline [the reducing theory] ..., the logical derivation of the former from
the latter is prima facie impossible" (1961, p. 352). As a consequence, Nagel
introduces two "necessary formal conditions" required for the reduction to take
place:
1. Connectability "Assumptions of some kind must be introduced which pos-
tulate suitable relations between whatever is signified by 'A' [the offending
term in the reduced theory] and traits represented by theoretical terms al-
ready present in the primary [reducing] science."
2. Derivability "With the help of these additional assumptions, all the laws
of the secondary science, including those containing the term 'A,' must
be logically derivable from the theoretical premises and their associated
coordinating definitions in the primary discipline." (Nagel, 1961, pp. 353-
354)
The connectability condition brings with it well-known interpretive prob-
lems. Exactly what is, or should be, the status of the "suitable relations," often
called bridge "laws" or bridge hypotheses? Are they established by linguistic
investigation alone? Are they factual discoveries? If the latter, what sort of
necessity do they involve? Are they identity relations that are contingently
necessary or will some sort of weaker relation, such as nomic coextensivity, suf-
fice? Much of the philosophical literature on reduction addresses these questions
about the status of the bridge laws.2
The consideration of certain examples lends plausibility to the idea, preva-
lent in the literature, that the bridge laws should be considered to express some
kind of identity relation. For instance, Sklar notes that the reduction of the
"theory" of physical optics to the theory of electromagnetic radiation proceeds
by identifying one class of entities—light waves—with (part of) another class—
electromagnetic radiation. He says "the place of correlatory laws [bridge laws] is
taken by empirically established identifications of two classes of entities. Light
waves are not correlated with electromagnetic waves, for they are electromag-
netic waves" (1967, p. 120). In fact, if something like Nagelian reduction is
going to work, it is generally accepted that the bridge laws should reflect the
existence of some kind of synthetic identity.
Kenneth Schaffner calls the bridge laws "reduction functions." He notes too
that they must be taken to reflect synthetic identities since, at least initially, they
require empirical support for their justification. "Genes were not discovered to
1That this is a paradigm example of reduction practically has the status of dogma in the
philosophical literature on reduction. Unfortunately, this is entirely misguided. See Sklar's
Physics and Chance (1993) for an extended discussion.
2For a good introduction to the subtleties involved, see Sklar (1967, pp. 118-121).


=== PAGE 75 ===

64 
Tie Devi] in the Details
be DNA via the analysis of meaning; important and difficult empirical research
was required to make such an identification" (Schaffner, 1976, pp. 614-615).
Now one problem facing this sort of account was forcefully presented by
Feyerabend in "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism" (1962). Consider the
term "temperature" as it functions in classical thermodynamics. This term is
defined in terms of Carnot cycles and is related to the strict, nonstatistical
second law as it appears in that theory. The so-called reduction of classical
thermodynamics to statistical mechanics, however, fails to identify or associate
nonstatistical features in the reducing theory, statistical mechanics, with the
nonstatistical concept of temperature as it appears in the reduced theory. How
can we genuinely have a reduction, if terms with their meanings fixed by the
role they play in the reduced theory get identified with terms having entirely
different meanings? Classical thermodynamics is not a statistical theory. The
very possibility of finding a reduction function or bridge law that captures the
concept of temperature and the role it plays in the thermodynamics seems im-
possible.
This argument, of course, carries with it a lot of baggage about how meaning
accrues to theoretical terms in a theory. However, just by looking at the histori-
cal development of thermodynamics, one thing seems fairly clear. It seems that
most physicists, now, would accept the idea that our concept of temperature and
our conception of other "exact" terms that appear in classical thermodynamics,
such as "entropy," need to be modified in light of the connection (reduction?)
to statistical mechanics. Textbooks, in fact, typically speak of the theory of
"statistical thermodynamics." The very process of "reduction" often leads to a
corrected version of the reduced theory.
None of this is new. Schaffner and others have developed sophisticated
Nagelian-type schemas for reduction that explicitly try to capture these features
of actual theory change. The idea is explicitly to include in the model the
"corrected reduced theory" such as statistical thermodynamics. Thus, Schaffner
(1976, p. 618) holds that T reduces T' if and only if there is a corrected version
of T', call it T'*, such that
1. The primitive terms of T" are associated via reduction functions (or bridge
laws) with various terms of T.
2. T'* is derivable from T when it is supplemented with the reduction func-
tions specified in 1.
3. T'* corrects T' in that it makes more accurate predictions than does T'.
4. T' is explained by T in that T' and T'* are strongly analogous to one
another, and T indicates why T' works as well as it does in its domain of
validity.
Much work clearly is being done here by the intuitive conception of "strong
analogy" between the reduced theory T' and the corrected reduced theory T'*.
In some cases, as suggested by Nickles and Wimsatt, the conception of strong
analogy may find further refinement by appeal to what in section 2.3 I referred


=== PAGE 76 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
65
to as the "physicists'" sense of reduction. That is, we might explicate the
notion of T"'s being strongly analogous to T'* in terms of the emergence of
T' as a parameter now appearing in T'* approaches a limiting value. Recall
equation 2.6:
Let me postpone a discussion of this "physicists' " sense of reduction until chap-
ter 6. Now, I would like to consider an important objection to the Nagelian
model of reduction—an objection that apparently holds even against the more
sophisticated versions such as Schaffner's.
5.2 Multiple Realizability
The philosophical literature on reduction, particularly on the reduction of the
so-called special sciences (of which psychology is taken to be the paradigm case),
is largely concerned with issues about multiple realization. In the context of psy-
chology, this involves the claim that the "upper level" psychological properties
or states are potentially realized by (or implemented in) a wide variety of hetero-
geneous lower level physical states. Call this the "Multiple Realization Thesis."
The Multiple Realization Thesis has been used by a number of people, most
notably by Jerry Fodor (1974), as an essential component in an argument to
the effect that the special science cannot be reduced to some lower level science
and, ultimately, to physics.
In the context of this discussion this means that no Nagelian or neo-Nagelian
derivation of the laws of the special science from the laws of physics in conjunc-
tion with bridge laws or reduction functions can be possible.3 As we will now
see, this is because the "fact" of multiple realizability is supposed to disallow
the very possibility of the requisite bridge laws. The key to the argument is
the heterogeneity of the lower level realizers of the upper level special science
properties. A simple example, discussed by Kim (1992), will help to show how
this is supposed to work.4
Kim's example concerns a purported case of multiple realizability in which
the mineral jade has two distinct physical realizers: jadeite and nephrite.5
Jadeite and nephrite are distinct chemical kinds. The issue is whether we can
reduce a "theory" about jade to a lower level theory about its chemical realiz-
ers. So, suppose it is a law of our jade theory that all jade is green.6 Under the
3For the purposes of the discussion here, I'm just going to take physics to be the reducing
theory. Of course, it may be better to talk about the reduction of psychology to neurophysi-
ology or some other "intermediate" level theory.
4The conception of law in use here (and in most discussions in this literature)—namely,
laws have the form (Vx)(Fi —> Gx) with some sort of implied necessity—is, on my view,
physically ridiculous. This philosophical abstraction ignores many of the important features
of laws, particularly in physics. Of course, my saying this here doesn't mean that I have
anything like a decent account of what laws are really like.
5This example was first introduced by H. Putnam (1980) in "The Meaning of Meaning."
6Kim uses the example to argue against the view that one can genuinely have a theory
about jade because of multiple realizability. More about that argument later. For my purposes


=== PAGE 77 ===

66 
The Devil in the Details
assumption that jade has only the two realizers, one might try to construct a
bridge law as follows:
• (L) (Vx)(x is jade <—> (x is jadeite V x is nephrite)).
Since, by hypothesis, the extension of jade is exhausted by all instances of jadeite
and nephrite, (L) expresses a necessary coextensivity.
Fodor's argument against reductionism proceeds by noting that because the
microstructures of jadeite and nephrite are completely distinct and heteroge-
neous from the point of view of the lower level theory, this bridge law cannot
express the coextensivity of a natural kind term of the jade theory with a natu-
ral kind term of the lower level chemical theory. Fodor's view seems to be that
bridge laws must be laws and, therefore, must relate natural kinds to natural
kinds. But why? Why not take the disjunction (x is jadeite V x is nephrite) to
be a natural kind of the lower level theory? His answer, roughly, is that hetero-
geneous disjunctions of kinds are not kinds. Two responses should immediately
come to mind. First, why can't heterogeneous disjunctions be kinds? Second,
why think that the bridge laws need to be laws where this means something
like universal generalizations that relate kinds to kinds? Kim offers interesting
arguments for the conclusion that heterogeneous disjunctions cannot be kinds.
Let me consider these first and then address the second response one might
have.
As Fodor readily admits, the notions of a natural kind and of law are inti-
mately intertwined. "There is no firm footing here. If we disagree about what
is a natural kind, we will probably also disagree about what is a law, and for
the same reasons. I don't know how to break out of this circle, but I think
that there are interesting things to say about which circle we are in" (Fodor,
1974, p. 102). Under the assumption that jade is a natural kind and given that
the "law," jade is green, has received much empirical confirmation, one will be
puzzled about what to say about the following imagined circumstance. Sup-
pose we find out that all confirming instances of this upper level law have been
instances of jadeite and not nephrite. Then what grounds would we have for
thinking that were we to examine a bit of nephrite, it would indeed be green?
Laws are supposed to be projectible. But it seems that, despite its confirmation,
the law about jade fails the projectibility test. What grounds this intuition is
the idea that jadeite and nephrite are heterogeneous as chemical kinds. Were
they not, then we might very well allow for its projectibility to cases of yet to
be examined nephrite.
Another argument of Kim's appeals to the individuation of kinds in terms
of causal powers. It relies on the following two principles:
• Principle of Causal Individuation of Kinds: Kinds in science are individu-
ated on the basis of causal powers; that is, objects and events fall under a
kind, or share a property insofar as they have similar causal powers (Kim,
1992, p. 17).
here, let's just assume we have a genuine theory and that this law is a genuine law, and see
how multiple realizability might be used to block reduction.


=== PAGE 78 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
67
• Causal Inheritance Principle: If an upper level property is realized in a
system on an occasion in virtue of a "physical realization base P" then
the causal powers of that upper level property are identical with the causal
powers of P (Kim, 1992, p. 18).
If kinds are individuated on the basis of causal powers, and if the causal powers
of the distinct possible realizers for an upper level property like jade are radically
distinct (heterogeneous), then the realizations of jade on distinct occasions will
be realizations of distinct kinds. Appealing to disjunctive properties as kinds
seems besides the point.
Now it must be admitted here that Kim intends his arguments to go much
further. In fact, he uses these two arguments to support the conclusion that
either (1) the upper level law is not a genuine scientific law, or (2) if we insist that
it still is a law, then the upper level theory must be reducible to (in a relatively
strong sense meaning, perhaps, "eliminable by") the lower level science.
Briefly, the argument proceeds as follows. We grant that the bridge principle
(L) expresses the necessary coextension of jade with the disjunction of jadeite
and nephrite. Furthermore, because of their distinct and wildly heterogeneous
nature, their disjunction cannot be a natural kind of the lower level theory.
(Fodor, presumably, would agree with this since he too holds that the disjunction
of the realizers can't be a natural kind.) But then jade is nomically coextensive
with a disjunctive nonkind. Then why isn't jade itself equally disjunctive and
hence, nonnomic? Our assumption that the generalization, jade is green, is a
genuine scientific law, and that our theory of jade is a genuine scientific theory,
is simply mistaken. At best we might say that there are two theories—a theory
of jadeite and a theory of nephrite.
Kim puts the argument as follows. Here he is talking about mental properties
M as the upper level properties. We can just replace "M" and "mental kinds"
everywhere by "jade."
[I]nstances of M that are realized by the same physical base must
be grouped under one kind, since ex hypothesi the physical base is a
causal kind; and instances of M with different realization bases must
be grouped under distinct kinds, since, again ex hypothesi, these re-
alization bases are distinct as causal kinds. Given that mental kinds
are realized by diverse physical causal kinds, therefore, it follows
that mental kinds are not causal kinds, and hence are disqualified
as proper scientific kinds. (Kim, 1992, p. 18)
So Kim concludes that the multiple realization thesis forces us to say one
of two things. Either the special sciences (with multiply realized properties)
are not genuine sciences at all, or if we insist that they are genuine sciences,
then they are not autonomous. In fact, they will be reducible to the lower level
"theories" of the realizers according to a new model of reduction Kim offers.
Kim's new model of reduction is, in fact, distinct from the Nagelian and
neo-Nagelian models. Furthermore, it virtually guarantees that "theories" of
the special sciences will reduce to lower level physical theories. He calls this


=== PAGE 79 ===

68 
The Devil in the Details
the "functional model of reduction." It purports to be a model that can answer
explanatory why-questions about the nature of the properties of the upper level
theory without having to come up with bridge laws as do the Nagelian and
neo-Nagelian models. It is, however, a kind of reduction that will likely not
satisfy the so-called "nonreductive physicalists"—those who want to maintain
the autonomy of the special sciences.
5.3 
Kim's "Functional Model of Reduction"
The very idea that psychological (or upper level special science properties in
general) are multiply realizable emerged from the functionalist account of men-
tal states proposed in the 1970's by Putnam and others. If mental states or
properties can be given a functional definition, then it comes as no surprise
whatsoever that they might be realized or implemented in different physical
states.
Kim points out that one, very fruitful, way of characterizing functional prop-
erties is as a species of second-order properties.
F is a second-order property over a set B of base (or first-order)
properties iff F is the property of having some property P in B such
that D(P), where D specifies a condition on members of B. (Kim,
1998, p. 20)
Functional properties over a base B are now defined in terms of the nature
of the condition D. In particular, D must specify "causal/nomic" relations
among first-order properties. Kim offers the following example of a functional
property. A substance has the property, dorrnativity, "just in case it has a
chemical property that causes people to sleep. Both Valium and Seconal have
dorrnativity but in virtue of different first-order (chemical) realizers" (Kim, 1998,
pp. 20-21). Thus, dorrnativity is a functional property on Kim's view that is
multiply realized.
Furthermore, on the functionalist account of mental properties as understood
by Kim, "[t]o be in a mental state is to be in a state with such-and-such as
its typical causes and such-and-such as its typical effects," where the causes
and effects are understood as holding between "first-order physical properties
(including biological and behavioral properties)" (Kim, 1998, pp. 21).
The odd thing about Kim's model of reduction is its historical relationship
to the motivations of the functionalist position. Functionalism, after all, was an
implementation of the idea that the physical details don't matter with respect
to the definition of psychological states, and in conjunction with Fodor-type
multiple realizability arguments, it formed the backbone of the nonreductive
physicalist position. But for Kim, if a property can be functionalized according
to the recipe as a second-order property characterized by certain causal/nomic
relations among first-order realizers, then that property reduces to the lower
level theory of those realizers. Here is how it is supposed to work.


=== PAGE 80 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
69
Let M be some upper level, say, mental property. Further, suppose that
M, as a matter of fact, has two distinct, heterogeneous physical realizers, P1
and P2. (For instance, suppose M is pain and P1 and P2 are pain's realizers
in humans and reptiles.) We assume, with Kim, that this means that P1 and
p2 are causally heterogeneous and that, therefore, they are distinct as natural
kinds. One first construes M (or reconstrues it, if M had not been taken
to be a functional property before) as a second-order property defined by its
causal/nomic specification D as discussed before. Thus, M is the property of
having some property in the base domain with certain causal features.
The reduction consists in identifying M with its realizer Pi relative
to the species or structure under consideration (also relative to the
reference world [the world relative to which nomological possibility is
to be judged]). Thus M is P1 in species 1, P2 in species 2, and so on.
Given that each instance of M has exactly the causal powers of its
realizer on that occasion ("the causal inheritance principle"), all the
causal/explanatory work done by an instance of M that occurs in
virtue of the instantiation of realizer PI is done by PI , and similarly
for other instances of M and their realizers .... This contrasts with
Nagelian reduction via bridge laws in which M only nomologically
correlates with PI in species 1 but remains distinct from it, and
similarly for P2, and so on. (Kim, 1998, p. 110)
It is worth elaborating a bit further on Kim's model here. There are really
three steps involved in a functional reduction. The first and, according to Kim,
the most important step is the functionalization of the property to be reduced.
Here's how he presents it in an article entitled "Making Sense of Emergence."
Let E be the property that is a candidate for reduction to a reduction base
B. B is the class of properties comprising the "basal" conditions for E.7 The
functional reduction of E to B involves the following steps (Kim, 1999, pp.
10-11):
Step 1. UE must be functionalized—that is, E must be construed, or recon-
strued, as a property defined by its causal/nomic relations to other prop-
erties, specifically properties in the reduction base B."
Step 2. "Find realizers of E in B. If the reduction, or reductive explanation, of
a particular instance of E1 in a given system is wanted, find the particular
realizing property P in virtue of which E is instantiated on this occasion
in this system."
Step 3. "Find a theory (at the level of B) that explains how a given realizer
of E performs the causal task that is constitutive of E (i.e., the causal
role specified in Step 1). Such a theory may also explain other significant
causal/nomic relations in which E plays a role."
7In supervenience talk, B is the subvenient base for E.


=== PAGE 81 ===

70 
The Devil in the Details
The functionalization of E described in Step 1 involves defining E as a
second-order property as discussed. Kim notes the scientifically significant (and
hard) part of this reduction is comprised in Steps 2 and 3.8 But, as far as the
concept of reduction is concerned, the most important step is the first. Kim's
functional model also, as we've seen, is supposed to supply explanations.
Suppose that E can be functionalized. Then one can explain why a given
system 5 exhibits E at some time t. The explanation takes the following form: E
is the property of having some property in B that meets the causal specification
D—that is, E is functionalized. 5 has property E at t because 5 has property
P and P fulfills D—P is a realizer of E. Furthermore, we have a theory that
tells us exactly how P in B fills the causal role D.
Therefore, the functional model of reduction works because it allows for
the identification of E in a given structure or species with its realizer in that
structure or species. Thus, an explanatory question, such as "why does this
system have pain now?," is answered by pointing out that the system of kind i
is now instantiating Pi which is a realizer of pain in systems of that kind. That
is to say, Pi meets the causal/nomic specification which is definitive of having
pain.
But notice what has happened here. The reduction afforded by Kim's func-
tionalist model is a species—or structure—specific reduction. We have, for
instance, reductions of human psychology to human physiology (and ultimately
to physics) and reductions of reptilian "psychology" to reptilian physiology (and
ultimately to physics). We do not, however, have a reduction of psychology to
physics. This, according to Kim, is the price of taking the causal inheritance
principle and multiple realizability seriously. Therefore, someone who takes
psychology to be an autonomous science on the basis of Fodor-type multiple
realizability arguments will be forced, if Kim is right, to give up that very posi-
tion. In effect, any special science for which the functionalization of its special
properties is possible will be eliminated. This is why I noted earlier that Kim's
model is not likely to be endorsed by those who want to maintain the orthodoxy
expressed by the label "nonreductive physicalism."
It is helpful to think about this in terms of the distinction between types
of why-questions discussed in section 3.1. Recall that a type (i) why-question
asks for an explanation of why a given instance of a pattern obtained. Type
(ii) why-questions ask why, in general, patterns of a given type can be expected
to obtain. The type of explanation that Kim's model of reduction supplies are
answers only to questions of type (i). It is because of this that he is forced
to say that the reductions are species-, or structure-specific, and hence that
there can be no general reduction of psychology, say, to lower level theory. The
explanation of why a given system is now feeling pain is an account of why a
8Kim uses the example of the reduction of the gene to the DNA molecule. It took many
years of research to determine that DNA is a realizer of the gene (1999, p. 11). On the other
hand, it is relatively trivial to functionalize the property of being a gene: "[T]he property of
being a gene is the property of having some property (or being a mechanism) that performs a
certain causal function, namely that of transmitting phenotypic characteristics from parents
to offsprings." (1999, p. 10)


=== PAGE 82 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
71
particular instance of pain is occurring in a system at this time. By providing
the theory and the account that shows how it is that the particular physical
realizer Pi meets the causal/nomic specification that is definitive of having pain
in systems of kind i, one is providing something like causal-mechanical details
for the occurrence of that particular instance of pain.
On the other hand, once we realize that one might be asking a question
concerning why pain, in general, appears in certain circumstances, we see that
this account provides a completely inappropriate answer to that question. Thus,
if we can think of pain, for example, as being a universal property, then it is
legitimate to ask for an explanation of its universality. (See the discussion in
section 5.5.) But no answer to this question can be provided by Kim's model
of reductive explanation. If such an answer can be provided then one need not,
it seems to me, adopt the radical eliminitivist line towards the special sciences
that Kim seems upon occasion to endorse.
The next section considers several attempts by nonreductive physicalists to
diagnose and respond to Kim's argument. Following that discussion, I will offer
a solution that in some respects should be welcomed by all of the disputants in
this controversy.
5.4 A Metaphysical Mystery
Several authors, notably Jerry Fodor and Ned Block, have offered diagnoses
of the intuition motivating Kim's position here. Fodor, for instance, says that
"what's really bugging Kim is ... a metaphysical mystery about functionalism"
(1997, p. 159). Here's what he has to say about it:
The very existence of the special sciences testifies to reliable macro-
level regularities that are realized by mechanisms whose physical
substance is quite typically heterogeneous .... Damn near every-
thing we know about the world suggests that unimaginably compli-
cated to-ings and fro-ings of bits and pieces at the extreme microlevel
manage somehow to converge on stable macrolevel properties.
On the other hand, the 'somehow' really is entirely mysterious, and
my guess is that that is what is bugging Kim .... [Kim] doesn't see
why there should be (how there could be) [macrolevel regularities]
unless, at a minimum, macrolevel kinds are homogeneous in respect
of their microlevel constitution. Which, however, functionalists in
psychology, biology, geology, and elsewhere, keep claiming that they
typically aren't. (Fodor, 1997, pp. 160-161)
Fodor, as well, confesses to ignorance about the "somehow" here. In fact,
he says that he doesn't even "know how to think about why" there could
be such macrolevel regularities multiply realized by heterogeneous microlevel
properties—why, as he puts it, "there is anything except physics" (1997, p.
161).


=== PAGE 83 ===

72 
The Devil in the Details
For Fodor, then, the metaphysical mystery really is how multiple realizability
is possible. If it is possible to provide an explanation from lower level theory
of the multiple realizability that is present in the special sciences (or at least in
some of them), then the mystery may very well be dispelled (at least for some
of them). But multiple realizability, as we have Seen, seems to tell us that no
reduction (except, perhaps, for the species-/structure-specific reductions Kim
talks of) can be had. Hence, on the standard way of thinking about reduction,
no explanation of this sort can be forthcoming.
David Papineau is also concerned with the fact that the multiple realizability
that (often) accompanies functionalism seems to tell us that there can be no
commonality among the disparate and heterogeneous realizers that will yield
the desired explanation. He finds this to be "incredible."
The difficulty I am concerned with arises when some mental state
S, which mediates between physical input R and physical output T,
is realized by a range of different physical states Pi. The puzzle is:
why do all the different Pis which result from R all nevertheless yield
the common effect T? (Papineau, 1993, p. 35)
Of course, this is another expression of Fodor's metaphysical mystery about
functionalism.
Block, as well, thinks that it would "be amazing if laws of nature imposed no
constraints at all on what can think or be conscious [or, presumably, on what
can feel pain]" (1997, p. 120). He argues that while the realizers of the upper
level multiply realized properties are heterogeneous, they are not completely
heterogeneous. "One way of leading to my disagreement with Kim is to note
that these special science kinds are typically not nomically coextensive with
completely heterogeneous disjunctions of physico-chemical properties" (1997, p.
120). In support of this he appeals to what he calls the "Disney Principle."
This is the claim that "laws of nature impose constraints on ways of making
something that satisfies a certain description."9 The idea is that such constraints
require some sort of similarity between the distinct realizers of the special science
properties, so, the realization base is not as heterogeneous as Kim and others
might think.
On my view there is indeed something to the Disney principle. But as an as-
sertion of fact about the world, it stands in need of explanation and justification.
Without this explanation, it amounts to little more than a denial of Kim's as-
sertion that the physical realizers of the upper level property are so disparate in
physical constitution that the disjunctive property nomically correlated with the
upper level property fails to be a genuine kind. In other words, one would like
to have some independent account of why the Disney principle holds. Block's
intuitions, I believe, are correct. But there ought to be a physically acceptable
explanation of why. Simply claiming that it would be "amazing" if things were
otherwise is not sufficient.
9The principle is introduced as follows: "In Walt Disney movies, teacups think and talk,
but in the real world, anything that can do those things needs more structure than a teacup"
(Block, 1997, p. 120). Whence the name.


=== PAGE 84 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
73
In the next section I will argue that it is reasonable to think of cases of
multiple realizability as cases of similar behaviors in diverse systems. That is,
it is profitable to think of multiple realizability as being a kind of universality.
Given this, it will be possible to (at least) propose a way of explaining multi-
ple realizability in a physically acceptable way despite the heterogeneity of the
realizers. We have already seen how this works in section 4.1 in the context of
explaining the universality of critical phenomena, and in the other examples of
asymptotic explanation discussed in chapter 4, particularly, in sections 4.3 and
4.3.
5.5 
Multiple Realizability as Universality
Let us assume then that certain properties that are part of the subject matter
of psychology, like pain, are multiply realized. The question posed by Fodor and
the others concerns how this can be possible. Can such multiple realizability be
explained in a physically acceptable way? If not, then one's physicalism is, on my
view, fairly attenuated—to maintain the autonomy (irreducibility) of the special
science (in the face of Kim's reductive strategy), it seems one must just dig in
one's heels and assert that it is a brute unexplained fact that "unimaginably
complicated to-ings and fro-ings of bits and pieces at the extreme microlevel
manage somehow to converge on stable macrolevel properties" (Fodor, 1997,
p. 160). This seems to be Fodor's attitude, at least if I understand correctly
his claim that he doesn't know why (or even how to think about why) there is
anything but physics.
Now if pain is multiply realized by heterogeneous physical realizers, then it
is the case that there are systems with completely different "micro" details that
exhibit the same behavior—that described by the "laws" of pain psychology.
That is, after all, what the multiple realization thesis asserts. Furthermore,
given the wildly distinct physical nature of the realizers, any detailed causal-
mechanical explanation that shows that a given system or realizer exhibits an
instance of the behavioral pattern in question will be disjoint from any other
such story for a different system or realizer. This is an indication that the details
of the realizer must be largely irrelevant for describing the behavior of interest,
namely, the fact that the various systems all conform to the particular "law" of
pain psychology.
These features are just the features I identified in section 2.2 as features
of universal behavior. There I said that universality is characterized by the
following general features:
1. The details of the system (those details that would feature in a complete
causal-mechanical explanation of the system's behavior) are largely irrel-
evant for describing the behavior of interest.
2. Many different systems with completely different "micro" details will ex-
hibit the identical behavior.


=== PAGE 85 ===

74 
The Devil in the Details
The philosophical notion of multiple realizability appears to map nicely onto
the physicists' conception of the universality of certain behaviors. I have argued
elsewhere Batterman (2000) that this is in fact the case and that, therefore,
it might be reasonable to expect that explanatory accounts having the same
general strategy as the renormalization group accounts may be applicable in
these cases as well. In other words, it is reasonable to expect that there will be
some sort of asymptotic explanation of the multiple realizability or universality
that is characteristic of the special sciences. Furthermore, as we have seen, this
sort of explanation involves demonstrating principled physical reasons for why
many (most) of the details that legitimately allow us to consider the distinct
realizers as "wildly" heterogeneous are irrelevant for their universal or multiply
realized behavior.
In chapter 8 I will defend the view that the asymptotic explanations of
universality essentially involve appeals to structures that are emergent in an
asymptotic regime. (Recall the brief discussion in section 2.4.) In many cases,
though interestingly and importantly not in all, the asymptotic regime in which
this emergence takes place is one in which the limit of many interacting com-
ponents is involved. In the context of the special sciences, particularly in the
context of psychology, it seems reasonable to suppose that the physical struc-
tures that are, for example, pain's various realizers are structures (states of the
system) composed of many interacting parts. Connectionist models of compu-
tational features of the mind, for instance, require large numbers of interacting
components. In fact, much of the mathematical apparatus of at least one class
of network models is formally similar to the statistical mechanical modeling
of lattice systems and spin glasses—just those models often used to represent
the microscopic details of fluids and magnets (Churchland and Sejnowski, 1992,
chapter 3). The mathematics of such models involves, essentially, the study of
systems in the limit of a large number of interacting components. Whether these
models exhibit singular behavior in certain limits, and whether such behavior
can be associated with the emergence of special mental properties, is something
I won't speculate about here. Given the widely accepted supposition that pain,
for instance, is genuinely multiply realized, I want to claim only that some sort
of asymptotic analysis will allow one to explain that multiple realizability.
Thus, I do not want to suggest that the mathematical apparatus of the
renormalization group analysis itself is what will provide us with an explanation
of the multiple realizability of pain. I would have to know much more about the
physics and microstructural makeup of the realizers. But, I do not see how any
explanation would go unless it proceeds by demonstrating principled physical
reasons for why most of the microstructural details of the realizers are irrelevant
for the universal behavior of interest. The underlying physical theory must be
able to tell us (through some type of asymptotic analysis) that most (otherwise
important) physical details are irrelevant.
Suppose that through something like a renormalization group analysis, phy-
sics tells us that the physical parameters a and 7 are the only relevant physical


=== PAGE 86 ===

Philosophical Models of Reduction 
75
parameters for the pain universality class.10 This would be analogous to the
renormalization group analysis of critical behavior telling us that the critical
behavior depends only upon the physical dimension (d) of the system and on
some symmetry property of the order parameter (n). (Recall the discussion of
this explanation in section 4.1.) That is, the various realizers of pain in hu-
mans, reptiles, and Martians, say, have these features in common when certain
generalizations or regularities about pain are the manifest behaviors of interest
observed in these systems. Equivalently, physics has then told us that all the
other microdetails that legitimately force us to treat the realizers as heteroge-
neous are irrelevant. With respect to the universal, multiply realized behavior
of interest, we can, in effect, perturb the "microdetails" of humans into those
of Martians and reptiles without altering the manifest pain behavior we care
about. We would then have an explanation of pain's realizability by wildly
diverse realizers in exactly the same way that we explain and understand the
universality of critical phenomena.
We would also then have a justification for (and an explanation of) Block's
Disney principle. In placing humans, reptiles, and Martians in the same univer-
sality class characterized by a and 7, physics will have demonstrated that there
are constraints on what systems can realize pain.
If all of this could be accomplished, then it would be possible to say some-
thing positive about the apparent stalemate between those, like Kim, who favor
a kind of reductionist or eliminitivist approach to the special sciences and those,
like Fodor and Block, who would maintain the autonomy of the special sciences.
Recall that Kim argues that either the special sciences are not genuine sciences,
or to the extent that one takes them to be genuine sciences, they are reducible
(in a species- or structure-specific fashion) to lower level physical theory. Fodor
and others maintain that the special sciences are genuine sciences and that their
multiple realizability entails a failure of reduction and (for Fodor at least) lit-
tle if any hope of physically explaining the very possibility of their multiple
realizability.11
If I am right and multiple realizability is best understood as physicists under-
stand universality, then it will be possible to explain the multiple realizability—
how the "unimaginably complicated to-ings and fro-ings of bits and pieces
at the extreme microlevel manage somehow to converge on stable macrolevel
properties"—yet also to maintain the nonreducibility of the special science.
This is because asymptotic explanations of the renormalization group ilk do
not provide sufficient conditions for the universal behavior.12
10I use the example of pain here only because it is so common in the philosophical literature.
There may, of course, be serious problems with this particular case having to do with qualia.
On the other hand, in special sciences for which qualia issues do not arise, the explanation
can proceed without such worries.
11 This talk of "genuine science" here depends, of course, on one's intuitions. By and large,
it seems to me that most of the intuitions floating around in this debate aren't sufficiently
grounded in examples taken from actual scientific practice. (Note that I didn't say "from
genuine science"!) I'm urging that a solution to the puzzle about the multiple realizability of
the special sciences is possible, once one steps out of the quagmire of ungrounded intuitions.
12See Batterman (2000) for details.


=== PAGE 87 ===

76 
The Devil in the Details
It follows that one can have explanation without reduction, since we can ac-
cept the Fodor-type multiple realizability argument against reduction, while still
allowing for a physically based explanation of that very multiple realizability.
This allows us to maintain the autonomy of the special sciences, contrary to Kim,
while at the same time endorsing a more robust—less attenuated—physicalism
than Fodor believes we are able to. This accords better with Block's version of
nonreductive physicalism in which the Disney principle is a step toward a more
robust conception.
5.6 
Conclusion
As we have seen, there are severe difficulties involved in providing philosophical
models of theory reduction. Nowhere are these problems more evident than
in the contentious debates that revolve around the question of the status of
the special sciences. In this context we have seen that there is an explanatory
strategy within which one might fruitfully address the question of how properties
of the special sciences can be heterogeneously multiply realized. In physics, as
earlier examples have shown, such explanations are common. In their most
abstract form, they involve extracting phenomenological relations among upper
level properties by determining features that are stable under perturbation of
the microdetails.
Multiple realizability gives us good reasons for thinking that certain impor-
tant intertheoretic reductions, as typically understood by philosophers, will not
be possible. I agree. There are indeed good reasons for thinking of the different
realizers as diverse natural kinds. It is often legitimate to treat the different
systems as genuinely heterogeneous; but this does, for now familiar reasons,
make reduction difficult, if not impossible.
On the other hand, it may be best, in this context as well as others, to
give up on the various philosophical models of reduction that require a connec-
tion (strong or weak) between kind predicates in the reduced theory and kind
predicates in the reducing. A more fruitful approach to understanding the rela-
tionships between one theory and another is to investigate asymptotic relations
between the theory pairs. In these situations the philosophical models of reduc-
tion that require derivational connections demand too much detail and, in some
cases, too much precision. Sometimes, what is needed to understand relations
between theories are methods for ignoring details. As we've seen, asymptotic
reasoning is typically the essential component of such methods. Asymptotic
methods often allow for the understanding of emergent structures that domi-
nate observably repeatable behavior in the limiting domain between the theory
pairs. The next two chapters will consider this approach to intertheoretic rela-
tions in detail.


=== PAGE 88 ===

6
Intertheoretic
Relations—Optics
This chapter focuses on asymptotic limiting relationships between two theories
of light: The so-called ray theory (or geometrical optics) and the wave theory.
The aim here is to demonstrate through a detailed discussion of a concrete
example (the rainbow) how fruitful it is to study the asymptotic domain between
theories. We will see that there are phenomena—various observable features of
the rainbow, in particular—that require for their description aspects of both the
ray theory and the wave theory. To my mind, from a philosophical point of
view, this is an extremely important fact. It means that the reductive programs
championed by philosophers actually miss out on a lot of interesting physics.
The idea that the wave theory reduces the ray theory in the neo-Nagelian sense of
reduction discussed in the last chapter turns out to be completely inappropriate
in this context. Furthermore, the physicists' sense of reduction, in which the
wave theory is supposed to reduce to the ray theory in some appropriate limit,
also fails to apply here. We ought to give up on the notion of reduction in any
sense and consider what of philosophical (and physical) interest can be learned
by studying the asymptotic limits between theories.
Elsewhere, Batterman (1993, 1995), I have argued that one ought to think
that a third theory characterizing the asymptotic borderland between the ray
and wave theories exists. This theory might, following Berry, be called "Catas-
trophe Optics." However, Berry himself, doesn't address the philosophical ques-
tion of whether this is a genuine theory. He says, "[t]he resulting catastrophe
optics is unfamiliar and unorthodox, cutting across traditional categories within
the subject [of optics]" (Berry and Upstill, 1980, p. 259). There are, obviously,
issues concerning the legitimacy of treating these asymptotic borderlands as re-
quiring a new theory. I will raise some of them in section 6.5 and in chapter 8
as well.
While this chapter concentrates on the borderland between two specific theo-
ries, I believe much of what I have to say generalizes to other theories related by
77


=== PAGE 89 ===

78 
The Devil in the Details
singular asymptotic limits. In chapter 7 I discuss the singular "correspondence"
limit relating quantum and classical mechanics as Planck's constant h —> 0.1 I
believe, in fact, that any pair of theories related by such singular limits will give
rise to new physics requiring a new explanatory theory of the asymptotic do-
main. For the moment, though, I will concentrate on the wave and ray theories.
The next section begins by discussing what I have called the physicists' sense
of reduction. Following this in section 6.2 I will briefly discuss singular limits.
Section 6.3 is the heart of the discussion. Here I consider the relationships
between ray theoretic structures and wave phenomena. In section 6.4 I show
how certain of these relationships are best understood as instances of universal
phenomena. This discussion makes explicit the connections between studying
asymptotic intertheoretic relations and my earlier discussions of universality,
intermediate asymptotics, and Barenblatt's "principal physical laws."
6.1 
"Reduction2"
Earlier in section 2.3 I noted that scientists, particularly physicists, use the term
"reduction" in a very different sense than do philosophers. This is the sense in
which a typically newer and more refined theory, Tf, is said to reduce to another
typically older and "coarser" theory, Tc, as some parameter in Tf takes on a
limiting value. The philosophical sense of reduction discussed in the last chapter
has it that things are the other way around. That is, the older, coarser theory
reduces to the newer more refined theory via some kind of deductive derivation
(or approximate derivation) of the laws of the older theory from the laws of the
newer theory. Thus, the roles of reduced and reducing theories are inverted.
Thomas Nickles introduced this distinction in an important article entitled
"Two Concepts of Intertheoretic Reduction" (1973). He labelled the philoso-
phers' sense "reduction1" and the physicists' sense "reduction2." Though Nick-
les, himself, doesn't express the relationship of reduction in quite this way, I
think it is easiest to understand it as satisfying the following schema (equa-
tion [2.6]):
One must take the equality here with a grain of salt. In those situations where
schema (6.1) can be said to hold, it is likely not the case that every equation or
formula from Tf will yield a corresponding equation of Tc.
A paradigm case where a limiting reduction of the form (6.1) rather straight-
forwardly holds is that of classical Newtonian particle mechanics (NM) and the
special theory of relativity (SR). In the limit where (v/c)2 —> 0, SR reduces to
NM.2 Nickles says "epitomizing [the intertheoretic reduction of SR to NM] is
1See also my discussion in Batterman (1995).
2I will drop Nickles's subscript on "reduction" unless the context fails to make obvious
which sense of reduction is being considered.


=== PAGE 90 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics 
79
the reduction of the Einsteinian formula for momentum,
where mo is the rest mass, to the classical formula p = m0v in the limit as
v —> 0"3 (Nickles, 1973, p. 182).
This is a regular limit—there are no singularities or "blowups" as the asymp-
totic limit is approached. As I explained in section 2.3 one way of thinking about
this is that the exact solutions for small but nonzero values of |e| "smoothly [ap-
proach] the unperturbed or zeroth-order solution [e set identically equal to zero]
as e —> 0." In the case where the limit is singular, "the exact solution for e = 0 is
fundamentally different 
in character from the 'neighboring' solutions obtained
in the limit e —> 0" (Bender and Orszag, 1978, p. 324).
In the current context, one can express the regular nature of the limiting
relation in the following way. The fundamental expression appearing in the
Lorentz transformations of SR, fl — (v/c)2, can be expanded in a Taylor series
as 1 - l/2(v/c)2 - l/8(v/c)4 - l/l6(v/c)6 
, so the limit is analytic. This
means that (at least some) quantities or expressions of SR can be written as
Newtonian or classical quantities plus an expansion of corrections in powers of
(v/c)2. So one may think of this relationship between SR and NM as a regular
perturbation problem.
Examples like this have led some investigators to think of limiting relations
as forming a kind of new rule of inference that would allow one to more closely
connect the physicists' sense of reduction with that of the philosophers'. Fritz
Rohrlich, for example, has argued that NM reduces1 to SR because the mathe-
matical framework of SR reduces2 to the mathematical framework of NM. The
idea is that the mathematical framework of NM is "rigorously derived" from
that of SR in a "derivation which involves limiting procedures" (Rohrlich, 1988,
p. 303). Roughly speaking, for Rohrlich a "coarser" theory is reducible to a
"finer" theory in the philosophers' sense of being rigorously deduced from the
latter just in case the mathematical framework of the finer theory reduces in the
physicists' sense to the mathematical framework of the coarser theory. In such
cases, we will have a systematic explication of the idea of "strong analogy" to
which Schaffner (section 5.1) appeals in his neo-Nagelian model of philosophical
reduction.
The trouble with maintaining that this relationship between the philosoph-
ical and "physical" models of reduction holds generally is that far more often
than not the limiting relations between the theories are singular and not regu-
lar. In such situations, schema (6.1) fails to hold. Examples of these singular
limiting problems are the subject of this chapter.4 I will argue that it is best
to give up on talk of one theory reducing to another on either sense of "re-
3It is best to think of this limit as (v/c)2 —> 0 rather than as v —> 0 since (v/c)2 is
a dimensionless quantity, so this limit will not depend on the units used to measure the
velocity.
4See also Batterman (1995).


=== PAGE 91 ===

80 
The Devil in the Details
duction." Nevertheless, much is to be learned by studying singular limiting
relations between theories—both of physical and philosophical interest.
6.2 
Singular Limits
We have already come across a couple of examples of singular limits. In sec-
tion 4.1 I discussed the example of explaining critical phenomena using the
apparatus of the renormalization group. The singular limit involved in this
example is the so-called thermodynamic limit of large number N of particles.
When the system is at criticality—that is, at its critical point—this limit di-
verges. This is reflected in the divergence of the correlation length. In this
context, we can say that the limit of statistical mechanics as 1/N —> 0 fails
to smoothly approach classical thermodynamics. In fact, we must think of the
state of a fluid at its critical point as a singularity of thermodynamics where
the reductive schema (6.1) necessarily breaks down.
Likewise, in section 4.3 I discussed the problem of the spreading of a ground-
water mound over an impermeable rock bed. There too the physics is singular.
Mathematically this is reflected in the fact that intermediate asymptotics of the
first kind fails completely, as is evident from the fact that the n2 —> 0 limit blows
up. This does not, in any straightforward sense, reflect the failure of a limiting
relation between a pair of theories; however, the mathematics involved is com-
pletely analogous to the problems faced when schema (6.1), which expresses a
relation between theories, fails to obtain.
Let me add one more simple example to this list of singular limits before
moving on, in the next section, to consider in detail the relationship between
two theories of light—the ray theory or the theory of geometrical optics and the
wave theory.
Consider a wave of wavelength A (water, light, or sound) traveling in the
x-direction with speed v.5 This wave is represented by the following function:
Suppose we are interested in the nature of this wavefunction in the case where
the wavelength is very small. That is, let's take the limit as A —> 0. This would
correspond to our interest in, say, the workings of a telescope that are perfectly
well characterized (for many purposes) by a view of light as traveling along rays.
Unfortunately (or fortunately), the limit is singular; y cannot be expanded in
powers of A—the function y is nonanalytic at A = 0. In fact, at this limit, y
takes on every value between -1 and 1 infinitely often, in any finite range of x
or t.
In wave theory we are often interested in the superposition of two or more
waves. Suppose we superpose two waves traveling along the x-axis in different
5This is taken from Michael Berry's discussion of singular relations between theories in his
"Asymptotics, Singularities and the Reduction of Theories" (1994).


=== PAGE 92 ===

Intertheoretic Relations — Optics 
81
directions at speeds v and —v. The resulting wavefunction is
If we care about the intensity of this new wave at various locations x, we
need to calculate |y|2. 
By averaging over time we will get the intensity of a
spatially invariant interference pattern:
We see here that the intensity of a simple two-wave interference pattern has a
singularity in the limit A —> 0 ray limit.
There are other shortwave singularities that arise in naturally occurring phe-
nomena. Sometimes, according to the wave theory, waves can reach places
where, according to the ray theory, there could be no light. For example, from
high school physics we are familiar with the fact that for some angles light will
be totally internally reflected at an interface between two media such as glass
and air.6 According to the ray theory, no light can be detected outside this
interface. Nevertheless, there are waves outside with an amplitude that decays
exponentially with increasing distance from the boundary:
where / is some function of the distance to the boundary.
An interesting example where both sorts of singularities are present — those
of the form (6.5) and those of the form (6.6) — is the rainbow. On the lit side of
a rainbow, there is the visible oscillatory structure of the bows, and on the dark
side apparently no light is visible. In fact, the rainbow is a very instructive,
yet relatively simple example. In the next section I will look more carefully at
the relationship(s) between the ray and wave theories. We will see that much
about these intertheoretic relations can be learned by examining the case of the
rainbow.
6.3 
Wave and Ray Theories
The Rainbow and the Airy Integral
Let us begin with an account of certain features of the rainbow that is based on
geometrical optics. This is the theory in which light travels along rays that can
be reflected or refracted by different media, but in which there are no waves.
6This phenomenon is exploited in the use of fiber optics.


=== PAGE 93 ===

82 
The Devil in the Details
The questions I want to ask concern how much of the observed features of
the rainbow are characterizable using the theory of geometrical optics alone.
Where does the arc of the rainbow come from? Can we predict where it will be
located? Can we describe the observed structure (intensities and locations) of
the various bows that we see? Figure 6.1 represents an ideal (spherical) raindrop.
Light from the sun hits the raindrop in parallel rays. Upon encountering the
droplet, these rays are partially reflected and partially refracted according to
simple geometrical rules. In the figure, light is first refracted as it encounters the
droplet, then reflected at the back side of the droplet, and then finally refracted
again as it exits back into the air. The various rays come in with specific angles
of incidence that are specifiable by the variable s and are scattered back as they
exit at various angles C.
Using elementary ray optics, Descartes had already shown that the scattering
angle as a function of s is a minimum at Co = 138°. (In other words, all
other rays exiting the droplet will exit at angles C > 138°.)7 Furthermore, if
C > 138°, there are two rays through every point. If C < 138°, there are no
rays. This is characteristic of the most elementary of stable caustics—the fold.8
One can see how the refraction and reflection of the light rays produce the fold
caustic.
On the geometrical theory of optics, the caustic is a line on which the inten-
sity of light is, strictly speaking, infinite. That is, it represents a singularity of
the ray theory. Figure 6.2 is a blowup of the boxed portion in figure 6.1. In effect,
the ray theory can locate (only approximately it turns out) the primary bow of
a rainbow—the caustic surface—and can also, by considering multiple internal
reflections, locate the secondary bow that is sometimes seen. It is incapable,
however, of accounting for the following sort of phenomenon. We sometimes
notice the presence of so-called supernumerary bows. These are fainter arcs
appearing on the lit side of the main rainbow arc. They are visible in the sky
Figure 6.1: Spherical raindrop
7A very nice discussion of this is provided in Greenler (1980, chapter 1).
8Caustics are the envelopes of families of rays. Literally, the term means "burning surface.'
Figure 6.2 shows the fold caustic.


=== PAGE 94 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics
83
Figure 6.2: The fold caustic
at times as faint alternating pink and green arcs. Furthermore, since actual
rainbows do not exhibit light of infinite intensity, the singularity predicted by
the ray theory cannot be realistic.
In 1838 George Biddell Airy derived an equation from the undulatory or
wave theory of light from which one can determine the variation in intensity of
Figure 6.3: Airy function and supernumerary bows


=== PAGE 95 ===

84 
The Devil in the Details
light near a fold caustic of geometrical optics. Airy recognized that the singular-
ity at the caustic was an artifact of the ray theory, and by properly incorporating
effects of diffraction using the wave theory, he was able to derive the definite
integral of equation (6.7). The square of this, |Ai(x)|2, gives the intensities of
the various supernumerary bows of the rainbow caustic and properly represents
the smoothing of the ray theory singularity (Airy, 1838, p. 1838).
Figure 6.3 (Berry, 1990, p. 1185) gives an idea of how well the square of Ai(x)
can locate and describe the intensities of the wave patterns (the supernumerary
bows) decorating the rainbow caustic. It is evident from this figure that the
Airy function is oscillatory on the lit side of the caustic (negative values of x)
and exponentially decaying in the shadow (positive values of x). It exhibits in
the A —> 0 limit the singular behaviors characterized by equations (6.5) and
(6.6).
Catastrophe Optics
In the context of studying intertheoretic relations, it is reasonable to ask for more
details concerning the relationship between the Airy function (6.7) describing
various wave features and the "underlying" caustic structure that resides entirely
within the ray theory. The function, in effect, describes how (to use a phrase that
often appears in this context) the "wave flesh decorates the ray theoretic bones."
This colorful way of talking is actually quite suggestive. It is instructive to see
exactly how, and to what extent, the ray theoretic structure can be related to, or
associated with, certain wave theoretic features. It should come as no surprise
that these relations are best studied (and, in fact, can only be studied) in the
asymptotic domain between the two theories.
Let us see "how much" of the wave phenomena can be captured by ray
theoretic considerations. It seems obvious that some sort of connection must
exist between the two theories in the asymptotic limit A —> 0. What will the
waves look like in that asymptotic domain? It seems natural to suppose that
they must be related to the objects of geometrical optics—in particular, to
families of rays.
At the shortwave limit, where A = 0 or where the wavenumber k = oo
(k = 2n/A), rays and not waves are the carriers of energy. These rays propagate
as normals to what we can call "geometrical wavefronts."9 Consider figure 6.4.
We have an initial geometrical wavefront W characterized by its deviation from
the plane z = 0 by a height function f ( x , y). We want to construct, as far as we
can, an approximation to a wave at a point P in terms of rays normal to this
wavefront.10
9Think of a point source of light such as a candle. The geometrical wavefronts will be
concentric spheres with the source as their common center. Light rays will be those straight
lines through the center and normal to each sphere's surface.
10This discussion follows closely that of Berry (1981) and Berry and Upstill (1980).


=== PAGE 96 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics
85
Figure 6.4: Arbitrary wavefront
The rays that emanate from W are defined in terms of the gradient of the
so-called "optical distance function" 0.11 To define this function we introduce a
second coordinate system X, Y, z (with the same z-axis as the original coordinate
system) to label the various points P = (X, Y, z). In this simple case the optical
distance function is just the Euclidean distance between the point (x, y, f ( x , y))
and the point P:
I assume here that the ray propagates in a homogeneous medium without
refraction or reflection from W to P. If we further assume that W deviates only
gently from a plane parallel to the plane z = 0, then we can use the so-called
paraxial approximation to 0. (Roughly, this means that since the deviation of
the rays from lines parallel the z-axis will be small, we can replace sines of angles
by the angles themselves.) On this approximation 0 reduces to
where r = (x, y) and R = (X, Y).
Following terminology from catastrophe theory, it is useful to think of the
points P = (R, z) as "control" parameters—places, for instance, where we might
perform various observations. The points (r, /(r)) are "state variables"—they
label the various starting points for rays that lead to point P.
11 In mechanics this function would be the generating function of a canonical transformation
of coordinates. See, for example, Batterman (1995).


=== PAGE 97 ===

86
The Devil in the Details
Fermat's principle tells us that the rays, for a fixed value of the control
parameter R are those paths through P for which the optical distance func-
tion (6.9) is a minimum:
and so
The rays through P are the solutions to this equation. Because of the curvature
of the wavefront W, there will generally be more than one such ray though a
given point P. (See figure 6.5.) We can label these using an index u, ranging
over the state variables or starting points on W:
Had we started with a wave equation such as the scalar Helmholtz equation
it would be natural to assume that as the wavenumber k —> oo a first approxi-
mation to the wavefunction y ( C ) will be a construction out of a superposition
of contributions from various rays that pass through the point P.12 We have
just seen that these rays are those that satisfy Fermat's (extremum) condition
Figure 6.5: Multiple rays through a given point P
12Here the control parameter C is the ordered pair (R, z).


=== PAGE 98 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics
87
(6.10). If these rays are going to combine somehow to give us an approximation
to a wavefunction y(C), then we must have a way of determining both the
amplitude and phase of y in this ray-theoretic approximation.
The phase of the uth ray is 2?r times the optical distance 0 from the wavefront
W to (R, z) in units of wavelength. That is, the phase is
with k = 2n/A. We can get an approximation to the wave intensity, |amplitude|2,
by considering the energy flux through an area dA(R) of a tube of rays surround-
ing the uth ray at the control point (R, z) when there is unit flux though an
area, dA(ru), surrounding that ray at its starting point on W. (See figure 6.6.)
The amplitude is proportional to
which is the square root of the Jacobian determinant of the mapping from
to dR:
Combining these formulas for the amplitude and phase of a given ray though
the control point (R, z) gives the shortwave approximation of equation (6.14).
Figure 6.6: "Tube" of rays


=== PAGE 99 ===

88 
The Devil in the Details
Let us call this the "interfering ray sum."
Berry notes that
[a]s a shortwave (or, in quantum mechanics, semiclassical) approxi-
mation, [equation (6.14)] has considerable merit. Firstly, it describes
the interference between the contributions of the rays through R, z.
Secondly, it shows that wave functions y are non-analytic in k as
k —> oo, so that shortwave approximations cannot be expressed as
a series in powers of 1/k, i.e. deviations from the shortwave limit
cannot be obtained by perturbation theory. Thirdly, in the short-
wave limit itself [k = oo], y oscillates infinitely fast as R varies and
so can be said to average to zero if there is at least some impreci-
sion in the measurement of R in the intensity |y|2, the terms from
[equation (6.14)] with different u, average to zero in this way, leaving
the sum of squares of individual ray amplitudes, i.e.
and this of course does not involve k. (Berry, 1981, pp. 519-520)
The second and third points here tell us, in effect, that the interference effects—
the wave features—do not go away in the limit as k —> oo. Thus, as we already
knew, there is a qualitative distinction between the limiting behavior and the
behavior in the limit.
Despite these advantages, the interfering ray sum (6.14) cannot describe the
nature of the wave near and on a caustic. In other words, it breaks down exactly
where we need it most. It is relatively easy to see what is responsible for this
failure. Consider a ray tube surrounding a ray that eventually touches a caustic,
say, a fold caustic, such as the one illustrated in figure 6.7. The area dA(R) of
the ray tube around the ray ru shrinks to zero on the caustic. Therefore, the
amplitude that is proportional (equation [6.13]) to
becomes infinite on the caustic. Caustics and focal points are the primary
objects of study in optics, but the interfering ray sum (6.14) fails exactly at those
places. The interfering ray sum can tell us nothing about how the intensity, \y\2,
on and near the caustic changes as k —> oo, nor can it tells us anything about
the wave pattern—the fringe spacings—in that neighborhood.
Now, the construction just considered proceeded from the ray theory "on
up" to the wave theory. Most discussions of shortwave asymptotics proceed by


=== PAGE 100 ===




=== PAGE 101 ===




=== PAGE 102 ===




=== PAGE 103 ===

92 
The Devil in the Details
the state variables. For example, the fold and cusp catastrophes (the first two
in the hierarchy) are represented by the following polynomials:18
These polynomials are called the "normal forms" of the catastrophes. Figure 6.8
shows a cusp caustic (the point) in two dimensions. These are actually visible in
coffee cups that are illuminated at an oblique angle from above by light bulbs.
The importance of the normal forms is the following. Every optical dis-
tance function (or generating function) 0 that yields, say, a fold caustic, can
be transformed by diffeomorphism in the control parameter C into bfold as in
equation (6.17). Similarly, each 0 corresponding to a cusp can be transformed
into bcusp as in equation (6.18). The same holds for the other catastrophes with
K < 4 such as the swallowtail, elliptical umbilic, and the hyperbolic umbilic—
Berry and Upstill (1980), Berry (1981).19 So in order to evaluate the inte-
gral (6.16) for any of the infinite number of y that encounter a fold caustic,
we need only evaluate the "fold diffraction catastrophe" integral. (Similarly for
those that encounter cusps, etc.)
The diffraction catastrophe integral for the fold is the following (C — 0 on
the caustic):20
Fermat's condition—the ray condition—is that
For C < 0 this means that there are two interfering rays su = ±\/-C. For
C > 0, the roots of (6.20) are complex and there are no real rays. The inten-
sity |b(C)|2 is exactly that given by 
basically, the square of the Airy
function (equation [6.7]).21
18Here, for reasons that will become clear later on, I now let s and C denote, respectively,
the state variables and the control parameters.
19The existence of these normal forms means that all of the generating functions in the
same class share the same caustic geometry. In turn, this means that the topology of the
coalescence of the stationary points as C approaches a caustic must be identical.
20Note the appearance of the normal form bfold (6.17) in the integrand.
21A different, but equivalent (for real values) formulation of the Airy equation as a function
of complex variables is given by
Compare this with the fold diffraction catastrophe integral (6.19).


=== PAGE 104 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics 
93
The discussion in this section has led us in a seemingly circuitous route
back to the very equation Airy invented to characterize the behavior of light
near a fold caustic such as the rainbow. But now we see that this is just
the first in a hierarchy of equations—the diffraction catastrophe integrals—that
represent different universality classes of wavelike features. But my interest in
so-called catastrophe optics was motivated in the first instance by a desire to
understand the relationships between two theories, wave theory and ray theory,
in the asymptotic shortwave limit. In particular, one question of interest is
how the diffraction patterns change in this asymptotic domain as k —> oo. The
next section will address this question. There are, in fact, certain exponents
that characterize, algebraically, the behavior of both the intensity of light and
the way the fringe patterns change with increasing k. These exponents reflect
the singularities in the wave physics at the the caustics. In a very deep sense
they are analogous to the anomalous exponents that we found earlier in my
discussions of critical phenomena in thermodynamics (section 4.1) and in the
behavior of the spreading of a groundwater mound over impermeable bedrock
(section 4.3).
6.4 
Universality: Diffraction Catastrophe
Scaling Laws
As k —> oo the intensity on the caustic must rise toward infinity and the spacing
of the fringe patterns must go to zero. The question is how are these limits ap-
proached. It turns out that the structural stability of the caustics—geometrical
objects of ray theoretic origin—guarantees that the k dependence of both the
intensity and the fringe spacings is universal. In essence what we are looking
for is an intermediate asymptotic solution to the physical wavefunction (6.16).
Because of the singularities at the caustics we must expect that this is a solution
of the "second kind."
In fact, the asymptotic solution is the following scaling (self-similar) law:
for the various control parameters Ri (1 < i < K) (Berry and Upstill, 1980,
p. 292). The exponents 0 and a are the "anomalous" or scaling exponents.
They will tell us about the nature of the fringe spacings and intensities scale
with increasing values of k near the caustics. Let us now try to understand this
equation in the simplest case of the fold caustic.
Note first that the wavefunction (6.16), which represents the physical wave
we are interested in, depends on k in two places. There is the k dependence in the
exponent that multiplies the generating function 0 (optical distance function)
and there is the k appearing in the prefactor, kn/2, multiplying the integral itself.
The prefactor guarantees that (when we are far from the caustic and hence the
integral can be evaluated by the method of stationary phase) the contributions
to the interfering ray sum have amplitudes that are k-independent. This is


=== PAGE 105 ===

94 
The Devil in the Details
required since the amplitude is determined by the ray tube equation (6.13),
which is k-independent as one would expect in the ray theory.
The discussion of the last section 6.3 shows that near the caustic it is possible
to transform (perturb) the physical generating function, 0, in (6.16) to the
normal form of the appropriate catastrophe b. For my purposes, I will focus on
the fold caustic with its normal form bfold (6.17). We also saw that as k —> oo
the wave patterns are described by the diffraction catastrophe integral (6.19).
But this equation is independent of k. In order to understand the universal
way the intensities and fringe spacings scale with increasing k — that is, in order
to understand the scaling law (6.21) — we need to understand the relationship
between the k-dependent equation (6.16) and the k-independent equation (6.19).
Recall that the normal forms b have a part that is nonlinear in the state
variables s and independent of the control parameters C. This is called the
"germ" of the normal form. The remaining terms of the equations are linear
in C and these are called the "unfolding terms." For example, the germ of the
bcusp (6.18) is s4/4. (See, for example, Poston and Stewart (1978).) We first
want to remove the k-dependence of the germ of the function 0 in (6.16) by a
linear k-dependent transformation from r to s: kr3 = s3. This will yield a factor
kB outside the integral. Second, we remove the k-dependence of the unfolding
terms by another linear transformation Ri = k-aiRi (Berry, 1981, pp. 538-539)
(Berry and Upstill, 1980, pp. 295-296). Since kr3 = s3 implies that r = s/k1/3
and since dr = k - 1/ 3ds, we get the equation22
This is exactly of the form (6.21) with B = 1/6 and a1 = 2/3. These
exponents tell us, respectively, how the intensity and fringe spacings scale with
increasing values of k at the caustic. In fact, we see immediately that on the
fold caustic the intensity, |y|2 diverges as (k1/6)2 = k1/3 and the fringe spacings
on the bright side of the caustic shrink as k-2/3.
Equations for the fold caustic (6.22) and in general (6.21) are what Baren-
blatt would call "the principal physical laws" governing the wave features of
interest. They are self-similar solutions to the problem of understanding the
nature of various wave phenomena in the those situations where the wave in-
tensity is greatest—on the singularities or caustics.
Furthermore, they capture, in a particularly transparent way, certain im-
portant intertheoretic relations between the wave theory and the ray theory.
In particular, the ray theoretic caustic, with its structural stability properties,
is responsible for universal behavior in the intensity and form of various wave
patterns. Thus, in the asymptotic domain characterized by the limit A —> 0 or
k —> oo, elements from both theories seem to be intimately and inextricably inter-
twined. This is a direct result of the singular nature of the limiting relationship.
22In the case of the fold, caustic the second transformation is unnecessary.


=== PAGE 106 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics 
95
6.5 
Conclusion
By focusing on the intertheoretic relations between the ray and wave theories of
light using the particular example of the rainbow, I have shown that intertheo-
retic relations can be much more involved and complicated than the reductive
schema 6.1 appears to allow. In fact, it is fair to say that in many (actually
in most) cases of asymptotic limiting intertheoretic relations, that schema will
fail. Whenever the limiting relations are singular, we can expect new, and often
unexpected, physics in the asymptotic regime between the two theories.
Furthermore, it should be evident that the various philosophical accounts of
reduction discussed in chapter 5 will fail to account for the physical phenomena
that obtain in the asymptotic borderlands. These reductive accounts are, as
we've seen, primarily concerned with the derivation of the laws of the reduced
theory from those of the reducing. But the kinds of phenomena I have been con-
sidering here—the universal behavior of light in the neighborhood of caustics of
various types—are neither laws of the reduced nor of the reducing theories. The
philosophical views of reduction fail to pay attention to these kinds of issues en-
tirely. Given the discussion of the various ways in which philosophical accounts
of explanation cannot deal with universal behavior of certain types, it should
not be very surprising that the main accounts of reduction also will fail. After
all, these accounts are intimately tied to various views about explanation. We
have already taken an important step, in our discussion of multiple realizability
in chapter 5, toward seeing how this intimate relationship between reduction
and explanation needs to be chaperoned.
So what is the status of catastrophe optics—the "theory" of the asymptotic
shortwave limit of the wave theory? As Berry says, it cuts across traditional
categories in optics. In chapter 7 I will argue that semiclassical mechanics plays
an analogous role as the "theory" of the asymptotic h —> 0 limit of quantum
mechanics, cutting across traditional categories of mechanical theories. In what
sense are these really theories distinct from the pairs to which they are somehow
related?
Concerning the diffraction catastrophes that I have been discussing, Berry
says the following:
Such "diffraction catastrophes" have intricate and beautiful struc-
tures, and constitute a hierarchy of nonanalyticities, of emergent
phenomena par excellence. The patterns inhabit the borderland be-
tween the wave and ray theories, because when A is zero the fringes
are too small to see, whereas when A is too large the overall structure
of the pattern cannot be discerned: they are wave fringes decorating
ray singularities. (Berry, 1994, pp. 602-603)
While the visual idiom Berry uses provides an intuitive picture of the character
of these properties as emerging in the A —> 0 limit, I do not think that it captures
the full import of the nature of their emergence. It is true that when A = 0
the fringes are too small to discern, but that is because they do not actually
exist at that limit. (Recall that this is a reflection of the singular nature of the


=== PAGE 107 ===

96 
The Devil in the Details
limit.) The fringes in a sense do exist for any value A > 0, but as Berry says,
their structure or pattern cannot be observed if the wavelength gets too large.
What's crucial, however, is the fact that the nature of the fringe pattern itself—
how the spacings and intensities change with changing wavelength—depends
upon the structure of the ray theoretic caustic. When the wavelength gets too
large, the wave patterns can no longer "discern" (or are no longer dominated
by) the relevant features of the "underlying caustic."
It is true, nevertheless, that these emergent structures are in some sense
contained in the wave equation (6.12) (and in the case of quantum mechanics,
in the Schrodinger equation). The question here is exactly what is the operative
sense of "contained in." I think that the sense of "contained in" must refer to
asymptotic analysis. It is not the case that these structures are derivable in any
straightforward sense from the fundamental wave equation. A theme through-
out the book has been how different asymptotic reasoning is from the usual
understanding of how solutions to equations are to be gotten. The examples
considered in this chapter served to illustrate the fact that asymptotic analysis
of singular limiting intertheoretic relations typically yields new structures that
are not solutions to the fundamental governing equations in the normal sense
of the term.
It is possible to say a bit more about what this sense of being "contained in"
but not "predictable from" the fundamental theory amounts to. I have claimed
that mathematical asymptotic analysis of the Helmholtz equation (6.12) can
yield solutions characterizing the emergent patterns of light on and near the
caustics of geometrical optics. (Again, a more detailed quantum mechanical
example of this sort of analysis is discussed in chapter 7.) We see that the inter-
fering ray sum (6.14) and the scaling laws result from this asymptotic analysis.
But we also see that one cannot interpret these purely mathematical results
in wave theoretic terms alone. An understanding of what the mathematical
asymptotics is telling us requires reference to structures that make sense only
in the ray theory. Thus, the interpretation of the interfering ray sum and of
the scaling laws demands reference to caustic structures. As we've seen though,
these are purely ray theoretic features.
So "predictable from fundamental theory" is somewhat ambiguous. In one
sense, the solutions are contained in the fundamental wave equation. This is
the sense in which asymptotic analysis enables one to find mathematical rep-
resentations of those solutions. On the other hand, the understanding of those
mathematical representations requires reference to structures foreign to the fun-
damental theory. In this sense, they are unpredictable from fundamental theory.
It seems reasonable to consider these asymptotically emergent structures to
constitute the ontology of an explanatory "theory," the characterization of which
depends essentially on asymptotic analysis and the interpretation of the results.
This full characterization must make essential reference to features of both the
ray and the wave theories. That is what the analysis forces upon us. So, as
we've seen, despite the fact that the wave equation in some sense "contains"
these emergent phenomena, their explanation necessarily requires reference to
features that are not present in the wave theoretic ontology. As a result, I think


=== PAGE 108 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Optics 
97
it is entirely reasonable to think of catastrophe optics as a genuinely new theory,
a third theory, describing the asymptotic "no man's land" between the wave and
ray theories.
If these diffraction catastrophe structures and their properties do represent
features of a new domain, then perhaps the use of the term "emergent" to
describe them is appropriate. Chapter 8 will argue that this is indeed the case.


=== PAGE 109 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 110 ===

Intertheoretic
Relations—Mechanics
Chapter 6 discussed in detail the asymptotic relations between the wave and ray
theories of light in the shortwave limit as A —> 0. I mentioned at several points
that similar relationships obtain between quantum and classical mechanics in the
semiclassical limit in which Planck's constant h —> 0.1 This limit too is singular
and the result is that a third theory—semiclassical mechanics—characterizes
the asymptotic borderland between quantum and classical mechanics. In this
chapter I will continue the discussion of asymptotic intertheoretic relations by
concentrating on certain aspects of the so-called correspondence between clas-
sical and quantum mechanics.
There are truly interesting issues here. Ever since the beginning of the
development of the quantum theory, the idea of a correspondence between the
two theories in some limit—very roughly, the limit in which "things get big"—
has played an important role. Bohr, in fact, required that the "correspondence
principle" be a fundamental law of the quantum theory. Jammer puts the point
as follows:
It was due to [the correspondence principle] that the older quan-
tum theory became as complete as classical physics. But a costly
price had to be paid. For taking resort to classical physics in order
to establish quantum-theoretic predictions, or in other words, con-
structing a theory whose corroboration depends on premises which
conflict with the substance of the theory, is of course a serious in-
consistency from the logical point of view. Being fully aware of this
difficulty, Bohr attempted repeatedly to show that "the correspon-
dence principle must be regarded purely as a law of the quantum
1One might reasonably wonder what it could mean to let a constant change its value. The
way to understand "ft —> 0" is that it is the limit in which h is small relative to some quantity
having the same dimension—namely, the classical action.
99
7


=== PAGE 111 ===

100
The Devil in the Details
theory, which can in no way diminish the contrast between the pos-
tulates and electrodynamic theory." (Jammer, 1966, p. 116)
I have argued elsewhere, Batterman (1991, 1993), that semiclassical mechanics
is the modern extension of the "old quantum theory" and that many of the
issues of concern to Bohr in the early development of the quantum theory still
remain. Some of these issues, in a more modern guise, will be addressed here.
In particular, I will argue, as in my earlier discussion of catastrophe optics, that
semiclassical mechanics should be understood as the explanatory theory of the
asymptotic "no man's land" between classical and quantum physics.
7.1 Classical and Quantum Theories
The representation of classical mechanical systems and their evolutions typically
utilizes the descriptive apparatus of phase space. This is usually a multidimen-
sional Euclidean space in which the complete state of a system is represented
by a point. An example is the representation of the state of a simple harmonic
oscillator such as a pendulum by a point in a two-dimensional phase space whose
axes represent angular position, 6, and angular momentum, w. (See figure 7.1.)
The oscillator has one degree of freedom and the phase space is two dimensional.
In general, a system with N degrees of freedom will have its state represented
by a point in a 2N dimensional phase space. As the system evolves over time
according to Hamilton's equations of motion, the representative point carves
out a trajectory in this phase space.
The analog of this classical phase space in the optics case discussed in chap-
ter 6 is the space that would be formed by combining (taking the Cartesian
product of) the space of state variables su with the space of control variables
or parameters C. Figure 6.8, for example, shows the cusp catastrophe in the
two-dimensional control space (X, Y) with z fixed. The full representation in
Figure 7.1: Phase space for a simple oscillator


=== PAGE 112 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Mechanics
101
"phase space" is shown in figure 7.2. Recall also equation (6.18). The Ci's are
the control parameters.
As we saw in figure 6.8, the caustic organizes the multivaluedness of the
family of rays—inside the cusp each point is the intersection of three separate
rays, whereas outside there is only one ray through each point. In the combined
"phase space" of figure 7.2, this is represented by the foldings of a surface over
the control space. In the figure, the three contributions from different sheets of
the folded surface are labeled 1, 2, and 3.
As I noted, in classical mechanics the state of a system is represented by a
point (q, p) in phase space. Here q = (q1,... qN) is the generalized coordinate
for the system and p = (p1,...pN) is the conjugate generalized momentum.
Thus, the classical state is fully represented by 2N numbers. In quantum me-
chanics, on the other hand, the system's state is represented by a wavefunction
y(q), which is a function of only half the canonical coordinates (q, p). In a mo-
ment I will show how this reduction in the number of coordinates gets carried
out. (We are, of course, looking at the relationship between the classical de-
scription of a phenomenon and the quantum description.) The "objects" of the
classical theory that are relevant for this discussion are families of trajectories
or surfaces evolving under Hamilton's equations of motion. These are analogous
to the ray families discussed in section 6.3. The analog of the waves in wave
optics are, naturally, the quantum mechanical wave functions.
We can begin with a question similar to that first asked in my discussion
of the asymptotic relationship between the wave and ray theories: How are the
classical structures related to or associated with certain quantum mechanical
features? How much of the quantum mechanical wavefunction can be under-
Figure 7.2: Cusp caustic and multivaluedness in "phase space"


=== PAGE 113 ===

102
Tie Devil in the Details
stood with purely classical "trajectory-theoretic" considerations?
Given that classical mechanics is supposed to be a limiting case of quantum
mechanics as h —> 0, we would like to try to understand the nature of the quan-
tum mechanical wavefunctions in this limit. The hope is to find a construction
similar to the interfering ray sum (6.14) that we found in section 6.3. In other
words, we would like to find an association between wavefunctions and families
of phase space trajectories, or equivalently, surfaces in phase space.2
The association depends upon geometric properties of certain kinds of N-
dimensional surfaces embedded in the 2N-dimensional phase space. These are
so-called Lagrangian surfaces.3 Consider such a surface £ embedded in a four-
dimensional phase space as in figure 7.3. One can consider points on £ as
a function of the coprdinates q—p(q). In so doing we treat the surface as
a function of only half the canonical coordinates (q, p), just as the quantum
mechanical wavefunction y(q)- Next we introduce a new set of variables Q =
(Q1, Q2) to label points on E. (These variables are analogous to the introduction
of the coordinates [X, Y] used to locate the point R in the optical example of
section 6.3. Recall figure 6.4.)
Corresponding to this new set of coordinates will be a set of conjugate mo-
Figure 7.3: Lagrangian surface S
2The discussion here largely follows Berry (1983) and Batterman (1995).
3For the technical definition, of which we need not be concerned here, see Littlejohn (1992)
and Arnold (1989).


=== PAGE 114 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Mechanics 
103
mentum coordinates P = (P1,P2). The full set (Q,P) might, for instance, be
a set of angle/action coordinates. We can now think of (Q, P) as providing
a different coordinatization of the entire phase space that is connected to the
original (q, p) by a canonical transformation provided by a generating function
5(q, P)—a function of both old and new canonical variables:
Schematically, the generating function operates as follows:
The Lagrangian surface is, then, the set of points in phase space (q, p) =
(q, VqS(q, P)). The generating function plays the role in mechanics played by
the optical distance function 0(r, R) in geometrical optics.
Now the idea is to associate a (semiclassical) wavefunction y(q) with this
Lagrangian surface in such a way that the probability density (the "intensity")
is proportional to the density of points in the classical coordinate space—the
(q1,q2) 
plane in figure 7.3. The density is determined by "projecting down"—
taking |dQ/dq|—from S onto q-space, assuming points are uniformly distributed
in Q. We introduce the ansatz for the wavefunction y(q):
with amplitude a(q) and phase 6(q). Given this, the requirement on probability
density requires (using [7.2]):
where K is a constant.
The phase b(q) is determined by appeal to the de Broglie relation, P =
h k, which relates the momentum p(q) to the wavevector of a locally plane
wave. This introduces Planck's constant and yields, after some straightforward
manipulation involving equation (7.1), the phase:
Putting all of this together finally yields the wavefunction:
Note the similarity between this formula and a single term of the interfering
ray sum (6.14). In particular, note that h appears in the denominator of the
exponent. This indicates that (as expected) the limit h —> 0 of (7.6) is singular.


=== PAGE 115 ===

104 
The Devi] in the Details
I mentioned in my discussion of the optics case that the interfering ray
sum can also be arrived at through asymptotic analysis of the Helmholtz equa-
tion. The fact that this "top down" derivation agrees with the "bottom up"
construction just performed serves to validate the association of wavefunctions
with classical Lagrangian surfaces. It is worthwhile in the current context to
provide the beginnings of the top down analysis. It is the so-called WKB method
familiar to practitioners of quantum mechanics. The typical attitude of both
physicists and philosophers toward this method is that it is simply an approx-
imation scheme that is useful when the Schrodinger equation cannot be solved
exactly. My view, on the other hand, is that the WKB method serves as the
primary tool for understanding the asymptotic domain between classical and
quantum mechanics. It is much more than a pragmatically useful method for
solving computationally difficult problems.
7.2 The WKB Method
In this section I will show how, starting with the Schrodinger equation, we
can arrive at a top down asymptotic expression for the wavefunction of the
form (7.6). We will then see that this solution exhibits the singular features —
particularly divergence at caustics — that we found when considering the corre-
sponding situation in the optics case.
Let's begin with the one dimensional Schrodinger equation:
Now write the wavefunction y(x) in the following form:
where S is, in general, a complex function of x. Next, we substitute (7.8) into
(7.7) and solve for S.
Carrying out the differentiations yields
This equation is exact. Next we expand the function S in powers of h:


=== PAGE 116 ===

Intertheoretic Relations — Mechanics 
105
It turns out that this series is asymptotic. It has the characteristic property of
asymptotic series that if one truncates it after a few terms and then considers the
result for small values of the parameter h, one will have a good approximation to
the actual value, even though the series, considered in its entirety, is divergent.4
In other words, as we include more terms in the series, the numerical result will
eventually diverge without bound from the true value of 5.
If we now insert (7.11) into (7.10) and group terms according to the power
of h they multiply, the result, retaining terms only up to and including h , is:
This equality can hold only if the coefficient of each power of h is separately
equal to zero. Thus, we have
Finally, by inserting these values for S0 and S1 into the expansion of S(x) in
the wavefunction (7.8), we get the following WKB expression for V (with A and
B arbitrary constants):
This is the first-order WKB asymptotic approximation. It is the superpo-
sition of a wave traveling in the positive x direction (positive exponential) and
a wave traveling in the negative x direction (negative exponential). It is for-
mally similar to the bottom up construction provided by equation (7.6), A little
further analysis will show how similar it is to the interfering ray sum (6.14).
Note that when V(x) = E, the denominators in both terms are infinite.
Classically, this identity characterizes a turning point—a point where a classical
particle would have zero momentum and its direction of motion would change.
In the classical theory the only allowed region for a particle is that characterized
4For a discussion of asymptotic series in this context, see Batterman (1997).


=== PAGE 117 ===

106
The Devil in the Details
Figure 7.4: Potential barrier
by its kinetic energy being greater than the potential energy. One should keep
figure 7.4 in mind here. When x < X0, V(x) < E and a classical particle coming
from the left must turn around at X0. The WKB solution to the Schrodinger
equation, however, allows the wavefunction to be valid even in regions that are
classically forbidden—when V > E.
As noted, at the classical turning points the amplitude of the wavefunction
blows up. This is completely analogous to the singular behavior of the interfer-
ing ray sum at the caustic. In fact, classical turning points in one dimension are
caustics. Furthermore, it appears that we can provide an interpretation for the
phase S(X) in analogy with the optical distance function 0 appearing in the
phase of the interfering ray sum. Constant values for S are classical surfaces
in phase space similar to geometrical wavefronts, and normals to these surfaces
are classical trajectories in analogy with the rays of geometrical optics. The
semiclassical (small h) asymptotic agreement between the top down analysis
provided here and the bottom up construction of section 7.1 provides a justifi-
cation for our association of wavefunctions with classical surfaces in this asymp-
totic domain. We can draw the same conclusions about this quantum/classical
"no man's land" that we were able to draw about the shortwave catastrophe
optics domain existing between the wave and ray theories of light. Just as in
the case of light there are structures—features that appear in the semiclassical
limit—whose understanding requires reference to classical structures and are
not fully explicable (without asymptotic analysis) from the perspective of the
quantum theory alone.
Much research in recent years has been devoted to studying these emergent
structures and their patterns. I'll have a bit more to say about some of this
later. However, most of this research has tended to focus on the fact (mostly
ignored by my discussion until now) that quantum mechanics is a dynamical
theory. We need to discuss this aspect.
The Schrodinger equation tells us how the wavefunction evolves over time.


=== PAGE 118 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Mechanics 
107
Figure 7.5: Invariance of the semiclassical construction over time
One question we might reasonably consider is whether the classical evolution of
Lagrangian surfaces under Hamilton's equations is mirrored by the Schrodinger
evolution of the constructed wavefunctions in the semiclassical limit. Figura-
tively, we are asking whether the diagram of figure 7.5 is satisfied.
The answer is that for a restricted class of Lagrangian surfaces, the invari-
ance of the semiclassical construction over time does hold. This is the class
of Lagrangian surfaces that are invariant under Hamiltonian evolution. They
have the topology of N-dimensional tori (or doughnuts) in the 2N-dimensional
phase. Classical dynamical systems whose trajectories are confined to invariant
tori are known as integrable systems. They exhibit what is called "regular"
motion—that is, periodic or multiply periodic motion. The simplest example is
the simple harmonic oscillator whose phase space trajectory just is the torus in
one dimension. Recall figure 7.1. The semiclassical mechanics of systems whose
"underlying" classical motions are regular has been around for a long time. In
essence it is a refinement of the "old" quantum theory of Bohr, Sommerfeld,
and Born, et al. Sometimes this theory goes by the name "EBK" theory, after
Einstein, Brillouin, and Keller. However, Berry's term, "Torus Quantization"
is much more descriptive.5
On the other hand, most classical evolutions are not confined to invariant
tori. Those systems exhibiting irregular and even fully chaotic motions are far
more common in classical mechanics than the typical textbook examples of inte-
grable or regular systems. This fact causes problems for torus quantization and,
as a result, for the invariance of the semiclassical association of wavefunctions
with Lagrangian surfaces.
Under noninvariant evolution the Lagrangian surface of figure 7.3 may de-
velop folds and other more complicated morphologies. For instance, in figure 7.6
the surface has evolved so as to yield, upon projection to the coordinate space,
(q1, q2), a fold caustic. Each point inside the fold results from two distinct points
(e.g., points 1 and 2) on the surface. Once again this demonstrates how the
5See Berry (1983), Batterman (1991).


=== PAGE 119 ===

108
The Devi] in the Details
Figure 7.6: The folding of a Lagrangian surface under evolution
caustic organizes the multivaluedness of the "trajectories" in coordinate space.
One might also have evolutions leading to cusp caustics, as the surface of fig-
ure 7.2 shows, as well as evolutions leading to other more complicated mor-
phologies, some of which are classified by catastrophe theory.
As long as these foldings are relatively far apart, it is possible at any given
time to use the recipe for associating (semi)classical wavefunctions with classical
surfaces. The problem is that, when the folds become too close, then one will
no longer be able to deal with the caustic singularities using Maslov's methods.6
Neither will the WKB approximation be applicable. But exactly when do the
foldings of the surface "become too close" for these methods to apply? In two
dimensions there is a simple criterion for deciding this.
Suppose that an initial surface E0 (the curve in figure 7.7) evolves over
time At into the surface Et. Suppose, further, that the points labeled 1, 2,
and 3 (in figure 7.7 [a]) evolve to have the same q-value in time At. Then
the constructed wavefunction associated with the surface St will be expressed
as the superposition of contributions of the form (7.6) for each point above qt
in figure 7.7 (b). However, this construction will fail if the phase space area,
A-t, enclosed between the line connecting the pre-images of these points (e.g.,
points 1 and 2) is of order h. This is what it means for the folds to be "too
close." As long as the folds remain fairly isolated, it will be possible to use
semiclassical formulas analogous to the diffraction catastrophe integrals (such
as equation [6.19]) to construct good approximate wavefunctions. But if the
Hamiltonian evolution is irregular or chaotic, then in the limit as t —> oo, the
catastrophes will no longer be isolable. The Lagrangian surface will become so
convoluted that there will be ubiquitous clustering of caustics on scales smaller
than order h. In that case, the method of the diffraction catastrophe integrals
itself will break down. This means that there is a clash between two fundamental
6Recall the brief discussion of Maslov's methods in section 6.3.


=== PAGE 120 ===

Intert.heoret.ic Relations—Mechanics
109
Figure 7.7: "Area" criterion for validity of constructed wavefunction
asymptotic limits—the semiclassical limit (h —> 0), and the long-time limit
(t —> oo).
In fact, if the classical evolution is chaotic, then these limits fail to commute.
That is, while for fixed t after some initial time to it will be possible to keep the
folds sufficiently far apart by letting h get very small, one can't do this if the
t —> oo limit gets taken first. The caustics will cluster on too fine a scale. Since
classical chaos is a t —> oo property, it is apparently not possible to recover that
chaotic behavior in the h —> 0 limit of quantum mechanics. This is the so-called
problem of quantum chaos.
7.3 Semiclassical "Emergents"
For my purposes here, the problem of quantum chaos provides further evidence
for a failure of limiting reductive relations between quantum and classical me-
chanics. Much research of late has been devoted to studying various aspects of
the asymptotic clash between these two limits and certain features and struc-
tures that emerge in these asymptotic domains. The asymptotic "no man's
land" is much more complex and interesting than Bohr and many others had
thought. It should be clear that a straightforward interpretation of the corre-
spondence principle simply does not appear to be available.
There are many aspects of the semiclassical limit of quantum mechanics that
cannot be explained purely in quantum mechanical terms, though they are in
some sense quantum mechanical. Just as the case of optics discussed in chap-
ter 6, the fundamental theory is, in certain instances, explanatorily deficient.
For instance, there are differences in the morphologies of semiclassical wave-
functions that depend essentially on the nature of the "underlying" classical
motion—whether the classical motion is regular or chaotic. When the motion
is integrable or regular, then, as I've mentioned, torus quantization applies and
one finds fairly simple formulas for constructing wavefunctions. When the clas-
sical motion is chaotic, the tori break down; nevertheless, classical periodic
trajectories (now isolated—that is, not appearing in families—yet densely dis-


=== PAGE 121 ===

110 
The Devil in the Details
tributed in a sea of nonperiodic trajectories) still play an essential role in fixing
the form of the wavefunction's probability density. This phenomenon is called
"scarring" and the "rule" for quantization is sometimes called the "Gutzwiller
trace formula."7
Another feature among many that are emergent in the semiclassical domain
is the statistical behavior of the spacings of the energy levels for the quantum
systems. If we consider a bound quantum system—one with a discrete spectrum
of energy levels—we can ask how these levels are distributed in the semiclassical
limit. As h —> 0, and the classical limit h = 0 is approached, we should rightly
expect that the energy levels get closer and closer together. In the classical
theory, after all, the energy is distributed along a continuum. The mean spacing
between levels when h is small is proportional to hN , where N is the number
of degrees of freedom of the system. If we then "look" at the levels with a
microscope with magnification h-N (in other words, we rescale the level spacings
in proportion to the "size" of h), we will be looking at a set of levels with a unit
mean density that remains constant as h —> 0. Now we can ask about how the
distribution of levels fluctuates about this mean. Here is what Berry has to say
about the answer to this question:
The answer is remarkable: apart from trivial exceptions, the fluctu-
ations are universal, that is, independent of the details of the system
and dependent only on whether the orbits of its classical counter-
part are regular or chaotic. Paradoxically, the spectral fluctuations
are those of a sequence of random numbers (Poisson distribution)
when the classical motion is regular, and are more regularly dis-
tributed (exhibiting the level repulsion characteristic of the eigen-
values of random matrices) when the classical motion is chaotic. We
are beginning to understand this quantum universality in terms of
semiclassical asymptotics: it arises from a similar universality in the
distribution of long-period classical orbits. (Berry, 1994, p. 604)
It is indeed remarkable how these quantum mechanical features require reference
to classical properties for their full explanation. Once again, these features are
all contained in the Schrodinger equation—at least in the asymptotics of its
combined long-time and semiclassical limits—yet, their interpretation requires
reference to classical mechanics.
7.4 
Conclusion
In this chapter and in chapter 6 I have discussed examples of complex phenom-
ena that apparently inhabit the asymptotic borderland between theories related
by singular limits. I have shown how one can explore the nature of these phe-
nomena in a sense from two "directions"—from the bottom up and from the top
7For a nice, relatively nontechnical survey article about some of these semiclassical emer-
gent features, see Heller and Tomsovic (1993). See also my discussions Batterman (1991, 1993,
1995) and the book by Gutzwiller (1990).


=== PAGE 122 ===

Intertheoretic Relations—Mechanics 
111
down. The top down approach, which begins with the fundamental equation
of the finer theory and investigates its solutions in an appropriate asymptotic
limit, has been the main focus of this chapter. In contrast, the bottom up ap-
proach was the main consideration of chapter 6. We see that in the context of
time evolution—that is, that when we investigate the long-time limit (t —> oo)
in combination with the semiclassical (h —> 0) correspondence limit—things
become much more complex and interesting.
These examples serve to indicate that (1) the neo-Nagelian reductive rela-
tions are woefully inadequate and that (2) the failure of the physicists' reductive
schema (6.1), lime_>0Tf = Tc, leads one to investigate what can only be called
"new physics."
My discussion of these borderland phenomena and their explanations should
also lead one to question what has become a fairly common sentiment among
physicists and philosophers. It seems that most investigators maintain a reduc-
tionist and even eliminativist attitude toward classical physics given the many
successes of the quantum theory. Of course, it is just this attitude that I have
been at pains to question. Nevertheless, I have frequently heard the line that one
really need not pay any attention to classical mechanics. A typical expression
of this attitude might be the following:
Everything is ultimately quantum mechanical. The standard pro-
cedure of beginning with a classical system and then quantizing it
according to well-established heuristic rules is simply old-fashioned.
Ideally, we should simply treat all systems as quantum mechanical
and our use of classical methods is purely pragmatic—simply a mat-
ter of convenience and a function of our deep, yet flawed, need to
think classically. Once the revolution is complete and a new gener-
ation of physicists arrives, such classical thinking should really be
jettisoned altogether.
I hope that the discussion of the last two chapters shows how misguided this
way of thinking really is. Given that the understanding of various observed and
observable universal behaviors "contained in" the finer theories (wave optics and
quantum mechanics) requires reference to structures present only in the coarser
theories to which they are related by asymptotic limits, it is indeed difficult to
see how this attitude can coherently be maintained.


=== PAGE 123 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 124 ===

8
Emergence
I think it is fair to say that recently the topic of emergence has received most of
its attention in the context of philosophy of mind. While there may be things
distinctive about the emergence of mental phenomena, these discussions have
also by and large tried to encompass the emergence of other special science
properties as well.1 My discussion of philosophical views about reduction also
focused on issues about special science properties generally. It is, therefore,
worthwhile for me to begin this chapter with a discussion of emergence in this
context as well.
Let me say, however, that most of the discussion in this chapter will concern
an example of emergence that is not from the special sciences. I will argue that
the universal features of the rainbow—the way the fringe spacings and inten-
sities scale in the neighborhood of a caustic—are emergent properties. While
certain aspects of these phenomena satisfy certain features of the philosoph-
ical conception of emergence outlined in section 2.4, there are other features
of that conception that are wholly inapplicable in this context. In particular,
I will argue that the part/whole aspect of the "received view" of emergence
is completely absent in this example, though issues about irreducibility, unex-
plainability, and unpredictability remain salient. Furthermore, I will argue that
the mereological aspects of the usual view of emergence are relatively unimpor-
tant vis-a-vis emergence even in those contexts—even for those properties—for
which they appear to play an essential role. Instead, what is important, and
often missed, is the asymptotic nature of the relationship between the emergent
properties and the lower level theory characterizing the components.
Section 8.1 reviews what I'll call the "received" view of emergence. In sec-
tion 8.2 I will continue the discussion of the rainbow example. I will consider
the extent to which the universal scaling properties of light in the neighborhood
of a caustic can be considered emergent properties. Next, in section 8.3 I will
formulate a new sense of emergence—one that captures and accounts for several
1Kim, for instance, thinks that if any property can legitimately be understood as emergent,
it will be a phenomenal feel or "quale." On his view Kim (1999), as we will see later, most
other "upper level" special science properties will fail to be emergent.
113


=== PAGE 125 ===

114 
The Devil in the Details
of the key features of the "received" view. Finally, in section 8.4 I will try to
make sense, on this new view, of the idea that emergents possess novel causal
powers. Actually, I will argue there that this novelty is best understood not in
terms of causation but rather in terms of the existence of new theories that play
novel explanatory roles.
8.1 
Emergence and the Philosophy of Mind
Let's begin by reviewing and expanding the discussion of section 2.4. I noted
there that there are several assumptions underlying what we can take to be the
"received" view about emergence in the literature today.2 The first assumption
is that the world divides somehow into levels. Thus, an important difference
between a special science, such as psychology, and more "basic" underlying sci-
ences, such as neurophysiology and physics, is the fact that the things talked
about in psychology exist in some important sense at a higher (= less funda-
mental) level.
The second assumption is that this conception of levels is to be understood in
mereological terms. In other words, properties of wholes existing at some level
are constituted by the basic parts of that whole and their various features. For
example, Kim expects most emergentists to accept what he calls "mereological
supervenience." 3
• Mereological Supervenience: Systems with an identical total microstruc-
tural property have all other [intrinsic] properties in common. Equiva-
lently, all properties of a physical system supervene on, or are determined
by, its total microstructural property. (Kim, 1999, p. 7)
Kim notes further that those who hold that there exist emergent properties
typically need to try to distinguish them from other upper level properties that
are merely resultant (1999, pp. 7-8). This difference has traditionally been
founded on epistemological considerations of predictability and explainability.
In particular, emergent properties are said to be novel at least in the sense that
they are neither explainable nor predictable from the theory of the lower level
constituents.
More recently, perhaps, issues about reducibility have also played a role in
distinguishing those properties that are emergent at a higher level from those
2There is no unanimity in this literature. Nevertheless, I think Kim is right to think that
the four (or five) tenets he identifies are quite prevalent in contemporary discussions.
3A notable exception to this is Paul Humphreys (1997). He suggests that, to meet various
objections against the possibility of emergent properties, one actually needs to give up on
supervenience. For him, emergent properties are formed by an ontological operation in which
two (or more) lower level property instances fuse to form a property instance at the next higher
level. As a result of this fusion, the lower level property instances no longer exist; and hence,
there is no supervenience base upon which the emergent properties can supervene. Note,
however, that on this view, the fusion operation is mereological. The emergent properties are
formed by a real coming together of lower level parts and their properties, even if once the
operation has been effected, such parts no longer exist.


=== PAGE 126 ===

Emergence 
115
that are merely resultant and pose no (or little) interpretive problems. Most
authors assume (and Kim is no exception) that reductions are essentially ex-
planatory. We have seen, however, that there are good reasons to think that
reduction and explanation can part company. Thus, there are no good reasons
to maintain that reduction (in all of its guises) need be essentially epistemolog-
ical.4
As I noted in section 2.4, Kim tries to capture contemporary thinking about
emergent properties in the following five tenets:
1. Emergence of complex higher-level entities: Systems with a higher-level of
complexity emerge from the coming together of lower-level entities in new
structural configurations.
2. Emergence of higher-level properties: All properties of higher-level entities
arise out of the properties and relations that characterize their constituent
parts. Some properties of these higher, complex systems are "emergent,"
and the rest merely "resultant."
3. The unpredictability of emergent properties: Emergent properties are not
predictable from exhaustive information concerning their "basal condi-
tions." In contrast, resultant properties are predictable from lower-level
information.
4. The unexplainability/irreducibility of emergent properties: Emergent prop-
erties, unlike those that are merely resultant, are neither explainable nor
reducible in terms of their basal conditions.
5. The causal efficacy 
of the emergents: Emergent properties have causal
powers of their own—novel causal powers irreducible to the causal powers
of their basal constituents (Kim, 1999, pp. 20-22).
It is clear that the first two tenets focus on the part/whole nature of the
emergent properties, while the last three are concerned with trying to capture
the sense in which the emergents are novel. In the next section, I will consider
again the example of the rainbow. I hold that the patterns of fringe spacings and
intensities that exist in the asymptotic limit near the caustic are genuinely emer-
gent properties. We will see, however, that there are no part/whole relations
in play here. I will also give an account of the different senses in which these
patterns are novel. This will enable me to refine the conception of emergence
in several important ways.
8.2 
The Rainbow Revisited: An Example
of Emergence?
In this section, I will assume that we do want to think of the patterns of fringe
spacings as emergent phenomena and examine the extent to which these phe-
4See Antony (1999) for a similar point of view explicitly in the context of a discussion of
emergence.


=== PAGE 127 ===

116 
The Devil in the Details
nomena satisfy the tenets of contemporary emergentist thinking noted above
in section 8.1. The discussion of section 8.3 will show that this is a legitimate
assumption.
To begin, let us recall Berry's characterization of the scaling laws for the
fringe spacings and the intensities of the wavelike aspects that decorate caustics
in the shortwave limit.
[The] "diffraction catastrophes" have intricate and beautiful struc-
tures, and constitute a hierarchy of nonanalyticities, of emergent
phenomena par excellence. The patterns inhabit the borderland be-
tween the wave and ray theories, because when A is zero the fringes
are too small to see, whereas when A is too large the overall structure
of the pattern cannot be discerned: they are wave fringes decorating
ray singularities. (Berry, 1994, pp. 602-603)
As we've seen, an important assumption underlying the "received" character-
ization of emergence is that the world be construed as consisting of a hierarchy
of levels. The things talked about by theories at upper levels are to be related
mereologically to things talked about by lower level, typically more fundamental,
theories. In the context of my discussion of the physicists' sense of intertheo-
retic reduction, we would typically take the coarser theory to be a higher level
theory related to the finer, more fundamental theory by the schema (6.1). For
instance, we have the coarser theory of Newtonian space and time related by
this schema to the finer, more basic, theory of special relativity. Even in the
cases (the most interesting cases) for which the reductive schema fails, such
as the relationship between the ray and wave theories of light or that between
classical and quantum mechanics, it does seem to make sense to consider the
second member of these pairs to be more fundamental in an important sense.
After all, the "coarser" members of the pair are, strictly speaking, false, and
they have been superseded by the second, "finer" members.
Despite the difference between the more and less fundamental nature of the
theories in these pairs, it is difficult to hold that this difference maps nicely onto
the conception of levels that is employed in most philosophical discussions about
emergence. For instance, it is hard to see any sense in which the properties of the
"entities" or systems of classical mechanics are composed of parts and properties
of quantum mechanical systems. Similarly, it doesn't make sense to speak of the
rays that are the basic entities of the ray theory as having properties that arise
through the coming together of wave theoretic components and their properties
and relations. If we are trying to understand and explain certain features of
the rainbow, for instance, both theories seem to be operating at the same level.
"Level" talk here seems completely inappropriate. Instead, it makes better
sense to speak of a distinction between scales. Ray theoretic talk becomes more
appropriate on scales in which the wavelength is small. Quantum mechanical
effects dominate at scales in which Planck's constant is large in comparison
with "classical" quantities having the same dimension. While we surely do
want to think of quantum mechanics and the wave theory as more fundamental


=== PAGE 128 ===

Emergence 
117
(= basic?), it is surely not the case that that notion is captured by the hierarchy
of levels model where that model depends upon the coming together of wholes
from parts as one moves up the hierarchy.
But someone might respond to this as follows. Why not think that the
caustic structure of the ray theory is some kind of component property of the
phenomena we observe in the rainbow? After all, I noted that often investiga-
tors speak of the "wave flesh decorating the ray theoretic bones." So we might
take these bones to be components out of which the wave phenomena is built.
Furthermore, recall the discussion of the interfering ray sum equation (6.14).
There I attempted to construct a wavefunction through a summation — through
some kind of aggregation — of rays. So, even if it might be difficult to think of
the wave and ray theories as fitting in a hierarchy of levels, we may still be able
to maintain a mereological connection between various entities and properties
described by the two theories. And so, at least some aspects — in particular, the
mereological supervenience that is often assumed in the contemporary emergen-
tist position — would apply to the current example of emergent properties.
There are two main difficulties with this response. On the one hand, if we
take the more fundamental wave theory to be the base theory, then this line of
reasoning gets things backwards. Rays are not objects of the base theory, waves
are. Clearly this is related to the different ways philosophers and physicists
think about reduction. 
Philosophers would surely (and correctly) take the
wave theory to be more fundamental and look for a reduction of the ray theory
to the wave theory. Physicists, as we've seen, would have it that the wave theory
reduces to the ray theory in the limit.5 They, too, would correctly think of the
wave theory as being more fundamental, though not in the sense of parts being
more "basic" than wholes. But the tenets of emergentism, particularly tenets 1
and 2, assume the philosophical picture of this aspect of intertheoretic relations.
The "inversion" that seems to be required to map the rainbow example onto the
philosophical characterization of emergence is just one more indication that the
traditional philosophical thinking about intertheoretic — reductive — relations is
wrong-headed.
The second reason why this response — thinking of the wave phenomena of
interest as being due to an aggregation of ray theoretic components and their
properties — is misguided has to do with the nature of the construction (equa-
tion [6.14]) itself. Constructing this asymptotic approximation from ray theo-
retic components required that we endow each ray with a phase,
with k = 2n/A. In other words, we had to associate a wave theoretic feature
with each ray in the construction. The construction is helpful because it allows
one to see fairly clearly what the relationship is between the ray theory and
the wave theory in the asymptotic shortwave limit for waves relatively far from
5 As schema (6.1) fails because of the nonanalytic nature of the limit, the reduction fails.
Nevertheless, many physicists, including Berry, still talk about reduction. As noted in the
last chapter, I prefer to speak of intertheoretic relations.


=== PAGE 129 ===

118 
The Devil in the Details
ray theoretic caustics. It provides a fairly intuitive picture of the asymptotic
domain of interest. But the ultimate justification for the (limited) applicability
of this construction is the fact that asymptotic analysis starting with the wave
equation—the Helmholtz equation (6.12)—yields the same interfering ray sum
in the stationary phase approximation.
So, the idea that one can take the emergent wave theoretic features of the
rainbow as "arising from" a "coming together" (see tenets 1 and 2) of ray the-
oretic components and their properties—as the tenets of emergentism would
have it—doesn't work. Wave theoretic features must be built in from the be-
ginning. The part/whole features characteristic of the "received" emergentist
position simply fail to apply to the case of emergence under consideration. The
"naked emergentist intuition"—namely, that "an emergent property of a whole
somehow 'transcends' the properties of the parts"6—just fails to apply to the
emergent phenomena I have been considering.
Now let me begin to consider the novelty aspects of the emergentist position.
Tenets 3 and 4 refer to the unpredictability and unexplainability/irreducibility
of the emergent properties in terms of the basal conditions. I must now discuss
the possibility of explaining and predicting the emergent rainbow phenomena.
Kim understands "basal conditions" to be "the lower-level conditions out of
which [emergent properties or phenomena] emerge" (1999, p. 6). I have already
expressed worries about how to understand the hierarchical distinction between
basic and nonbasic in this context where it appears the traditional conception of
a level hierarchy fails to apply. Nevertheless, given the view that the wave theory
is more fundamental, it seems reasonable to understand "basal conditions" as
referring to aspects of the wave theory in this context. So the question becomes:
Are the emergent aspects of the rainbow—those features captured by the scaling
law (6.21) for fringe spacings and intensities—explainable and predictable in
terms of the wave theory?
Now, if by "explanation" one has in mind one of the dominant contem-
porary conceptions—the D-N model or some causal-mechanical model—then I
think that the answer is a clear "no." The discussion in chapter 6 about the
nature of the diffraction catastrophe scaling laws, together with the discussion
of asymptotic explanation in chapter 4, makes this clear. These emergent phe-
nomena are not derivable in any straightforward sense from the underlying wave
theory. They are not, as it were, from-first-principle solutions to the wave equa-
tion (6.12). They are deeply encoded in that equation but are apparent only
through its asymptotic analysis.
On the other hand, the "theory" of that asymptotic domain—catastrophe
optics—does provide satisfactory accounts of the phenomena of interest. So the
phenomena are not inexplicable or brute tout court. One has, in a well-defined
sense, an explanation that is "grounded in" the fundamental wave theory; but
this kind of asymptotic explanation is, as we've seen in the discussion in chap-
ter 4, distinct from the usual types of explanation talked about in the philosoph-
ical literature. The phenomena are not explainable through derivation—that
6See Teller (1992, p.139).


=== PAGE 130 ===

Emergence 
119
is, through straightforward solutions to the differential equation—from the fun-
damental wave theory alone.
Recall the discussion (chapter 5) of the explanation of universality in phi-
losophy of mind in particular, and the special sciences in general. There, I was
concerned in part to maintain a robust physicalism while at the same time re-
specting the multiple realizability argument against reduction. The solution was
to see that multiple realizability is just an instance of universality. Also, expla-
nations of universal (multiply realized) behavior proceed by finding principled
reasons in the physical theory of the realizers for the irrelevancy of certain details
that otherwise are quite important for answering certain explanatory questions.
It is in this sense that the explanations are "grounded in" the physical theory
yet are obviously quite different from the usual understanding of explanation
by derivation from first principles.
Are the phenomena predictable from the wave theory? Again, I think that
the answer here must be negative. If by "predicting the presence of phenomenon
P," one means (as philosophers typically do) "it can be shown that P is an ex-
act solution to the fundamental governing equation of the appropriate theory,
given all the details one might require as to initial and boundary conditions,"
then these emergent phenomena are not predictable. On the other hand, things
are, perhaps, a bit more tricky than this. After all, it seems reasonable to think
that part of what it means to say that the wave theory is fundamental is that
the governing equation of the theory—the wave equation—"contains" the sum
total of wave phenomena. But, as I argued at the end of chapter 6, the real
issue is how to understand properly this notion of containment. This is analo-
gous to understanding the distinction, just highlighted, between an explanation
being "grounded in" the fundamental theory but not itself being an instance of
derivation from that theory. As I've argued, I don't think that when properly
understood, the sense of containment entails predictability in the usual sense.
In fact, it must be understood as referring to asymptotic analysis.
Furthermore, if I'm right and there is a genuine, distinct, third theory (catas-
trophe optics) of the asymptotic borderland between the wave and ray theories—
a theory that of necessity must make reference to both ray theoretic and wave
theoretic structures in characterizing its "ontology"—then, since it is this on-
tology that we take to be emergent, those phenomena are not predictable from
the wave theory. They are "contained" in that theory but aren't predictable
from it.7
All of this is just to say that with respect to many phenomena of interest, the
"base" theory is often explanatorily and predictively deficient. This has been a
major theme throughout this book. From-first-principle accounts often obscure
what is genuinely explanatory. Asymptotic reasoning in its many guises, reme-
dies this situation by highlighting the "principal laws" and dominant features
of the phenomena of interest.
Let us now turn to the question of the reducibility of the scaling patterns for
7The same, of course, goes for the emergent phenomena characterized by semiclassical
mechanics.


=== PAGE 131 ===

120 
The Devil in the Details
the fringes and the intensities of the rainbow. Are they reducible to the wave
theory? I take it that the arguments of chapter 6 have shown that they are
not, at least if reduction is to be understood in either the neo-Nagelian, philoso-
phers' sense or in the physicists' sense captured by schema (6.1). Nor are these
patterns reducible on Kim's functional model of reduction. We have seen (sec-
tion 5.3) that that model fails to account for the important—universal—nature
of the phenomena under consideration. The phenomena are, after all, universal
features of light in the shortwave limiting domain. We want to know whether
such lawlike patterns of light in the neighborhood of caustics are reducible to
lawlike relations in the wave theory. At best, it seems, we can say the following
about the functional model of reduction as applied to this (and other cases).
// the phenomena are functionalizable, we will have accounts of why individual
instances of the patterns are displayed on given occasions. But this, as should
now be familiar, in no way provides a reductive account of the lawlike universal
pattern itself.
As we have seen, the ultimate reason for the failure of reducibility is the sin-
gular nature of the asymptotic relationship between the wave and ray theories. It
is because of this that we have the predictive and explanatory failures discussed
before. In an important sense, then, the novelty of the emergent phenomena
I am discussing is a direct result of the singular nature of the correspondence
relations between the two theories.
To sum up this discussion so far, we can say that the emergent rainbow
phenomena—the nature of the fringe spacings near the caustic—have the fol-
lowing features:
• They are not reducible to either theory involved—neither to the more
fundamental wave theory nor to the coarser ray theory.
• They are not explainable in terms of the more fundamental theory (though
there are asymptotic explanations that are "grounded in" that theory).
• They are not predictable from the properties of the more fundamental
theory (though they are in a well-defined sense asymptotically "contained
in" that theory).
Each of these features maps to some extent onto the tenets that characterize
the contemporary conception of emergence. However, the part/whole and level
hierarchy aspects of emergent properties expressed in tenets 1 and 2 most surely
do not hold for our candidate emergent property.
I have still not discussed tenet 5—the causal efficacy of the emergents. Surely
the fact that on the standard conception of emergence the emergent properties
are to have causal powers of their own is an important feature of their novelty.
I will return to this later on in section 8.4.


=== PAGE 132 ===

Emergence 
121
8.3 A New Sense of Emergence
There is a sense of the term "emergence" that is not captured explicitly by
the five tenets already listed. But it is a sense of the term that better fits the
status of phenomena which inhabit borderlands between theories. According
to the Oxford English Dictionary, "emergence" can be defined as "the process
of coming forth, issuing from concealment, obscurity, or confinement." This
explicitly reflects a process view of emergence that is not obviously present
in the "received" philosophical conception I have been discussing. It is true
that tenets 1 and 2 speak of emergents "arising out of" or resulting from the
"coming together" of lower level parts and their properties. Nevertheless, these
conceptions refer to combinatorial or aggregative operations and not to a kind
of "continuous" process of issuing from concealment.
Of course, I do not intend much to hang on a dictionary definition of the
term. However, the sort of limiting asymptotic relations that play essential
roles in understanding and explaining the features of the rainbow are much
more amenable to this sense of emergence as issuing from concealment, obscu-
rity, or confinement. Mathematical asymptotics show exactly how the scaling
laws come to dominate in the shortwave domain in which A can be considered
small. Asymptotic methods explain why we do not see the patterns when the
wavelength is too big, and they enable us to understand the nature and behavior
of the changing patterns as the limit A —> 0 is approached.
On my view, the novelty of these emergent properties is, as I've said, a
result of the singular nature of the limiting relationship between the finer and
coarser theories that are relevant to the phenomenon of interest. It is therefore
intimately tied to the failure of reduction as understood by the physicists'
schema (6.1). I claim that this is true even in some cases where there is a natural
level hierarchy defined in terms of parts and wholes. The thermodynamics of
critical phenomena is just such a case. Let us reconsider this case with an eye
toward demonstrating the essential singular asymptotic aspect of the emergent
phenomena.
The two theories are classical thermodynamics of fluids and statistical me-
chanics. I have already mentioned reasons for doubting that anything like a
straightforward Nagelian reduction of thermodynamics to statistical mechanics
is possible. The reasons are complex and involve the fact that there are essential
probabilistic elements involved in the reducing theory—statistical mechanics—
that are completely absent in the reduced theory of thermodynamics. Perhaps
some sort of neo-Nagelian approach is more appropriate. Recall that in cases of
heterogeneous reduction, it is often the case that the reduced theory is corrected
in the process of carrying out the "reduction." Thus, most investigators now
think of thermodynamics as allowing for fluctuations. The second law, for exam-
ple, becomes a statistical statement to the effect that entropy is overwhelmingly
likely to be nondecreasing in an isolated system, though "antithermodynamic"
fluctuations are possible. (See Sklar (1993) for an extended discussion.)
The connections between thermodynamics and statistical mechanics are very
subtle. Nevertheless, it is possible to give derivations of suitably reinterpreted


=== PAGE 133 ===

122 
The Devil in the Details
thermodynamic laws, in certain situations, from statistical physics. 
These
derivations involve, essentially, the taking of asymptotic limits. In this context,
the limit is called the "thermodynamic limit." As a relatively simple example,
let's consider the "zeroth law" of thermodynamics. This is the assertion that
there exists a property, temperature, that takes the same value for any two bod-
ies in thermal contact. What is involved in "reducing" this law to statistical
mechanics?
First of all, we need a way of modeling two bodies in thermal contact. We do
this by treating an isolated classical system S (a system composed of molecules
interacting via collisions) as consisting of two subsystems S1 and S2 that interact
with one another across a boundary B. (See figure 8.1.) We need to assume
that the interaction is sufficiently strong to allow energy transfer between the
subsystems, but also that it is so weak that the interaction energy doesn't
contribute significantly to the total energy of the system 5. Next we assume
that the dynamical motion of the composite system is ergodic and mixing. These
are properties of the dynamics related to its instability. For my purposes here I
don't need to go into their definitions. This assumption guarantees that we can
use a particular probability distribution — the microcanonical distribution for the
system S — to calculate the equilibrium values for various quantities measured
on the subsystems S1 and S2-
The assumption that the interaction energy is sufficiently weak guarantees
that to a first approximation we may treat the Hamiltonian for the composite
system Hs(q, p) to be the sum of the Hamiltonians of the components:
HSI is a function of the position and momentum coordinates of subsystem S1 ,
namely, (q1, p1) and similarly for the Hamiltonian of subsystem S2. Given that
the composite system is isolated at constant energy E, the distribution in phase
space for S at that energy is given by the delta function:
This distribution function enables us to determine the probability distribution
for the energy E1 of the first subsystem S1 :
Here, N, N1, and N2 are the structure functions for the composite system and
its components respectively. (See Khinchin (1949) for details and definitions.)
The structure function £2, for example, enables one to calculate the expected
value for any measurable function over the energy surface for S. We can use
equation (8.1) to find the most probable value for E1.
I am now almost done. // we are justified in neglecting fluctuations about
this most probable value, then we can show that the logarithmic derivative of
the structure function is the same for the two subsystems in thermal contact.


=== PAGE 134 ===

Emergence 
123
Figure 8.1: Systems in thermal contact
Thus, we can identify, or at least associate (via some functional relationship),
this logarithmic derivative with the thermodynamic temperature. We have
shown how to "derive" the zeroth law from statistical mechanics.
So many assumptions are involved in this "derivation" that it is likely not
to seem terribly satisfying. From a philosophical perspective, one of the most
troublesome aspects is the identification or association of nonstatistical ther-
modynamic functions with most probable values for certain functions of phase.
Much work is required to interpret the sense of "most probable" here. The
assumption that S is ergodic and mixing is also a very strong assumption, one
that may be rarely justified in practice.8 For my purposes here, the most im-
portant assumption is that we can neglect fluctuations about the most probable
value. Much work has been done to justify this assumption. The received view
is that we can do so, if we can show that the distribution of the energy E1 is
sharply peaked about the most probable value. One can show this for certain
idealized9 (and not so idealized)10 systems by considering what is called the
thermodynamic limit. This is the limit in which the number of particles, N,
and the volume, V, go to infinity with the restriction that the ratio N/V—the
density—remains constant. The point is that the thermodynamic limit can be
shown to exist for certain systems (or for systems in certain regimes), and so the
connection between thermodynamics and statistical physics is (relatively well)
justified. What is crucial for us here is that the justification involves taking
an infinite limit as well as a demonstration that that limit exists. The thermo-
dynamic limit does not exist for systems undergoing phase transitions or for
systems at their critical points.
The case we have been considering depends upon taking a limit involving the
number of components at a lower level that make up the upper level composite
8Again, the best source for these discussions is Sklar (1993). See also Batterman (1998)
for a discussion of ergodicity and justifying the use of the microcanonical distribution.
9See Khinchin (1949) for the case of an ideal gas with noninteracting components.
10See Mazur and van der Linden (1963) for an extension of Khinchin's results to systems
with realistic interaction potentials between components.


=== PAGE 135 ===

124 
The Devil in the Details
system. It is, therefore, different from the rainbow situation in that parts and
wholes do play a role. However, to make the connection between the theories—
to explain and understand why thermodynamics works as well as it does—
we. needed to consider a limiting relationship as well. Asymptotic reasoning
plays an essential role in establishing this connection. That is, in order to
understand why the thermodynamic laws and relationships hold for a variety
of physically distinct types of systems, we require a method that allows for a
systematic abstraction from the details that distinguish the different systems—
the realizers—from one another. The asymptotic reasoning involved here, given
that it doesn't involve any physical singularities, is a type of reasoning analogous
to what Barenblatt calls "asymptotics of the first kind."11
As it turns out, this relationship satisfies the reduction schema (6.1). Thus,
it is analogous to the case of special relativity and the Newtonian theory of space
and time. One can say that a reduction of the physicists' type obtains (at least
partially) between thermodynamics and the underlying statistical mechanics of
the components in the limit as 1/N —> 0.
Given that schema (6.1) is satisfied, we must deny that the aggregation of
the many components of the system (at least for systems not undergoing phase
transitions or that are not at criticality) yields emergent phenomena. I take the
failure of this reductive schema to be necessary for emergence. Not all aspects
of wholes in thermodynamics are "greater than the sum of their parts." Those
that are not constitute the "resultant" properties of the higher level phenomena.
Despite this, in order to understand these resultants, asymptotic limits still play
an essential role.
At criticality, however, things are very different. The limiting reduction fails
completely. At criticality there are, as we've seen in section 4.1, long-range corre-
lations. This is reflected by the fact that the correlation length actually diverges.
As a result, fluctuations will no longer be negligible even in the thermodynamic
limit as N, V —> oo with N/V constant. For such systems the "derivational"
connections between thermodynamic laws and statistical mechanics will fail be-
cause the thermodynamic limit is singular.
The problem here is absolutely fundamental. Thermodynamics is a contin-
uum theory—fluids are continuous blobs from the perspective of the upper level
classical theory. The fact that they are made up of large numbers of interacting
molecules is not considered. The reduction we have been considering must show
that density fluctuations arising from intermolecular interactions occur only at
a very small, microscopic, scale. On the other hand, at and near the critical
point, such fluctuations exist at all scales up to the size of the fluid sample.
This leads to the divergence (singularity) of the correlation length.
Berry puts the point as follows:
Thus at criticality the continuum limit does not exist, corresponding
to a new state of matter 
[T]he critical state is a singularity of
thermodynamics, at which its smooth reduction to statistical me-
chanics breaks down; nevertheless, out of this singularity emerges a
11 Recall the discussion in section 4.3.


=== PAGE 136 ===

Emergence 
125
large class of new "critical phenomena", which can be understood
by careful study of the large-N asymptotics. (Berry, 1994, p. 600)
In fact, the approach to the critical point (T —> Tc) is analogous to the approach
to the caustic in our rainbow example. As these "structures" are approached, the
relatively straightforward accounts (respectively, the argument just considered
in the case of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, and the interfering
ray sum—equation [6.14]) completely break down. New methods, involving
asymptotics of the second kind are required to understand and explain what is
going on at and near these singularities.
The asymptotic investigation of the behavior of systems at and near these
singularities lets us "observe" properties as they issue from concealment and
obscurity. We are able to recognize and investigate emergent properties of these
systems.
Let me try to sum up the discussion of this section. In the case of ther-
modynamicar properties, it does make sense to think of upper level properties
(as Kim would describe them) as "arising out of" the properties and relations
characteristic of their constituent parts. Fluids and gases are composed of many
interacting molecular components. However, this mereological, part/whole as-
pect is not the most important when it comes to emergent phenomena. Instead,
what plays the most essential role is the fact that the thermodynamic limit is
singular at the critical point. True, the divergence of the correlation length is
due to a fact about parts and wholes—the correlation (at criticality) between
widely separated components. This is, as I've said, responsible for the failure
of the thermodynamic limit. But the explanation depends in a crucial way on
the fact that the purported limiting connection between statistical mechanics
and thermodynamics is singular. As the example of the rainbow shows, not all
such singular behavior (in that case the singularity in intensity at the caustic
according to the ray theory) results from some kind of blowup related to parts
a composite whole. There are no parts in this case.
The proposed account of emergent properties has it that genuinely emergent
properties, as opposed to "merely" resultant properties, depend on the exis-
tence of physical singularities.12 Otherwise, the sort of asymptotic reasoning
required to "see" and understand the properties of interest would fit relatively
well the reductive schema (6.1). The novelty of emergent phenomena—their
relative unpredictability and inexplicability—is a direct consequence of the fail-
ure of reduction. Thus, the received opinion that part/whole relationships are
important for characterizing emergence obscures what is actually most relevant.
Such relationships are operative in some instances, as the thermodynamics of
noncritical systems clearly demonstrates, but they are by and large inessential
for emergence. What is relevant—that is, what is necessary—is the failure of
12The adjective "mere" here does not reflect the obvious difficulties of accounting for dom-
inant, nonemergent phenomena of interest. Much work is required to prove that the thermo-
dynamic limit exists in noncritical systems. Similarly, the mathematics of the interfering ray
sum at distances relatively far from the caustic singularity of the ray theory is by no means
"mere" or trivial.


=== PAGE 137 ===

126 
The Devil in the Details
the physicists' sense of reduction. 
Such reductions fail because of the exis-
tence of genuine physical singularities. These singularities can be understood,
mathematically, through asymptotic investigations of the kinds discussed. My
proposal is that this asymptotic conception of emergence is an improvement over
the received view. At the very least, it is a well-defined conception of emergence
that applies to many interesting examples in physics for which the received view
apparently fails. It accounts for the unpredictable and inexplicable nature of
emergents stressed in the received view and explains why by appeal to physical
singularities and the failure of asymptotic reduction. The account offered by
proponents of the received view, to the effect that those aspects—the failures
of explainability and of predictability—are the result somehow of wholes being
greater than the sum of their parts, misses the point.
8.4 Tenet 5: Novel Causal Powers?
The fifth tenet of the "received" philosophical conception of emergence holds
that the novelty of emergent properties consists, in part, in their having causal
powers of their own. That is, they have causal powers that are not reducible
to the causal powers of their "basal constituents." It is now time to try to
determine the extent to which this feature can be accommodated in the new
conception of emergence being developed.
As we've just seen, the epistemic aspects of emergence—tenets 3 and 4—
result from a failure of the reductive schema (6.1). Can we say the same thing
about tenet 5? Do the emergent structures of the rainbow, for instance, possess
novel causal powers? In one sense, I think that the answer must be a clear "no."
After all, the idea that emergents possess novel causal powers seems to depend
in some sense on a contrast between higher level phenomena and their realizers.
Causal powers of the emergents, if they are novel, are not simply the causal
powers of the realizers on any given occasion. But, as we've seen, it is indeed
hard to see what are the realizers of those features of the rainbow that we take
to be emergent. Such talk seems wholly inappropriate in this context.
At the end of chapter 6 I suggested that the asymptotic borderlands between
theories related by singular limits are, in effect, breeding grounds for new the-
ories. Berry has given the name "catastrophe optics" to the theory describing
(among other things) the scaling relations for the fringe spacings and intensities
of light in the neighborhood of a caustic. I have argued that neither the wave
theory nor the ray theory can fully explain these emergent aspects of the behav-
ior of light.13 Catastrophe optics is an explanatory theory, one that enables us
to understand the asymptotically emergent dominant phenomena of interest in
the rainbow. In an important sense we cannot understand these features of the
rainbow—the behavior captured by a particular instance of equation (6.21)—
unless we look to such a novel asymptotic third theory.
As we've seen, in the asymptotic shortwave limit, catastrophe optics sews cer-
tain features of the wave theory (the "flesh") onto a skeleton of entities—families
13See also Batterman (1993, 1995, 1997).


=== PAGE 138 ===

Emergence 
127
of rays—making up the ontology of the ray theory. The caustic structures of
these ray families (and their structural stability) are required to determine the
form of the emergent features—the form of the scaling law that describes the
phenomenon of interest.
Similarly, we cannot understand the universality of critical phenomena in flu-
ids, for instance, without asymptotically sewing statistical aspects of the behav-
ior of the fluids' components onto singular thermodynamic structures (critical
points). These thermodynamic structures are necessary for a complete under-
standing of the emergent critical phenomena of interest. A third asymptotic
theory ("renormalization group" theory), characterizing the singular domain of
the thermodynamic limit at critical points, plays a novel explanatory role in
this context.
I've also argued in chapter 7, and elsewhere Batterman (1993, 1995, 1997),
that semiclassical mechanics plays a similar role as the theory of the asymp-
totic borderland between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics in the
semiclassical (h —> 0) limit. Most discussions of semiclassical mechanics hold
that the semiclassical methods are merely means for approximating solutions to
quantum mechanical problems. The main theme throughout this book has been
that such asymptotic methods are actually necessary for a proper understand-
ing of certain aspects of (in this case quantum) phenomena of interest. Here,
too, wave theoretic or quantum mechanical aspects are sewn onto a skeleton of
classical trajectories and their structures in the asymptotic semiclassical limit.
This results in a novel explanatory theory as well.
Instead of talking about novel causal powers, I suggest that we reinterpret
the fifth tenet of the received view of emergentism as follows:
5. The explanatory role of the emergents: Emergent properties figure in novel
explanatory stories. These stories involve novel asymptotic theories irre-
ducible to the fundamental theories of the phenomena.14
The main reason this reinterpretation is warranted is that it is hard, if not
impossible, to see the emergent structures in the rainbow as playing any causal
role whatsoever. On the other hand, as I've argued, these structures definitely
figure in certain new types of asymptotic explanations. They allow us, for
instance, to understand the behavior of light near ray theoretic caustics in the
shortwave asymptotic limit. But, as far as I can tell, this understanding isn't
based upon any causal role played by the wave decorated caustics or by the
mathematical characterization of their scaling properties.
Part of the problem I have with the received view is that I just do not under-
stand the talk of causal powers. I realize that largely this is just an appeal to our
intuitions about causes, but they are, as far as I can tell, intuitions that resist
codification in a coherent theory or framework. It is more fruitful, I think, to
adopt the framework of explanation—particularly, asymptotic explanation—as
a means to understand the sort of novelty the received view means to capture.
14See the discussion in section 8.2.


=== PAGE 139 ===

128 
The Devil in the Details
Many people hold that explanation is causal explanation. If we drop that re-
quirement, we can still refer to the explanations provided by the asymptotic
theories as novel. They are distinct in kind, and irreducible to, the explanations
that can be provided by the "lower level," "basal," more "fundamental" theory.
8.5 Conclusion
This chapter brings my earlier discussions of the nature of explanation and
of reduction to bear on the problem of emergence. Most important, as I've
tried to argue, is that we recognize that there is much more to the question of
the nature of intertheoretic relations than the philosophical models of reduction
would allow. In particular, it is best to think in terms of the physicists' reduction
schema and what happens when it fails.
In the event that schema (6.1) fails, we must say that no reduction between
the theory pairs (at least in some appropriate regime, e.g., critical phenomena)
can obtain. I take this to be a necessary condition for the emergence of novel
structures or properties. These structures or properties will inhabit the asymp-
totic "no man's land" between the theories. I've argued that they will possess
features that quite reasonably should lead us to think of them as emergent
structures or properties.
This view entails that it is fruitful to think of emergence in terms of a
pair of theories and their relationships. Nothing like this is explicit in the
"received view" of emergence, although I think it is definitely implicit. After all,
the very notions of predictability and explainability are theory-relative. These
epistemological notions depend on metaphysical or ontological relations between
theories—relations that require a sufficient mathematization of the theories in
order to be seen.
We have also seen that the idea of emergence as essentially involving some
conception of the properties of wholes transcending the properties of their parts,
is often a red herring. Instead, the crucial feature is the singular nature of
the limiting relationship between the theory pairs. Of course, this is not, as
we've seen, to say that no part/whole relations will play a role in the formation
and description of certain properties of wholes. It's just that without singular
limiting relations the properties of the wholes will be resultant and not emergent.
The view of emergence presented here depends upon the fact, just noted,
that the theories involved are expressible in a sufficiently rich mathematical
language so that the asymptotic relations between them can be explored. This
may lead many to wonder about the relevance of the view to the context in
which most philosophical discussions take place, namely, the context of mental
phenomena. My own view about this is that we need to wait and see how various
research programs in neuropsychology and neurophysiology play out. Perhaps,
in the near future sufficiently sophisticated theories will be forthcoming and
the kind of analysis I've been discussing here will be possible. Of course, one
problem—and a deep one at that—is the nature of the "upper level" theory in
this context. Folk psychology, by its very nature, will likely never be expressible


=== PAGE 140 ===

Emergence 
129
in a sufficiently formal language for this analysis to apply. Nevertheless, to me,
it doesn't seem unreasonable to expect that the emergence of certain mental
phenomena, if they are genuinely emergent, will depend on some sort of limit—
for instance, the limit of increasing complexity.


=== PAGE 141 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 142 ===

9
Conclusions
This book has been investigating some aspects of asymptotic reasoning in sci-
ence. In broad strokes, such reasoning involves the idea that sometimes throwing
away certain types of details and giving up on certain levels of precision will
lead to a proper (correct) understanding of a given phenomenon. In one sense
this should not be too surprising. Isn't this just what is often involved in the
process of idealization? Surely, no one would deny the importance of idealiza-
tion in scientific theorizing. The problem, however, is to make sense of this from
the point of view of physical theory itself. If we have a well-confirmed theory
that provides detailed information about the phenomenon, then it seems that,
in principle, having those details ought to be our best bet at fully understand-
ing the phenomenon of interest. However, I have been arguing that in many
situations this is simply not the case.
In introducing the unification model of explanation, Michael Friedman claims
that while most of the philosophical literature on explanation deals with the
explanation of particular events, such explanations are comparatively rare in
science itself. Most often, he claims, "what is explained is a general regularity
or pattern of behavior—a law, if you like" (Friedman, 1974, p. 5). There is
much truth to this claim. As a result of investigations in the pages here, we can
see what is responsible for this disparity in models of explanation. There is an
important ambiguity involved in speaking of explaining or understanding some
physical phenomenon. By "phenomenon," do we mean the particular event or
some pattern or regularity that subsumes it?
No one would deny that if I want to understand the buckling of a strut, I am
trying to account for some phenomenon that I find to be of interest. Clearly,
pragmatic considerations are at play here. Suppose that the reason I find this
interesting is because I've just witnessed the buckling. The next step, almost
certainly, is to try to repeat the event. Is this something that happens on a
regular basis once certain conditions are met? If not, then while I may still
search for an explanation of what I've just witnessed, it has lost some of its
interest, since I will not be able to project anything about what I've witnessed
onto other similar situations. The explanation will be pragmatically useless: I
131


=== PAGE 143 ===

132 
The Devil in the Details
won't advert to it when I'm trying to figure out if my building or bridge will
collapse under certain loads.
If, on the other hand, I am able to reproduce the results in other struts, then
I have much more reason to try to understand what is going on. There is still
the question of why each particular buckling event occurs, and it is upon this
that the philosophical accounts of explanation Friedman addresses focus. They
often ignore the more fundamental question about reproducible phenomena;
namely, why does the regularity or pattern itself obtain.1 In section 3.2 we have
seen reasons to be sceptical about the unification theorists' own answer to this
question. I will not rehearse these reasons here. The result of that discussion,
together with the my discussion of the failures of causal-mechanical models, is
that the proper focus should be on explaining the universality highlighted by the
fact that the regularity exists. Given the detailed differences that necessarily
are operative in each particular case we observe, what makes the reproducibility
or repeatability of the "phenomenon" possible? How can we account for the
universality in the pattern of behavior?
When an applied mathematician sets out to "model" some, even moderately
complex, phenomenon, she looks to answer just this question. The details of
any given instance of the reproducible phenomenon are simply too much to deal
with. Besides, the real interest, as I've tried to argue, is in the existence of
the observed pattern itself. The applied mathematician seeks to simplify or
idealize the problem so as to focus on those factors essential to the universal
behavior observed. Barenblatt, as the reader will recall, refers to these as the
"basic" or "principal" features of the phenomenon. Asymptotic reasoning—the
taking of limits as a means to simplify, and the study of the nature of these
limits—constitutes the main method of idealization in the mathematician's tool
box.
As we have seen, genuine insight is often the result of such idealizing asymp-
totic investigations. It is not always true that the results—the principal fea-
tures or "laws"—arrived at by these methods are merely the first steps toward
a deeper understanding to be obtained when (and if) we make further strides
in computation. There is a trade-off between "improving" upon this (asymp-
totic) type of idealized result, by including more details in the computations,
and achieving the understanding of patterns one desires. Such "improvements"
move one away from an account of the universality of the behavior, toward ex-
planations of particular instances of that universal behavior. The type of why-
question shifts and the question about the existence of the pattern becomes less
salient.
As I've said, I think Friedman is right that most philosophical accounts of
explanation focus on the explanation of particular events. They do so because
they are misled by an inaccurate and somewhat underdeveloped understanding
of the role of idealization in science. Their motto is something like this: "Of
course, as a first step, to get the ball rolling so to speak, we need to idealize,
'More accurately, they just assume it is answered by appeal to a misguided ideal—
"fundamental theory."


=== PAGE 144 ===

Conclusions 
133
but for true explanation and understanding, we must remove that idealization
(or 'improve' upon it) by including more and more details."
One of the most important lessons to be learned from the examples discussed
in this book is that this attitude is naive and often misguided. In the context
of explanation, the success of asymptotic investigations in providing scientific
understanding, and genuine answers to important explanatory why-questions,
testifies to the fact that such "improvements" are by no means necessary or
even desirable.
In the context of reduction, or more properly, of intertheoretic relations, we
have seen that asymptotic methods also play an extraordinarily important role.
The modern history of the development and evolution of scientific theories is
replete with examples in which one theory supersedes another. In the process the
newer theory (Tf) often preserves, to some extent, the domain of the previous
one (Tc), while at the same time expanding to encompass aspects that were
not treated by the earlier theory. To a large extent these relations between the
earlier and later theories are captured in the mathematical formalism.2 With
hindsight, much can be learned by studying how the formalisms of the two
theories are related.
However, investigations of this sort are not purely mathematical. As we've
seen repeatedly throughout the book, physical intuition plays a crucial role in
interpreting the results of such investigations. Recall, for example, the discus-
sion of the construction of the interfering ray sum in section 6.3. The most
surprising conclusion I have drawn concerns the autonomy and independence
(in some sense) of the limiting domain between theories related by singular
asymptotic limits. Theory pairs for which the physicists' reductive schema
fails, will typically be accompanied by new phenomena irreducible either to Tf
or Tc. Third theories of this asymptotic domain figure essentially in explanatory
accounts of the nature of the new phenomena.
Discussions in the philosophical literature on reduction largely ignore the
limiting (mathematical) aspects of the intertheoretic relations. Instead, they
assume that since the newer theory Tf purports to improve upon and account
for the (partial) successes of the earlier theory, there must be relations among
the predicates of the two theories that can be expressed in the form of bridge
laws. These types of semantic connections, if they exist at all, are often difficult
to formulate and difficult to justify. But in any case, they won't serve to aid
in the understanding of the new and surprising features that appear in the
asymptotic borderland between the theories.
Recently, a major focus of the philosophical reduction literature has been
on the status of the special sciences. It is difficult to subject these theories to
2 It is important to emphasize that not all aspects of intertheoretic relations will be captured
by the differences in mathematical formalisms. We need only think of the difficulties in
"reducing" thermodynamics to statistical mechanics to see this point. For instance, in this case
there are deep puzzles about the introduction and interpretation of probabilities in statistical
mechanics.


=== PAGE 145 ===

134 
Tie Devil in the Details
the same sort of rigorous asymptotic investigations as was possible in the case
of the wave and ray theories of light, in the limiting relations between quantum
and classical mechanics, and in the case of thermodynamics and statistical me-
chanics. The reason is obvious. The upper level theories of the special sciences
are, in general, not yet sufficiently formalized (or formalizable) in an appropri-
ate mathematical language. Despite this limitation this discussion has made
considerable progress in sharpening the issues involved in the debate.
We have seen that the important questions concern the possibility of ex-
plaining the universality of the upper level properties and generalizations from
the point of view of the lower level theory. The defense of a robust nonreduc-
tive physicalism requires that we explain this universality while simultaneously
allowing for the failure of a philosophical reduction of the upper level theory to
the lower level, physical theory. Asymptotic explanation of this universality, it
seems to me, is our best bet here. The multiple readability argument invokes
the wildly heterogeneous nature of the lower level realizers to block reduction,
where reduction is understood in terms of the availability of bridge laws relating
natural kind properties at the upper level to natural kinds at the level of the
realizers. If reduction is understood in this way, then I have argued that it is
reasonable to hold that reduction will fail.
On the other hand, on most philosophical conceptions of reduction, to re-
duce is to explain. Reduction, that is, is taken to be explanatory reduction. So,
if reduction fails because of multiple realizability, then no explanation will be
available. This puts severe pressure on the nonreductive physicalist. In what
sense is her physicalism at all interesting and robust? At best, it seems we have
what Fodor has called token-token identities. Particular upper level property
instances are identified with particular lower level property instances. But then
we lose any type of understanding of the universality of the upper level features.
What unifies all of the diverse token-token relations? Kim, as we've seen, ex-
ploits this arguing in effect that, to maintain an interesting physicalism, either
we must give up the position that the special sciences are genuine sciences, or
we must buy into an extreme reductionist position—a reductionism that entails
that at best there will be only species- or structure-specific special sciences.
Our attention to the nature of asymptotic explanation holds out the possi-
bility that we can explain the universality of the special sciences from the point
of view of the lower level theory while maintaining the irreducibility of those
sciences to physics. Explanation and reduction must part company. The philo-
sophical model that weds the two is simply mistaken. I have tried to argue that
is not unreasonable to think that such asymptotic methods will play a role in
our understanding of the status of the special sciences when, and if, they be-
come sufficiently mathematized. It is hard, indeed, to see how the explanation
of universality (or multiple realizability) would proceed without the discovery of
principled reasons grounded in the theory of the realizers, to the effect that most
of the details distinguishing those realizers are irrelevant and must be ignored
in the context of understanding that universality. Once one recognizes that a
claim of multiple realizability is just a statement of universality, the asymptotic
methods developed by the physicists become obvious candidates for dealing with


=== PAGE 146 ===

Conclusions 
135
the problem of the special sciences.
Clearly, much more work needs to be done in this context. It is my hope
that this discussion will lead investigators with more knowledge of the special
sciences than I to consider asymptotic methods in their investigations into the
status of those sciences.
Kim has also argued that nonreductive physicalism is modern emergentism.
In some sense I believe he is right about this. The problem, however, is to
understand properly the nature of emergence.
Our investigation into the singular limits that often exist between theories
has led us to examine universal phenomena that appear to emerge in asymptotic
domains. I've argued that the use of the term "emergent" to describe the struc-
tures and features of these phenomena is wholly appropriate. They are (relative
to the various theory pairs involved) genuinely novel structures. In the physics
literature one often finds claims to the effect that these phenomena constitute
"new physics" requiring novel theoretical work—new asymptotic theories—for
their understanding.
In keeping with the "received view" of emergence to be found in the philo-
sophical literature, I've argued that emergent phenomena are necessarily irre-
ducible in the strongest possible sense. This strong sense of irreducibility is
expressed by the failure of the reductive schema (9.1). Such reductive failure
will entail the failure of any sort of philosophically motivated reduction as well.
However, in contrast to the received view, I hold that this irreducibility is con-
sistent with the possibility that the existence and nature of the emergents are
susceptible to asymptotic explanatory scrutiny. The phenomena are not brute
and inexplicable tout court. They are brute in the sense that they are irre-
ducible to, unpredictable from, and unexplainable from the "base" theory Tf
alone—that is, without the use of asymptotic methods. Our recognition that
the connection between reduction and explanation must be severed allows for
this somewhat weakened sense of emergence.
The focus on the failure of schema (9.1) as at least a necessary condition
for emergence allows us to see that the received view inappropriately highlights
mereological criteria in its expression of the emergentist position. There are
examples—the rainbow being one—in which reduction in the strong sense fails,
but where no part/whole relations obtain.
Here, too, it is clear that more work needs to be done. Those wedded to a
conception of emergence as involving inexplicably brute phenomena will likely
not be overly impressed by the new view I advocate. But, then, I think it
is incumbent upon these investigators to provide us with genuine examples of
emergent properties. If it is reasonable to think of nonreductive physicalism
(modified to allow for explanation of the universal, multiply realized proper-
ties and regularities) as an expression of the emergentist doctrine, then these
"genuinely" emergent properties will have to be very strange indeed.


=== PAGE 147 ===

This page intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 148 ===

Bibliography
Airy, G. B. 1838. On the intensity of light in the neighborhood of a caustic.
Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 6:379-403.
Andronov, A., and Pontryagin, L. 1937. Systemes grossiers. Dokl. Akad. Nauk.
SSSR, 14:247-251.
Antony, Louise. 1999. Making room for the mental: Comments on Kim's
"Making sense of emergence." Philosophical Studies, 95(l/2):37-44.
Arnold, V. I. 1989. Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 2nd edition. Trans. Vogtmann, K. and Weinstein, A.
Barenblatt, G. I. 1996. Scaling, Self-similarity, and Intermediate Asymptotics.
Cambridge Texts in Applied Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Batterman, R. W. 1991. Chaos, quantization, and the correspondence principle.
Synthese, 89:189-227.
Batterman, R. W. 1992. Explanatory instability. Nous, 26(3):325-348.
Batterman, R. W. 1993. Quantum chaos and semiclassical mechanics. In PSA
1992, (vol. 2, pp. 50-65). East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association.
Batterman, R. W. 1995. Theories between theories: Asymptotic limiting in-
tertheoretic relations. Synthese, 103:171-201.
Batterman, R. W. 1997. "Into a mist": Asymptotic theories on a caustic.
Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 28(3):395-413.
Batterman, R. W. 1998. Why equilibrium statistical mechanics works: Univer-
sality and the renormalization group. Philosophy of Science, 65:183-208.
Batterman, R. W. 2000. Multiple realizability and universality. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 51:115-145.
Bender, C. M., and Orszag, S. A. 1978. Advanced Mathematical Methods for
Scientists and Engineers. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Berry, M. V. 1981. Singularities in waves and rays. In Balian, R., Kleman, M.,
and Poirier, J. P., (Eds.), Physics of Defects, Les Houches, Session 35, 1980,
(pp. 453-543). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Berry, M. V. 1983. Semiclassical motion of regular and irregular motion. In
looss, G., Helleman, R. H. G., and Stora, R., (Eds.), Chaotic Behavior of
Deterministic Systems, Les Houches Session 36, 1981, (pp. 171-271). Amster-
dam: North-Holland.
Berry, M. V. 1987. The Bakerian Lecture, quantum chaology. In Berry, M. V.,
Percival, I. C., and Weiss, N. O., (Eds.), Dynamical Chaos, (vol. 186, pp.
183-198). Princeton: Royal Society of London, Princeton University Press.
Berry, M. V. 1990. Beyond rainbows. Current Science, 59(21 & 22):1175-1191.
137


=== PAGE 149 ===

138 
Bibliography
Berry, M. V. 1994. Asymptotics, singularities and the reduction of theories. In
Prawitz, Dag, Skyrms, Brian, and Westerstahl, Dag, (Eds.), Logic, Method-
ology and Philosophy of Science, IX: Proceedings of the Ninth International
Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Uppsala, Sweden,
August 7-14, 1991, vol. 134 of Studies in Logic and Foundations of Mathe-
matics, pp. 597-607. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B. V.
Berry, M. V., and Upstill, C. 1980. Catastrophe optics: Morphologies of caustics
and their diffraction patterns. In Wolf, E., (Ed.), Progress in Optics, (vol. 18,
pp. 257-346). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Block, Ned. 1997. Anti-reductionism slaps back. Philosophical Perspectives, 11:
107-132.
Chen, L-Y, Goldenfeld, N., Oono, Y., and Paquette, G. 1994. Selection, stability
and renormalization. Physica A, 204:111-133.
Churchland, P. S., and Sejnowski, T. J. 1992. The Computational Brain. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feyerabend, P. K. 1962. Explanation, reduction, and empiricism. In Feigl,
H. and Maxwell, G., (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
(vol. 3, pp. 28-97). Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Fisher, Michael E. 1983. Scaling, universality and renormalization group theory.
In Hahne, F.J.W., (Ed.), Critical Phenomena, vol. 186 of Lecture Notes in
Physics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Fodor, Jerry. 1974. Special sciences, or the disunity of sciences as a working
hypothesis. Synthese, 28:97-115.
Fodor, Jerry. 1997. Special sciences: Still autonomous after all these years.
Philosophical Perspectives, 11:149-163.
Fowler, A. C. 1997. Mathematical Models in the Applied Sciences. Cambridge
Texts in Applied Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Friedman, Michael. 1974. Explanation and scientific understanding. Journal of
Philosophy, 71(1):5-19.
Goldenfeld, N., Martin, O., and Oono, Y. 1989. Intermediate asymptotics and
renormalization group theory. Journal of Scientific Computing, 4(4):355-372.
Greenler, Robert. 1980. Rainbows, Halos, and Glories. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Guckenheimer, John and Holmes, Philip. 1983. Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynami-
cal Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Fields, vol. 42 of Applied Mathematical
Sciences. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gutzwiller, Martin C. 1990. Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Heller, Eric J., and Tomsovic, Steven. 1993. Postmodern quantum mechanics.
Physics Today, 46:38-46.
Hempel, Carl G. 1965. Aspects of scientific explanation. In Aspects of Scientific
Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science, (pp. 331-496).
New York: The Free Press.
Humphreys, Paul. 1997. How properties emerge. Philosophy of Science, 64(1):
1-17.
Jammer, Max. 1966. 
The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics.
New York: McGraw-Hill.


=== PAGE 150 ===

Bibliography 
139
Jones, Todd. 1995. Reductionism and the unification theory of explanation.
Philosophy of Science, 62:21-30.
Khinchin, A. I. 1949. Mathematical Foundations of Statistical Mechanics. New
York: Dover Publications. Translation: G. Gamow.
Kim, Jaegwon. 1992. Multiple realization and the metaphysics of reduction.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 52(l):l-26.
Kim, Jaegwon. 1994. Explanatory knowledge and metaphysical dependence. In
Truth and Rationality, Philosophical Issues, 5, pp. 52-69.
Kim, Jaegwon. 1998. Mind in a Physical World: An Essay on the Mind-Body
Problem and Mental Causation. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kim, Jaegwon. 1999. Making sense of emergence. Philosophical Studies, 95
(l/2):3-36.
Kitcher, Philip. 1989. Explanatory unification and the causal structure of the
world. In Kitcher, Philip and Salmon, Wesley C., (Eds.), Scientific Explana-
tion, vol. 13 of Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 410-505.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Littlejohn, Robert G. 1992. The van Vleck formula, Maslov theory, and phase
space geometry. Journal of Statistical Physics, 68(l/2):7-50.
Mazur, P., and van der Linden, J. 1963. Asymptotic form of the structure
function for real systems. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 4(2):271-277.
Nagel, Ernest. 1961. The Structure of Science. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Nickles, Thomas. 1973. Two concepts of intertheoretic reduction. Journal of
Philosophy, 70(7):181-201.
Papineau, David. 1993. Philosophical Naturalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pfeuty, P., and Toulouse, G. 1977. Introduction to the Renormalization Group
and to Critical Phenomena. London: John Wiley and Sons. Translation: G.
Barton.
Piexoto, M. 1962. Structural stability on 2-dimensional manifolds. Topology, 1:
101-120.
Poston, T., and Stewart, I. 1978. Catastrophe Theory and its Applications.
London: Pitman.
Putnam, H. 1980. The meaning of 'meaning'. In Mind, Language and Reality:
Philosophical Papers, (vol. 2, pp. 215-271). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Railton, Peter. 1981. Probability, explanation, and information. Synthese, 48:
233-256.
Rohrlich, Fritz. 1988. Pluralistic ontology and theory reduction in the physical
sciences. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 39:295-312.
Salmon, Wesley C. 1989. Four decades of scientific explanation. In Kitcher,
Philip and Salmon, Wesley C., (Eds.), Scientific Explanation, vol. 13 of Min-
nesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 3-219. Minneapolis: Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press.
Schaffner, Kenneth. 1976. Reductionism in biology: Prospects and problems.
In Cohen, R. S. et al., (Eds.), PSA 1974, (pp. 613-632). Boston: D. Reidel
Publishing Company.


=== PAGE 151 ===

140 
Bibliography
Schurz, G., and Lambert, K. 1994. Outline of a theory of scientific understand-
ing. Synthese, 101:65-120.
Sklar, Lawrence. 1967. Types of inter-theoretic reduction. British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 18:109-124.
Sklar, Lawrence. 1993. Physics and Chance: Philosophical Issues in the Foun-
dations of Statstical Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smale, S. 1980. What is global analysis? In The Mathematics of Time: Essays
on Dynamical Systems, Economic Processes, and Related Topics, (pp. 84-89).
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Teller, Paul. 1992. A contemporary look at emergence. In Beckermann, A.,
Flohr, H., and Kim, J., (Eds.), Emergence or Reduction? Essays on the
Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism, Foundations of Communication and
Cognition, (pp. 139-153). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Wimsatt, William. 1994. The ontology of complex systems: Levels, perspectives,
and causal thickets. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary Volume
20:207-274.
Woodward, James. 2000. Explanation and invariance in the special sciences.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 51:197-254.


=== PAGE 152 ===

Index
Airy integral, 81, 83, 84, 92n, 93
Airy, G. B., 83
Andronov, A., 58n
Antony, L., 115n
Arnold, V. L, 102n
asymptotic borderland, 6, 77, 99,
110, 111, 116
and emergence, 95, 121
and reduction, 95, 133
theory of, 6, 77, 119, 126
asymptotic reasoning, 3, 7, 13, 19,
23, 30, 37, 46, 49, 52, 56,
57, 76, 96, 124, 131
and universality, 16
Barenblatt, G. I., 15, 16, 44-46, 46n,
51-53, 55, 55n, 57, 78, 94,
124, 132
Batterman, R. W., 23, 23n, 29, 30n,
34, 35n, 56, 74, 75n, 77,
78, 79n, 85n, 90n, 100,102n,
105n, 107n, ll0n, 123n, 126n,
127
Bender, C. M., 79, 90
Berry, M. V., 13, 77, 80n, 84, 84n,
88, 89n, 92-96, 102n, 107,
110, 116, 117n, 125, 126
Block, N., 61, 71, 72, 72n, 75, 76
Bohr, N., 99, 100, 107, 109
catastrophe optics, 77, 84-93, 106
as theory, 95, 97
catastrophes, 91, 92, 100
and caustics, 91
diffraction integrals, 92, 93, 108
scaling laws, 93-94
normal forms, 92
theory of, 85, 91
caustics, 81-84, 101, 107
and Airy integral, 84
and catastrophes, 91, 92, 126
and chaos, 109
and emergence, 113, 115, 120,
127
and interfering ray sum, 88, 96
and Maslov's method, 90, 108
and ray theory, 82, 84, 117
and stability, 91
and wave theory, 84
chaos, 109
chaos game, 23-25, 28, 29
Chen, L-Y, 58, 59
Churchland, P. S., 74
correspondence limit, 5, 18, 78, 99,
109, 111
correspondence principle, 5, 99
critical phenomena, 4, 12, 13, 35,
37-42, 75, 80, 93, 121, 124,
125, 127, 128
Descartes, 82
dimensional analysis, 15-16, 19, 44,
48-50, 52, 55, 56
and intermediate asymptotics,
51, 52, 55
as asymptotic reasoning, 49
Disney principle, 72
emergence, 6, 19-22, 97
and asymptotics, 74, 126, 128
and nonreductive physicalism,
135
and parts/wholes, 20, 21, 113,
118, 125, 128, 135
141


=== PAGE 153 ===

142
Index
emergence (continued)
and reduction, 6, 121, 124, 126,
135
and the rainbow, 113, 115-120
the "received view" of, 20, 115,
135
Euler formula, 12, 13
Euler Strut, 9-13
explanation, 133
and emergence, 118
and ideal texts, 10
and multiple realizability, 72, 74-
76, 119, see universality
and reduction, 6, 61, 95, 115,
134
and stability, 57-59
and the renormalization group,
37
and understanding, 12, 56
and why-questions, 23-25, 31,
70, 132
asymptotic, 4, 37, 74, 118, 127
causal-mechanical, 10
D-N, 26
D-N-P, 28
I-S, 26
of critical phenomena, 37-42
of universality, 42-44
unification model, 30-35, 131
Feyerabend, P. K., 64
Fisher, M. E., 12, 35, 45, 90
Fodor, J., 61, 65-68, 70-73, 75, 76,
134
Fowler, A. C., 52, 56
Friedman, M., 30, 32, 131, 132
fringe spacings, 88, 90, 93-96
universality of, 93, 94
functionalism, 68
generating function, 85n, 90, 92, 92n,
93, 94, 103
Goldenfeld, N., 43, 44, 48, 53, 55
Greenler, R., 82n
Guckenheimer, J., 58n
Gutzwiller, M., 110, 110n
Heller, E. J., ll0n
Helmholtz equation, 86, 96, 104, 118
Hempel, C. G., 25, 26, 26n, 27, 29
Holmes, P., 58n
Humphreys, P., 20, 114n
interfering ray sum, 88-90, 93, 102-
106, 117, 118, 125, 133
and caustics, 88
and scaling laws, 96
and stationary phase, 90
failure of, 88, 90
intermediate asymptotics, 44-46, 78,
80, see dimensional analy-
sis
and renormalization group, 55
first kind, 46-52
second kind, 52-57
Jammer, M., 99
Jones, T., 34n
Khinchin, A. I., 122, 123n
Kim, J., 20, 21, 21n, 32, 33, 61, 65,
65n, 66-70, 70n, 71-73, 75,
76, 113n, 114, 114n, 115,
118, 120, 125, 134, 135
Kitcher, P., 30-34
Lambert, K., 30
limit
semiclassical, 99, 102, 106, 107,
109-111, 127
shortwave, 81, 84, 88, 93, 95,
99, 106, 116, 117, 120, 126,
127
singular, 5, 6, 16, 18, 21, 49n,
51, 53, 56, 78, 80-81, 94-
96, 99, 103, 109, 110, 117n,
124-126, 128, 133, 135
new physics, 16, 78, 96
singular vs. regular, 18-19
thermodynamic, 122-123
Littlejohn, R. G., 102
Maslov's method, 90, 108
Mazur, P., 123


=== PAGE 154 ===

Index
143
multiple realizability, 4, 34n, 61, 65-
68, 72, 119, 134
and universality, 73-76
Nagel, E., 61-63
Nickles, T., 5, 18n, 64, 78, 78n
optical distance function, 85, 86, 90,
92, 93, see also generating
function
order parameter, 39
Orszag, S. A., 79, 90
Papineau, D., 72
Pfeuty, P., 40
physicalism, 73, 76, 134
and emergence, 21, 135
Piexoto, M., 58n
Pontryagin, L., 58n
Poston, T., 91n
Putnam, H., 65n, 68
quantum chaos, 109
Railton, P., 10, 11, 25, 27-29, 30n,
33
rainbow, 5, 81-84
and catastrophe optics, 126
and emergence, 21, 113, 115-
120
and reduction, 77, 95
caustic, 82
ray theory, 5, 17, 77, 93
and caustics, 82, 84, 94
reduction, 5, 17-19, 77, 133
and asymptotics, 76
and emergence, 6, 19, 120, 121,
125, 126, 128
and explanation, 6, 115, 134
and multiple realizability, 65-
66, 134
as "simplification", 52, 56
functional model, 61, 67-71
Nagelian, 61-65
philosophers' sense, 5, 95, 117
physicists' sense, 5, 65, 78-80,
117, 124
renormalization group, 4, 35, 37-43,
74, 75, 80
and intermediate asymptotics,
53, 55, 56
features of, 43
Rohrlich, F., 79
Salmon, W., 10, 30, 31
scaling, see self-similarity
Schaffner, K., 63-65, 79
Schrodinger equation, 12, 39, 96, 106,
107, 110
and WKB method, 104-106
Schurz, G., 30
Sejnowski, T. J., 74
self-similarity, 41, 48-50, 52, 53, 55,
56, 93, 94, see also inter-
mediate asymptotics
importance of, 51
semiclassical approximation, 88
semiclassical mechanics, 95, 100, 107,
119n
as theory, 99, 100, 127
Sklar, L., 26n, 62, 63, 63n, 121, 123n
Smale, S., 58n
special sciences, 4, 65, 68, 71, 74,
114
and emergence, 113, 113n
and multiple realizability, 65, 67,
72, 75
and physicalism, 73
and reduction, 61, 65, 68, 76,
133
and universality, 134, 135
stability, 34, 42, 44, 51, 57-59, 91,
93, 94, 127
stationary phase, 90
method of, 90, 93, 118
Stewart, L, 91n
supervenience, 69n, 114
Teller, P., 20, 118n
Thorn, R., 91
Tomsovic, S., ll0n
torus quantization, 107
and chaos, 107, 109


=== PAGE 155 ===

144
Index
Toulouse, G., 40
turning points
as caustics, 106
understanding, 3, 25, 30, 31, 90, 96,
131, 133
and asymptotics, 46, 52, 96, 104,
121, 127, 131-133, 135
and explanation, 10, 12, 56
and stability, 59
and unification, 30-32
causal-mechanical, 30
of universality, 34, 45, 46
universality, 4, 6, 9, 13, 14, 17, 23,
37, 39, 71, 93-94, 110, 119,
132
and multiple realizability, 61, 73-
76
and why-questions, 23
explanation of, 42-44, see also
renormalization group
features of, 13, 38, 73
of critical phenomena, 37, 42,
53
relation to macroscopic phenomenol-
ogy, 43
Upstill, C., 77, 84, 89n, 92-94
van der Linden, J., 123
wave theory, 5, 6, 17, 21, 77, 80, 83,
93, 95
why-questions, 4, 4n, 132, 133
and unification, 33
types (i) and (ii), 23, 31, 70
Wimsatt, W., 21n, 64
WKB method, 104-109, see also semi-
classical mechanics and semi-
classical approximation
Woodward, J., 59n
Young's modulus, 12, 12n, 14
