--- Page 2 ---

True Enough

--- Page 4 ---

The MIT Press
Cambridge, Mas sa chu setts
London,  England
True Enough
Catherine Z. Elgin

--- Page 5 ---

© 2017 Mas sa chu setts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any 
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information 
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was set in StoneSerif by Westchester Book Composition. Printed and bound 
in the United States of Amer i ca.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Elgin, Catherine Z., 1948– author.
Title: True enough / Catherine Z. Elgin.
Description: Cambridge, MA : MIT Press, [2017] | Includes bibliographical references 
and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016057890 | ISBN 9780262036535 (hardcover : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Knowledge, Theory of. | Comprehension. | Science—Philosophy. |  
Arts—Philosophy.
Classification: LCC BD161 .E445 2017 | DDC 121/.6—dc23 LC record available at 
https://lccn.loc.gov/2016057890
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

--- Page 6 ---

For Jim, Sam, and Gareth.
And in memory of Jonathan Adler.
Thou wert my guide, phi los o pher, and friend.
— Alexander Pope

--- Page 8 ---

Acknowl edgments  ix
 1 Reconfiguring the Realm   1
 2 Distancing from Truth   9
 3 From Knowledge to Understanding   33
 4 The Fabric of Understanding   63
 5 Epistemic Normativity   91
 6 Intellectual Integrity   123
 7 Objectivity: A Bulwark against Bias   151
 8 Irreconcilable Differences   171
 9 Exemplification in Understanding   183
10 Embodied Understanding   205
11 Casting in Bold Relief   221
12 Chekhov’s Gun   249
13 Borders and Crossings   273
14 Fallibility’s Payoff   291
Notes  311
References  319
Index  331
Contents

--- Page 10 ---

In writing True Enough I amassed a multitude of debts. The first and deepest 
is to Jonathan Adler. Since our days in gradu ate school, he was my dearest 
friend, sharpest critic, most supportive ally. Although the book is littered 
with acknowl edgments for his suggestions, objections, elaborations, and 
corrections, they do not begin to do justice to his contributions to my work. 
His influence is pervasive. The book would have been better if he had lived 
longer.
Many other friends, colleagues, and students also helped to improve 
the work, refining my arguments and saving me from a host of embar -
rassing gaffes. For their insights and advice I thank (in no par tic u lar order) 
Kenneth Walden, Remei Capdev ila, Samuel Elgin, Mary Kate McGowan, 
Kareem Khalifa, Nancy Nersessian, Elizabeth Camp, Stephen Grimm, John 
Greco, Roman Frigg, James Nguyen, Bas van Fraassen, Georg Brun, James 
van Cleve, Sabine Ammon, Zachary Barber, Insa Lawler, Duncan Pritchard, 
Heather Battaly, Judith Jarvis Thomson, A. R. Mudd, Michael Hannon, John 
Kulvicki, Wayne Riggs, Stephen Yablo, Joseph Cruz, Selim Berker, Robert 
Schwartz, Amélie Rorty, Jamie Tappenden, Jonathan Mattheson, Alvin 
Goldman, Sanford Goldberg, Geordie McComb, Michael Stuart, Mauricio 
Suárez, and a  gaggle of anonymous referees. I am sure  there are  others whom 
I have forgotten to list. For that I apologize. I am grateful to you all.
I road tested material a variety of venues. I am grateful for the comments 
and criticisms I received. Among the conferences where I presented drafts 
of dif fer ent chapters are: the 2003 Rutgers Epistemology Conference, where 
Ernest Sosa’s challenge got the  whole  thing started; the 2008 Pacific Division 
meeting of the American Philosophical Association, where worries raised 
by Jonathan Kvanvig, Michael Strevens, and Duncan Pritchard spurred me 
Acknowl edgments

--- Page 11 ---

x Acknowl edgments
on; the 2013 Spencer Foundation Conference on Virtue and Education at 
Stanford University, where A. R. Mudd’s critique was invaluable; the 2014 
Bled Epistemology Conference; the 36th International Wittgenstein Soci -
ety Symposium; the 2014 meeting of the Eastern Division of the American 
Philosophical Association; the 2014 meeting of the Society for Philosophy 
of Science in Practice; the Sawyer Seminar on Expertise and Disagreement 
at Northwestern University; the 2015 meeting of the British Society for 
Aesthetics; the 2015 meeting of the Northern New  England Philosophy 
Association; the 2016 Dubrovnik Philosophy of Science Conference; and 
the capstone conferences for the John Templeton Foundation proj ects on 
Intellectual Humility and on Va ri e ties of Understanding. I presented draft 
material at the University of North Florida, the University of East Anglia, 
the University of Leeds, Nancy 2 University, the London School of Eco -
nomics, Dartmouth, the University of Konstanz, Complutense Univer -
sity of Madrid, the University of Bern, Loyola Marymount University, the 
University of Basque Country, as well as at Reed, Bryn Mawr, Wellesley, 
Middlebury, Tufts, Bucknell, St. Louis University, the University of Miami, 
the University of Vermont, University College London, King’s College Lon-
don, the University of Kent, New York University, UC Davis, the University 
of Cape Town, and the University of Manchester. Contributions from audi-
ence members in all of  these places helped me to hone my position.
A number of institutions supported my work financially. I received a 
grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities in 2004 and one 
from the Spencer Foundation in 2009. In 2011 I was a fellow at the Susan 
and Donald Newhouse Center for the Humanities at Wellesley College. A 
substantial portion of the work was supported by awards from the John 
Templeton Foundation through the Va ri e ties of Understanding Proj ect at 
Fordham University and the Intellectual Humility Proj ect at St. Louis Uni-
versity. The opinions expressed in this publication are  those of the author 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Va ri e ties of Understanding 
Proj ect, Fordham University, the Intellectual Humility Proj ect, St Louis Uni-
versity, or the John Templeton Foundation. Nor, of course, do they reflect 
the views of the Newhouse Center, the NEH, or the Spencer Foundation. 
 Whether or not they share my views, I am very grateful to  these institutions 
for their support.
Earlier versions of sections of the book have appeared in journals and 
anthologies: Chapter 2 builds on “True Enough,” Philosophical Issues  14

--- Page 12 ---

Acknowl edgments xi
(2004): 113–131. Part of chapter 3 first appeared as “From Knowledge to 
Understanding,” in Epistemology  Futures, ed. Stephen Hetherington (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 2006), 199–215. Another part appeared as “Is Under -
standing Factive?” in Epistemic Value, ed. Duncan Pritchard, Alan Miller, 
and Adrian Haddock (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 322–330. A 
portion of chapter 4 was published as “Non- Foundationalist Epistemology: 
Holism, Coherence, and Tenability,” in Con temporary Debates in Epistemol-
ogy, ed. Mattias Steup and Ernest Sosa (Malden MA: Blackwell, 2005), 
156–167. I am grateful for James van Cleve’s comments, which  were pub -
lished along with my paper. Part of chapter 6 was first published as “Science, 
Ethics, and Education,” Theory and Research in Education 9 (2011): 251–263. 
A section of chapter 7 first appeared as “Keeping  Things in Perspective,” 
Philosophical Studies 150 (2010): 439–447. Part of chapter 9 was published as 
“Making Manifest: Exemplification in the Sciences and the Arts,” Principia 15 
(2011): 399–413. Another part was published as “Exemplification and Under-
standing,” in Explaining Understanding: New Essays in Epistemology and the Phi-
losophy of Science, ed. Stephen Grimm, Christoph Baumberger, and Sabine 
Ammon (New York: Routledge, 2016), 76–91. A version of chapter 10 was 
first published in French as “L’Exemplification et la Dance,” in Philosophie de 
la Dance, ed. Julia Beauquel and Roger Pouivet (Rennes: Presses Universitaire 
de Rennes, 2010), 81–98. A section of chapter 12 was published as “Telling 
Instances,” in Beyond Mimesis and Convention: Repre sen ta tion in Art and Sci-
ence, ed. Roman Frigg and Matthew Hunter (Dordrecht: Springer, 2010), 
1–17 (© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2010). A section of chapter 
14 was published in Spanish as “Ignorancia, Error y el Avance de la Comp-
rensión,” in Error y Conocimiento: La Gestion de la Ignorancia desde la Didáctia, 
la Ethica y la Filosofía , ed. Victòria Campos, Anna Estany, Mercè Izquierdo 
(Grenada: Comares, 2012), 273–294. I thank the editors for prompting me 
to write the vari ous pieces and the publishers for permission to reprint 
them.
Fi nally, I thank my  family—my husband, Jim Elgin; my son, Sam Elgin; 
and my son- in- law, Gareth Nellis. Their love, encouragement, and generos-
ity are incalculable.

--- Page 14 ---

Philosophy valorizes truth.  There may be practical or prudential or po liti cal 
reasons to accept a known falsehood. But  there can, it is held, never be epis-
temically good reasons to do so. Nor can  there be good reasons to accept 
modes of justification that are known not to be truth conducive. Such is 
the prevailing consensus. Although it seems reasonable, this stance has a 
fatal flaw. It cannot account for the epistemic standing of science: for sci -
ence unabashedly relies on models, idealizations, and thought experiments 
that are known not to be true. Modern science is one of humanity’s greatest 
cognitive achievements. To think that this achievement is a fluke would 
be mad. So epistemology has the task of accounting for science’s success. A 
truth- centered, or veritistic, epistemology must treat models, idealizations, 
and thought experiments as mere heuristics, or forecast their disappear -
ance with the advancement of scientific understanding. Neither approach 
is plausible. We should not cavalierly assume that the inaccuracy of mod -
els and idealizations constitutes an inadequacy; quite the opposite. I sug -
gest that their divergence from truth or repre sen ta tional accuracy fosters 
their epistemic functioning. When effective, models and idealizations are, 
I contend, felicitous falsehoods. They are more than heuristics. They are 
ineliminable and epistemically valuable components of the understanding 
science supplies.
 These are bold claims. In what follows I develop a holistic epistemology 
that accommodates the cognitive contributions of science. It acknowl -
edges that tenable theories must be tethered to the phenomena they con -
cern, but denies that truth is the sole acceptable tether. It maintains that 
felicitous falsehoods relate to their targets via exemplification, the relation 
of an example to the features it is an example of. It urges that exemplification 
1 Reconfiguring the Realm

--- Page 15 ---

2  Chapter 1
provides at least as strong and stable a link to the phenomena as truth does. 
Although models, idealizations, and thought experiments are inaccurate— 
sometimes wildly inaccurate— they exemplify features they share with their 
targets and thereby afford epistemic access to aspects of their targets that are 
other wise overshadowed or underemphasized. They are true enough. They 
advance understanding of the phenomena they bear on. To accommodate 
science, I advocate shifting epistemology’s focus from the knowledge of 
individual facts to the understanding of a broader range of phenomena. In 
science and other systematic inquiries, relatively comprehensive constella-
tions of epistemic commitments stand or fall together.
Once truth is dethroned, truth- conduciveness falls as well. Many epis -
temologists hold that arguments and methods of inquiry are justified by 
being reliably truth conducive. If so, in deploying them and eschewing argu-
ments and methods that are not truth conducive, we increase our prospects 
of epistemic success. Having sidelined truth, I can make no such claim. 
This raises an impor tant question about epistemic normativity. If truth- 
conduciveness does not vindicate a method or form of argument, what 
does? I develop a deontological account of epistemic norms. I argue that 
acceptability turns on epistemic responsibility rather than on reliability. 
I provide criteria for objectivity that are satisfied by repre sen ta tions that 
re spect deontological epistemic norms. Worries about subjectivity fade, but 
 there is, even in princi ple, no guarantee that conclusions that are backed by 
objective reasons are true. What a tenable account does guarantee is that 
conclusions are reasonable and defensible in the epistemic circumstances.
The position that emerges not only secures the epistemic standing of sci-
ence, it accords the same status to art. For the symbolic devices that under-
write the acceptability of felicitous falsehoods in science are also deployed 
in the arts. Thus, I urge, the arts embody and advance understanding if the 
sciences do. Throughout the book, discussions of the arts and the sciences 
intertwine. My position vindicates the oft expressed but seldom justified 
claim that, although works of art are not true or even truth apt, we learn 
something impor tant from our encounters with art.
In places, I frame my position by criticizing ways  others address the same 
issues. I make no attempt to provide a comprehensive survey of the avail -
able alternatives. I discuss other approaches only when and only to the 
extent that the juxtaposition illuminates the points I seek to make. Nor do 
my criticisms purport to be refutations. Like Quine (1961), I believe that we

--- Page 16 ---

Reconfiguring the Realm 3
can hold fast to any contention come what may, so long as we are willing 
to make compensatory adjustments elsewhere in our system of thought. 
One can, for example, continue to insist that scientific theories are unac -
ceptable  unless true, or that to understand is to be able to explain, or that 
science is cognitive but art is not. But, I  will urge, the cost of such tenacity 
is surprisingly high. It is high enough to make it reasonable to entertain my 
alternative.
The shape of the book is as follows: I begin by arguing that if epistemol-
ogy is to accommodate science, it must weaken its commitments to truth 
and truth- conduciveness.  After examining a variety of widely accepted sci-
entific models and showing that standard veritistic tweaks, such as con -
struing them as approximations, fail, I introduce the idea of a felicitous 
falsehood—an inaccurate repre sen ta tion whose inaccuracy does not under-
mine its epistemic function. I do not contend that we should believe felicitous 
falsehoods. Rather, building on L. Jonathan Cohen (1992), I maintain that 
we should accept them. This is a  matter of being willing and able to use 
them as a basis for inference or action when our overarching interests are 
cognitive.
To accommodate the fruits of science and other systematic inquiry, I urge, 
epistemology should shift its center of gravity from knowledge to under -
standing—in par tic u lar, to what has been called objectual understanding, the 
understanding of a topic or subject  matter (Kvanvig, 2003). Throughout the 
book, that is what I  shall mean when I use the word ‘understanding’ with-
out qualification. Understanding is not mirroring. It is neither a  matter of 
believing a host of separately justified individual propositions nor a  matter 
of believing a network of interconnected propositions that mirror the facts. 
To understand a topic involves knowing how to wield one’s commitments 
to further one’s epistemic ends. It involves being able to draw inferences, 
raise questions, frame potentially fruitful inquiries, and so forth. Since some 
of the commitments are likely to be felicitous falsehoods and  others to be 
methodological or normative commitments that are not truth apt, under -
standing is not factive. It is not a type of knowledge; it does not consist 
exclusively or primarily in believing or accepting truths.
 Because the commitments that comprise an understanding are mutually 
supportive, understanding must be construed holistically. I show how the 
mutual support of in de pen dently doubtful items can increase their credibil-
ity. Drawing on my previous work, I argue that an understanding of a topic

--- Page 17 ---

4  Chapter 1
consists in accepting a system of commitments in reflective equilibrium 
(Elgin, 1996). A network of commitments is in reflective equilibrium when 
each of its ele ments is reasonable in light of the  others, and the network as 
a  whole is as reasonable as any available alternative in light of our relevant 
previous commitments. Even if some components would be doubtful in 
isolation, collectively they constitute an interwoven tapestry of commit -
ments that we can on reflection endorse.
What differentiates a felicitous falsehood from an infelicitous one? If 
truth and truth- conduciveness are sidelined, what replaces them? Rather 
than being epistemic reliabilists, I urge, we should be epistemic responsi -
bilists. Acceptable epistemic norms are norms that would emerge from the 
deliberations of suitably idealized epistemic agents. Extrapolating from Kant 
(1981), I urge that such agents are legislating members of a realm of epis -
temic ends. The realm of epistemic ends is an idealization of real- life com-
munities of inquiry that eliminates  factors that distort  actual deliberations. 
I identify and justify the constitution of the realm, the  factors legislators 
can draw on, and the conditions on their deliberations. I argue that leg -
islators must be, in a po liti cal sense,  free and equal. They must be  free to 
advance any hypothesis they consider  viable and equally entitled to be 
heard. This does not mean, of course, that they must be equally intelligent 
or that their views are to be treated as equally cogent or equally worthy of 
ac cep tance. It only means that views are not to be rejected without a fair 
hearing. The po liti cal requirements on a realm of epistemic ends fix the 
framework within which the distinction between good and bad reasons, 
methods, strategies, and conclusions can be responsibly drawn.
I go on to argue that intellectual integrity requires that certain values— 
those that figure in or contribute to trustworthiness— are si mul ta neously 
moral and epistemic.  Here again I focus on science. Since nature is enor -
mously complicated, epistemic agents need to work together to achieve 
an understanding of it. Since even the best methods are not failsafe, the 
resources for identifying and correcting received errors must be readily avail-
able. Scientific misconduct undermines the enterprise by producing results 
that are untrustworthy.  Because the value of trustworthiness is integral to 
science— because a scientist needs to trust the findings she builds on— I 
argue that in teaching what good science is and how good science is done, 
science education typically imbues novice scientists with certain moral/
epistemic virtues. Other disciplines do the same for their prac ti tion ers.

--- Page 18 ---

Reconfiguring the Realm 5
As I’ve construed it, epistemic responsibilism may seem too weak to 
secure objectivity. Can a discipline claim to be objective if it recognizes that 
 there is an ineliminable  human ele ment in what ever vindicates its claims? 
I argue that the sort of objectivity that epistemology should seek is not 
that delivered by the ‘view from nowhere’ (Nagel, 1986) or the ‘absolute 
conception of real ity’ (Williams, 1978). It is an objectivity that protects 
against idiosyncrasy, bias, and chance. Drawing on van Fraassen (2008), I 
argue that it is often perspectival. I discuss two modes of objectivity. One 
is impersonal. We define magnitudes and develop ways of mea sur ing them 
that omit the personal ele ment entirely. Or anyway, they eliminate the 
personal or interpersonal ele ment once the work of defining magnitudes 
and developing mea sure ment procedures is done. The other is impartial. 
Although someone must be  doing the assessing, it makes no difference who 
that (suitably trained) someone is. The results of both are trustworthy and 
would be endorsed by legislating members of a realm of epistemic ends.
Having argued for a holistic account of understanding and explicated 
the norms that understanding is subject to, I return to the question of what 
vindicates felicitous falsehoods. I urge that a falsehood or inaccurate non -
propositional repre sen ta tion is felicitous only if it exemplifies features it 
shares with the phenomena it bears on. By making  those features salient, 
such a repre sen ta tion enables us to appreciate their significance for the 
pheno mena. I explicate exemplification and show how it figures in ethics, 
mathe matics, and dance.
I go on to argue that laboratory experiments, thought experiments, and 
works of fiction also advance understanding by means of exemplification. 
 Because laboratory experiments involve pure samples tested in isolated, pris-
tine environments, they distance themselves from the natu ral phenomena 
they bear on. They eliminate or control for irrelevant features in order to 
highlight relevant ones. Thought experiments involve further distancing. 
They contrive imaginative scenarios where situations that are not realizable 
in fact can be entertained and their implications investigated. This enables 
them to bring to the fore  factors that are typically overshadowed. Literary 
fictions, I urge, are elaborate, extended thought experiments. In all three 
cases, delicacy of discrimination is needed to determine which features are 
exemplified and how they proj ect back onto the facts.
Effective models exemplify features they share with their targets. They 
streamline, eliminating irrelevant  factors so that features of interest stand

--- Page 19 ---

6  Chapter 1
out. This enables them to reveal occluded aspects of their targets and to dis-
close how seemingly disparate phenomena are alike. Evolutionary game 
theory, for example, shows that, from the perspective of natu ral se lection, 
predator— prey relations and reciprocal altruism are the same sort of  thing. 
Following Hughes (1996), I urge that a model represents its target as having 
the feature the model exemplifies. This, I argue, is analogous to what occurs 
in portraiture.
If legislating members of realms of epistemic ends set the constraints 
that bind them, how rigid are  those constraints? What prospect is  there for 
interdisciplinary understanding? I suggest that the restrictions set by dif-
fer ent disciplines set strong presumptions but not rigid requirements. This 
allows for epistemic cross- fertilization. We can develop epistemic hybrids 
that bridge disciplinary divides.
Epistemology is haunted by the worry is that despite our best efforts 
we still might be wrong. Nothing in my position immunizes against this 
worry. The most I can say is that if a consideration is multiply tethered, it 
is relatively secure. That is far from a guarantee. The permanent possibility 
of error leads many to embrace fallibilism. This is not so straightforward as 
it might appear. The fallibilist is burdened by a version of Moore’s paradox 
(Moore, 1991). ‘I know that p, but I might be wrong that p’ has the air 
of giving one’s word in one breath and taking it back in the next. But if 
we repudiate fallibilism, and insist that we should dogmatically endorse 
a true conclusion that reaches the threshold for acceptability (wherever 
that threshold is set), we confront Kripke’s (2011a) dogmatism paradox: If I 
know that p, then p is true. In that case, any evidence that ~p is misleading. I 
 ought therefore to disregard any evidence that ~p, since if I take it seriously, 
I am apt to lower my credence and lose my knowledge. That being so, when 
I know, I  ought to be dogmatic. I  ought to turn a deaf ear to evidence that 
tells against p. But to do so seems epistemically irresponsible.
Taken together, the two paradoxes strike me as serious prob lems for a 
theory of knowledge. They do not undermine the possibility of knowledge. 
Neither individually nor jointly do they point  toward skepticism. But they 
undermine the value of knowledge. Concessive knowledge, which tolerates 
Moore’s paradox, and dogmatic knowledge, which deafens the knower to 
objections, both undermine the right to be sure. An epistemic agent would 
rightly be reluctant to accept testimony or to take a big risk on the basis 
of claims to knowledge that  were accompanied by Moore’s paradoxical or

--- Page 20 ---

Reconfiguring the Realm 7
Kripke’s paradoxical riders. But, I argue, fallibilism with re spect to under -
standing does not face  these difficulties. It is not a doctrine, but a stance— 
indeed, I urge, an epistemically valuable stance. Recognizing where and 
how we might be wrong discloses something significant about the fabric of 
our understanding. Possibilities of error, then, are not merely— and perhaps 
not mainly— vulnerabilities. They are ave nues of insight into our epistemic 
situation.

--- Page 22 ---

Veritism
In epistemology, the conviction that truth is vital is virtually axiomatic (see 
David, 2005). Although practical or prudential considerations might  favor 
accepting an acknowledged falsehood, most epistemologists hold that it is 
never epistemically legitimate to do so. Call any position that takes truth 
to be necessary for epistemic acceptability veritism (see Goldman, 1999). It 
seems prima facie reasonable. But, I  will argue, veritism is unacceptable. For, 
if we accept it, we cannot do justice to the epistemic achievements of sci -
ence. Truth  ought not be our paramount epistemic objective.
I begin this chapter with a sketch of veritism. My discussion is deliber -
ately schematic  because the weakness I focus on is endemic to truth- centered 
epistemology, being shared by internalist, externalist, virtue- theoretic, and 
knowledge- first positions. Too strong an emphasis on truth prevents epis-
temology from accommodating the cognitive contributions of science. But 
veritistic commitments run deep. Abandoning them requires radical revi -
sions. In par tic u lar, I urge that belief, assertion, and knowledge should be 
sidelined in  favor of ac cep tance, profession, and understanding. I show 
how this reconfigures the epistemic terrain, making available resources that 
veritistic positions lack. I go on to sketch a variety of devices that figure in 
science and philosophy, devices whose epistemic value comes to the fore if 
we distance epistemology from an inviolable commitment to truth.
According to veritism, truth- conduciveness is the appropriate standard 
of assessment for epistemic policies, practices, and their products. This 
holds for all epistemic achievements— knowledge, understanding, wisdom, 
know- how. The epistemic value of methods for obtaining and evaluating 
2 Distancing from Truth

--- Page 23 ---

10  Chapter 2
information, and the criteria used in such evaluations are purely instru -
mental. They are justified only  because and only to the extent that they are 
truth- conducive. Replicability of scientific results, for example, is epistemi-
cally valuable only if replicable results are more likely to be true than irrep-
licable ones. Should it turn out that replicable results are no more likely 
to be true than other wise well supported irreplicable results, replicability 
would have no epistemic value. As Berker notes, the shape of this argument 
is familiar. Veritism, he argues, is a form of consequentialism. It differs from 
more familiar consequentialist positions in that the consequence it wants 
to promote is true belief or a preponderance of true belief over false belief, 
not a preponderance of, as it might be, plea sure over pain or utility over 
disutility (Berker, 2013). If veritists are right, then at least insofar as our 
ends are cognitive, we should accept only what we consider true, take pains 
to ensure that the claims we accept are in fact true, and promptly repudiate 
any previously accepted claims upon learning that they are false.
Following William James (1951), many veritists hold that our overriding 
cognitive objective is to believe as many truths as pos si ble and disbelieve 
as many falsehoods as pos si ble (e.g., Alston, 1988, 258; Goldman, 1999, 5; 
Lehrer, 1986, 6; BonJour, 1985, 9). This is the objective with re spect to each 
and  every individual contention. It is, they say, never legitimate to accept 
an acknowledged falsehood, even if so  doing would in the long run result 
in the acquisition of more or a higher proportion of true beliefs than the 
repudiation of that falsehood would (Firth, 1981).
As stated, Jamesian veritism is remarkably tolerant. It does not discrimi-
nate among true (or false) beliefs. Insofar as our goals are purely cognitive, it 
says, we should amass as many truths and as few falsehoods as pos si ble. 
This is easily done. Take any number. Add two. Do it again. And again. And 
again. With each iteration you get another truth. Your risk of accepting a 
falsehood along the way is vanishingly small. Should you prefer to restrict 
yourself to the empirical realm, take any trivial truth, such as ‘Cats  don’t 
grow on trees’. Add a disjunct. (Its truth- value  doesn’t  matter.) Add another 
disjunct. And another. You now have numerous true beliefs. This is far easier 
and far less risky than, for example, mounting a carefully controlled, scrupu-
lously executed, theoretically grounded experiment. Nevertheless,  running 
the experiment is epistemically more valuable. It  won’t do to insist that the 
experiment is likely to be more fruitful, at least if the only available way 
to mea sure fruitfulness is to count the number of true conclusions or the

--- Page 24 ---

Distancing from Truth 11
proportion of true over false conclusions that can be drawn.  Every proposi-
tion has infinitely many consequences— indeed, infinitely many obvious 
consequences—so the fruits of trivial inferences and  those of the well- run 
experiment are on a par. And the automaticity of the procedure for gener -
ating trivial bits of knowledge is efficient enough to dwarf the number of 
truths one could discover by devising and  running experiments.
As many epistemologists recognize, this suggests that the Jamesian goal 
needs to be fine- tuned. Rather than considering all true beliefs on a par, 
perhaps epistemology should distinguish between significant and trivial 
truths, or between truths obtained by significant and trivial means. Then 
the Jamesian veritist could insist that our goal is to believe as many signifi-
cant truths as pos si ble and to disbelieve as many significant falsehoods as 
pos si ble, or perhaps to believe as many significant truths as pos si ble and 
to disbelieve as many falsehoods as pos si ble,  whether or not they are sig-
nificant (since it seems epistemically objectionable to believe falsehoods 
even if they are trivial). Alternatively, he could hold fast to the veritist goal 
as a purely cognitive end, but recognize that as finite beings with limited 
resources, we need, for practical reasons, to prioritize some truths over  others.
Not all veritists are Jamesians. Pritchard focuses on a position he calls 
‘Epistemic Value T- Monism’, the view that “true belief is the sole funda -
mental epistemic good” (2010, 14). For the T- Monist, the Jamesian concern 
with proportionality drops away or becomes of merely instrumental value. 
We should, on the T- Monist view, worry about false beliefs only if harboring 
them somehow interferes with our amassing true beliefs. Sosa (2007) credits 
only aptly formed true beliefs— those that emerge from the proper use of 
our epistemic competences.
Treanor goes further. He disputes the egalitarianism inherent in the 
Jamesian position, arguing that it rests on “the implicit assumption that 
any two truths contribute the same amount of truth to the balance sheet” 
(2013, 599). This, he claims, is incorrect. Rather than being concerned with 
how many truths someone believes, we should be concerned with how 
much truth he believes. And the latter is not a function of the former. Triv-
ial truths, Treanor argues, contribute  little to a person’s overall body of true 
belief; significant truths contribute a  great deal. Undermining the idea that 
we need to (or even that we can) count and aggregate true beliefs sidelines 
the triviality worry. Still, Treanor remains a veritist. Like his Jamesian oppo-
nents, he thinks that truth is epistemically central.

--- Page 25 ---

12  Chapter 2
So does Hetherington (2011). He maintains that we should take the locu-
tion ‘knowing better’ seriously, and recognize that knowledge admits of 
degrees. If an epistemic agent’s belief that p is true, she knows that p in a 
minimal way; if she has some justification for p, she knows better that p; 
and if she can defeat skeptical challenges to p, she knows perfectly well that 
p. But even the most minimal sort of knowledge requires truth. Epistemic 
gradualism does not solve our prob lem.
Most veritists take knowledge to be the paradigm of epistemic success, 
where knowledge is nonfortuitously justified or reliable true belief. Some 
consider knowledge valuable for its own sake.  Others think that the valu -
able aspect of knowledge lies in its embodying true belief.  Either way, the 
reason to  favor justified beliefs ( those backed by sufficient evidence) and 
safe beliefs ( those that could not easily have been false) is that they are 
liable to be true. Justification and safety are of merely instrumental value. 
Since propositions are the contents of beliefs and the  bearers of truth- values, 
they are what is known. 1 If this is right, the sort of justification of inter -
est to epistemology is in the first instance the justification of individual 
propositions. To justify a given proposition is  either to infer it from already 
justified propositions or to show how belief in it emerges from reliable 
belief- forming mechanisms. S is justified in believing p on the basis of q, 
and q on the basis of r, and so on. On some accounts the sequence ends in 
propositions that need no further justification (Fumerton, 2010); on  others, 
the sequence is infinite (Klein, 1999).
Holists are apt to consider this picture misleading. They maintain that 
epistemic acceptability is, in the first instance, acceptability of a fairly com-
prehensive theory, or system of thought— a constellation of mutually sup -
portive commitments that bear on a topic. Let us call such a constellation 
an account.2 It consists of contentions about a topic and the reasons adduced 
to support them, the ways they can be used to support other contentions, 
and higher- order commitments that specify why and how evidence sup -
ports them. It also contains normative and methodological commitments 
specifying the suitability of categories, the criteria of justificatory adequacy, 
and the ways to establish that the criteria have been met. An account’s 
priority over its components is epistemic, not historical.  There is no con -
tention that  people come to accept an account before coming to accept the 
vari ous items that comprise it. Rather, the claim is that, regardless of the 
order in which they are acquired, commitments are epistemically justified

--- Page 26 ---

Distancing from Truth 13
only when they coalesce to constitute a tenable account. An account as a 
 whole is tenable just in case it is as reasonable as any available alternative 
in light of the current relevant antecedent commitments (Elgin, 1996). The 
acceptability of individual claims, as well as of methods and standards, is 
derivative, stemming from their role in a tenable account. Perhaps a linear 
model of justification works for the belief that the cat is on the mat, but 
disciplinary understanding is holistic. The claim that electrons have nega -
tive charge is justified only to the extent that the scientific account that 
embeds it is.
As standardly construed, knowledge is granular: it comes in discrete bits. 
The objects of knowledge are individual facts, expressed in true atomic 
propositions or stated in true atomic declarative sentences. Judy knows (the 
fact) that the bus stops at the corner; George knows (the fact) that cows eat 
grass. Each grain of knowledge is supposed to answer to a separate fact. An 
epistemic agent acquires knowledge by amassing grains. To be sure, one 
grain can support another. Much of our knowledge is a product of inference 
from other  things we know. But the unit of knowledge is an individual sen-
tence, belief, or proposition— something that apparently bears a truth value 
in isolation. The commitment to granularity is manifest in the widespread 
adherence to Jamesian veritism. Indeed, the Jamesian goal is unintelligible 
 unless we suppose that knowledge comes in discrete, countable bits (Treanor, 
2013).
Disciplinary understanding is not an aggregation of separate, in de pen-
dently secured statements of fact; it is an integrated, systematically or ga-
nized account of a domain.  There is no prospect of sentence- by- sentence 
verification or sentence- by- sentence justification of the contentions that 
comprise a disciplinary account, for most of them lack separately evaluable 
consequences. In de pen dent of an account of heat transfer, nothing could 
count as evidence for or against the claim that a pro cess is adiabatic. In de-
pen dent of an ethological theory, nothing could count as evidence for or 
against the claim that grooming be hav ior manifests reciprocal altruism. Col-
lectively the components of an account are apt to have testable implications; 
separately they do not. In Quine’s words, they “confront the tribunal of 
sense experience not individually but only as a corporate body” (1961, 41). 
Nor is the prob lem merely epistemic. Some scientific statements evidently 
lack truth- values in isolation. If the individuation of the items they purport 
to refer to— a species, a retrovirus, or a lepton, for example—is provided by

--- Page 27 ---

14  Chapter 2
an account or cluster of accounts,  there may be no fact of the  matter as to 
 whether such statements are true in de pen dent of the epistemic adequacy of 
the account or cluster that characterizes them.
If it is to accommodate the cognitive contributions of the disciplines, 
epistemology should be holistic, construing the primary unit susceptible of 
justification to be a more or less comprehensive account of a topic rather 
than an individual proposition. Ele ments of such an account then are justi-
fied largely by their contribution to a coherent, relatively comprehensive 
body of thought. ‘Knowledge’ is usually taken to pertain to discrete propo-
sitions. An epistemic agent knows that p. Tenable accounts are said to afford 
an understanding of their topics. This suggests that epistemology should 
shift its focus from knowledge to understanding, or at least broaden its focus 
to comprehend understanding as well as knowledge. By itself, this should 
not spark panic among epistemologists. But, I maintain, a greater revision 
is called for. To accommodate science, epistemology must relax its commit-
ment to truth. I  will argue that the relation between truth and epistemic 
acceptability is both more tenuous and more circuitous than is standardly 
supposed. It is often epistemically responsible to prescind from truth to 
achieve more global, and more worthy cognitive ends.
At first blush, this looks mad. To retain a commitment to a falsehood 
merely  because it has other epistemically attractive features seems the height 
of cognitive irresponsibility. Allegations of intellectual dishonesty, wishful 
thinking, false consciousness, or worse immediately leap to mind. But science 
routinely transgresses the boundary between truth and falsity. It smooths 
curves and ignores outliers. It develops and deploys simplified models that 
diverge, sometimes considerably, from the phenomena they purport to rep-
resent. It subjects artificially contrived lab specimens to forces not found in 
nature. It resorts to thought experiments that defy natu ral laws. Even the 
best scientific accounts are not true. Not only are they plagued with anoma-
lies and outstanding prob lems, but where they are successful, they rely 
on lawlike statements, models, and idealizations that are known to diverge 
from the truth. Veritism might reasonably be undaunted by the existence 
of anomalies and outstanding prob lems, since they are readily construed 
as defects. The more serious prob lem comes with the laws, models, and 
idealizations that are acknowledged not to be true but that are nonetheless 
critical to, indeed at least partially constitutive of, the understanding that 
science delivers.

--- Page 28 ---

Distancing from Truth 15
Consider the prob lem that models pose. The ideal gas law, pV = nRT, rep-
resents the relation between pressure, volume, and temperature in a gas 
comprised of dimensionless, spherical molecules that exhibit no mutual 
attraction.  There is no such gas; indeed, if our fundamental theories are even 
nearly right,  there could be no such gas. All material objects have spatial 
dimensions. Being subject to gravity, all attract one another. No molecules 
are spherical. Nonetheless, the ideal gas model is integral to thermodynam-
ics. To be sure,  there are more refined models, such as the van der Waals 
equation and the virial equation, that incorporate some of the features of 
 actual gases that the ideal gas model omits; but they too are idealizations, 
not accurate repre sen ta tions of any  actual gas. Yet  these models, which are 
true of nothing real, figure in a genuine understanding of how  actual gases 
behave.
Thought experiments should also vex the veritist. They are not  actual 
experiments and often not even pos si ble experiments. Einstein demon -
strated the equivalence of gravitational mass and inertial mass by inviting 
scientists to compare the experience of a person riding in an elevator in the 
absence of a gravitational field and her experience while at rest in the pres-
ence of a gravitational field. Lacking external cues, she could not tell which 
situation she was in. To actually run the experiment we would need to place 
an unconscious subject in a windowless enclosure, send her to a region of 
outer space distant from any significant source of gravity, restore her to 
consciousness, and query her about her experiences. This is morally, practi-
cally, and physically unfeasible. It is evidently also unnecessary. Physicists 
take the thought experiment by itself to establish the equivalence.
Far from being defects, models, idealizations, and thought experiments 
figure ineliminably in successful science. If truth is mandatory, much of 
our best science turns out to be epistemologically unacceptable and per -
haps intellectually dishonest. Our predicament is this: We can retain the 
truth requirement and construe science  either as cognitively defective or as 
noncognitive, or we can reject, revise, or relax the truth requirement and 
remain cognitivists about and devotees of science.
I take it that science provides an understanding of the natu ral order. 
By this I do not mean merely that an ideal science would provide such an 
understanding or that at the end of inquiry science  will provide one, but 
that much  actual science has done so and continues to do so. I take it, 
then, that much  actual science is cognitively reputable— indeed, estimable.

--- Page 29 ---

16  Chapter 2
So an adequate epistemology should explain what makes good science cog-
nitively good. Too strict a commitment to truth stands in the way. Nor is 
science the only casualty. In other disciplines such as philosophy, history, 
po liti cal science, and economics, as well as in everyday discourse, we often 
convey information and advance understanding by means of sentences and 
other repre sen ta tions that are not literally true. An adequate epistemology 
should account for  these as well.
A tenable account is a tapestry of interconnected commitments that col-
lectively constitute an understanding of a domain. My thesis is that some 
repre sen ta tions that figure ineliminably in tenable accounts make no pre-
tense of being true, but are not defective on that account. Indeed, I  will 
argue, their deviations from truth are epistemically valuable— often more 
valuable than the unvarnished truth about the phenomena would be. If 
I am right, tenable accounts and the understandings they embed have a 
more intricate symbolic structure than epistemologists standardly suppose. 
Nevertheless, I do not think that we should jettison concern for truth com-
pletely. The question is what role a truth commitment should play in a 
holism that recognizes a multiplicity of sometimes conflicting epistemo -
logical desiderata.
Stepping Back
Consensus has it that epistemic acceptability requires something like non-
fortuitously justified and/or reliable, true belief. The justification, reliabil -
ity, and belief requirements involve thresholds. The connection between 
the belief’s being true and its being justified or reliable should not be due 
to (the wrong kind of) luck (see Pritchard, 2010). But truth is supposed to 
be an absolute  matter.  Either a belief content is true or it is not. I suggest, 
however, that the so- called truth requirement on epistemic acceptability 
involves a threshold too. I am not saying that truth itself is a threshold 
concept. Perhaps such a construal of truth would facilitate treatments of 
vagueness, but that is not my concern. For my purposes, classical bivalence 
is acceptable.  Either a sentence, belief, or proposition is true or it is false. My 
point is that epistemic acceptability turns not on  whether it is true, but on 
 whether it is true enough— that is, on  whether it is close enough to the truth. 
“True enough” obviously has a threshold.

--- Page 30 ---

Distancing from Truth 17
This raises a host of questions. But before addressing them, let me issue a 
disclaimer. I do not deny that (unqualified) truth is an intelligible concept 
or a realizable ideal. We readily understand instances of the (T) schema:
‘Snow is white’ is true ≡ snow is white
‘Power corrupts’ is true ≡ power corrupts
‘Neutrinos have mass’ is true ≡ neutrinos have mass
and so on. So long as it evades the paradoxes, a disquotational theory of 
truth suffices to show that the criterion expressed in Convention (T) can be 
satisfied. One might, of course, want more from a theory of truth than sat-
isfaction of Convention (T); but to make the case that the concept of truth 
is unobjectionable, any minimalist theory that does not engender paradox 
suffices. Moreover, we can often tell  whether a sentence is true. We are well 
aware not only that
‘Snow is white’ is true ≡ snow is white,
but also that
‘Newly fallen snow is white’ is true.
The intelligibility and realizability of truth, of course, show nothing 
about which sentences are true or which truths we can discover. Nevertheless, 
as far as I can see, nothing about the concept of truth discredits veritism. 
Since truth is a self- consistent, intelligible concept, it is open to epistemol-
ogy to insist that only truths are epistemically acceptable. Since truth is a 
realizable objective, such a stance does not lead inexorably to skepticism. I 
do not deny that veritism is an available epistemic stance. But I think it is 
an unduly limiting one. It prevents epistemology from accounting for the 
full range of cognitively estimable achievements.
If epistemic ac cep tance is construed as belief and epistemic acceptability as 
knowledge, the truth requirement seems reasonable (see Wedgwood, 2002). 
For cognizers like ourselves,  there seems to be no epistemically significant

--- Page 31 ---

18  Chapter 2
gap between believing that p and believing that p is true. Ordinarily, upon 
learning that his belief that p is false, an epistemic agent ceases to believe 
that p. Moreover, he considers it epistemically obligatory to do so. One 
 ought to believe only what is true. If he cannot manage to divest him -
self of the belief, he considers his failure a defect in his epistemic charac -
ter. Perhaps a creature without a conception of truth can harbor beliefs. A 
cat, lacking the capacity for semantic ascent, might believe that  there is a 
mouse in the wainscoting without believing that ‘ There is a mouse in the 
wainscoting’ is true.3 In that case, the connection between believing that p 
and believing that p is true is not exceptionless. But what ever holds for cats, 
it does not seem feasible for any creature that has a conception of truth to 
believe that p without believing that p is true. If epistemic ac cep tance is a 
 matter of belief, ac cep tance is closely linked to truth (Adler, 2002). So is 
assertion. Although asserting that p is not the same as asserting that p is 
true, it seems plain that one  ought not to assert that p if one is prepared 
to deny that p is true or to suspend judgment about  whether p is true; nor 
 ought one assert that p is true if one is prepared to deny that p or to suspend 
judgment about  whether p. Assertion and belief, then, seem committed to 
truth. Knowledge shares that commitment (Williamson, 2000).  Whether 
or not knowledge is equivalent to justified or reliably generated true belief, 
once someone discovers the falsity of something she took herself to know, 
she withdraws her claim to knowledge. She says, ‘I thought I knew it, but I 
was wrong’, not ‘I knew it, but I was wrong’.
Being skeptical about analyticity, I do not contend that a truth commit-
ment is part of the meaning of ‘belief’, ‘assertion’, and ‘knowledge’. Nor, for 
my purposes, does it  matter  whether belief is more primitive than knowl-
edge or vice versa. What ever the details, the truth commitment tightly 
intertwines with our views about belief, assertion, and knowledge. It seems 
best, then, to retain that connection and revise epistemology by making 
compensatory adjustments elsewhere. Once  those adjustments are made, 
knowledge and belief turn out to be less central to epistemology than we 
standardly think.
I do not then claim that it is epistemically acceptable to believe what is 
false or that it is linguistically acceptable to assert what is false. Rather, I 
suggest that epistemic ac cep tance is not restricted to, and does not always 
involve, belief. L. Jonathan Cohen distinguishes between ac cep tance and 
belief. With some modifications, I deploy his distinction. According to

--- Page 32 ---

Distancing from Truth 19
Cohen, “belief that p is a disposition, when one is attending to issues raised 
or items referred to by the proposition that p, normally to feel that it is true 
that p and false that not- p,  whether or not one is willing to act, speak, or rea-
son accordingly. . . .  To accept that p is to have or adopt a policy of deem -
ing, positing, or postulating that p” (1992, 4). The term ‘belief’ is ubiquitous 
in epistemology. To avoid (or at least minimize) confusion, I  will use the 
term ‘conviction’ for what Cohen calls ‘belief’. To be convinced that p is to be 
disposed, when attending to issues raised or items referred to by p, normally 
to feel that it is true that p and false that ~p. To accept that p involves being 
willing to take p as a premise, as a basis for action or, I add, as an epistemic 
norm or a rule of inference, when one’s ends are cognitive. This includes 
being willing to give  others to accept that p via testimony. Ac cep tance is 
not a disposition to represent, but a disposition to act. I impose two restric-
tions: first, I am concerned only with cases where our ends are cognitive. 
So I set aside cases where ac cep tance is purely prudential, practical, self- 
destructive, or whimsical. Second, I restrict ac cep tance to assertoric— that 
is, non- reductio— inferences, and to actions that are not intentionally self- 
defeating ( these being the practical counter parts of reductio inferences). I 
grant that reductios are cognitive and that in making a reductio argument 
we temporarily accept a premise in order to demonstrate that it is unaccept-
able. But reductios are not the sorts of inferences that concern me, since 
acceptance- for- reductio is too short- lived to serve my purposes.
Something more is required. An epistemic agent who accepts a consider-
ation is not just willing to deploy it when her ends are cognitive; she is also 
able to do so. Someone who, on the basis of testimony, believed that modus 
ponens is a valid rule of inference, but had no idea how or when to apply 
it, would not be in a position to accept modus ponens. In my usage, then, 
to accept that p is to be willing and able to take p as an assertoric premise, 
epistemic norm or rule of inference in one’s reasoning or as a basis for 
action when one’s ends are cognitive. To reject that p is to accept that not- 
p. To withhold that p is to fail to accept that p and fail to accept that not- p. 
Ac cep tance is action oriented in a way that conviction per se is not. In what 
follows I  will continue to use the term ‘belief’ as it is standardly used, to 
cover cases where conviction and ac cep tance align.
Although  there is considerable overlap, ac cep tance and conviction can 
diverge. One can be convinced of propositions that in a given context one 
does not accept. All snakes in Australia are venomous. So an Australian

--- Page 33 ---

20  Chapter 2
might find that she  can’t help but feel that  every snake she sees is venom-
ous. She is convinced. Nevertheless, she may train herself to accept that 
the garter snakes she encounters in Maine are harmless. She does not call 
the animal control officers each time she sees a garter snake slither across the 
campground. Conversely,  people often accept  things of which they are not, 
or not yet, convinced. They accept propositions for the purposes of argu -
ment or as a working hypothesis, and draw out their consequences. Judah 
Folkman suspected that cancer can be suppressed by inhibiting angiogenesis 
in tumors. If tumors lack an adequate blood supply, he reasoned, they  will 
be unable to grow. Initially, this was only a suspicion. He accepted it as a 
working hypothesis, drew inferences, and designed experiments based on 
it. When the long series of experiments yielded the results he anticipated, 
he became convinced. But the ac cep tance was earlier, and in de pen dent of 
the conviction (Folkman, 1996).
The term ‘working hypothesis’ is multiply apt  here. A working hypoth-
esis is a hypothesis that a scientist works with; it is not an idle hunch. It 
does some work for him, framing and focusing his investigation. And it is 
accepted only so long as it works—so long, that is, as it is epistemically fruit-
ful. I contend that ac cep tance rather than conviction is epistemologically 
central. The Australian camp counselor is saddled with a conviction that 
she recognizes is unwarranted. It is too ingrained for her to easily give up. 
This is unfortunate. But if she manages to bracket it and accept that many 
North American snakes are harmless, she is not epistemically defective.
The shift from belief to ac cep tance requires an additional shift, for belief 
is closely tied to assertion. Since I contend that much of our cognitively 
responsible verbal outputs concerns ac cep tance rather than belief, I cannot 
comfortably hold that that output consists in assertions. I maintain that 
uttering or inscribing seriously and sincerely for cognitive purposes— call 
it ‘professing’—is not limited to asserting. We regularly reason verbally 
within the par ameters of accounts we are not convinced of. Atheist phi los-
o phers profess ‘God exists and is not a deceiver’ in discussions of Descartes. 
Nominalists profess the Theory of Forms in discussions of the divided 
line. Physicists profess ‘F = ma’ in discussions of slow- moving middle- sized 
physical interactions, even though they consider Newton’s laws to have been 
superseded.
Some might maintain that what I have called professing is just a  matter 
of pretending. On such a view, in discussing the Sixth Meditation, I pretend

--- Page 34 ---

Distancing from Truth 21
that I am convinced by Descartes’s proofs for the existence of God and 
reason within the pretense. In discussing the motion of the billiard ball, I 
pretend that F = ma. But professing is not the same as pretending. Moore’s 
paradox is an assertion of the form ‘p but I do not believe that p’. To assert 
that p is to put it forth as something one believes. To assert that one does 
not believe that p is to deny that one believes that p. So  there is something 
absurd or self- defeating about asserting a Moore’s paradoxical sentence. The 
paradox cannot be avoided by retreating to pretense. An actor on stage say-
ing, ‘Buckingham is loyal to the king’ pretends to be asserting that Bucking-
ham is loyal to the king. But if, without breaking character in the  middle 
of his speech, the actor  were to say, ‘Buckingham is loyal to the king but I 
do not believe that Buckingham is loyal to the king’, his utterance would 
be as absurd and self- defeating as a standard Moore’s paradoxical assertion. 
Similarly, a child having a make- believe tea party might pretend that her 
toy dog Mopsy says, ‘I want another cookie’. But if she  were to pretend that 
Mopsy says, ‘I want another cookie, but I do not believe I want another 
cookie’, her pretend- utterance would be equally absurd and self- defeating 
(Szabó, 2001).
To pretend to assert that p is to act as if one had asserted that p. But to 
profess that p is to do something dif fer ent. It is to make p available to func-
tion as a premise or rule of inference in a given context for a given cognitive 
purpose. If one is professing rather than asserting,  there is nothing absurd 
about saying, ‘God exists and is not a deceiver but I do not believe that God 
exists and is not a deceiver’. In fact, it may be a good way of signaling that 
‘God exists and is not a deceiver’ is professed but not asserted in a par tic u lar 
context. As Cohen (1992, 72–73) argues,
where an utterance of ‘It is raining’ implies ac cep tance that it is raining but not 
belief that it is raining,  there should be no feeling of oddness or anomaly. And 
in fact it is not at all difficult to imagine such cases with more complex structures 
as in
“All right. Your arguments from economic theory are unanswerable and I have to 
concede your point. Index- linked wage settlements are inflationary. But, although 
I am bound to accept this, and every thing that follows from it, I still  don’t  really 
believe [ = I am still not  really convinced] that index linked wage settlements are 
 inflationary.”
As so often in linguistic analy sis, a larger slab of discourse constrains us to suppose a 
speech- act is dif fer ent from the one that a smaller one suggests.

--- Page 35 ---

22  Chapter 2
The close connection between the conviction that p and the conviction 
that p is true explains why conviction and belief are in general impervious 
to the  will (Williams, 1973). 4 A conviction is true only if  things are the 
way its content represents them to be. Fred’s conviction that it is raining 
is true only if it is in fact raining. But if his conviction  were responsive to 
his  will—if, that is, wishful thinking  were an effective mechanism for form-
ing convictions—by willing, wishing, or desiring strongly enough, he could 
convince himself that it is raining even if it is not, and even if he as ample 
evidence that it is not. Self- deception is real, so the imperviousness in ques-
tion is not absolute. But self- deception is difficult to sustain. For it is hard 
to retain a conviction that flies in the face of one’s evidence, while con -
tinuing to hold one’s other convictions firm (see Adler, 2002). Normally we 
find ourselves convinced of one  thing or another. Sometimes, to be sure, we 
become convinced through arduous investigations or laborious chains of 
reasoning. But even in  these cases, the fruits of our cognitive  labors seem to 
simply emerge from the  labor. They do not pres ent themselves as a  matter 
of choice.
This creates a conundrum for epistemology. On the one hand, we do not 
want to claim that it is up to an epistemic agent  whether to believe a propo-
sition for which she has and recognizes that she has sufficient evidence. On 
the other hand, epistemology is a normative discipline. It is given to issuing 
pronouncements about what epistemic agents should believe in vari ous cir-
cumstances. If we are passive with re spect to belief, then the ‘should’ seems 
impertinent. If Fred  can’t help but believe what he does, it’s no use telling 
him that he should believe something dif fer ent (or, for that  matter, tell -
ing him that he should keep believing what he does). What he believes is 
not up to him.
 Here the distinction between conviction and ac cep tance is helpful. 
Conviction is passive. As Fred surveys the arid landscape, he  can’t help 
but be convinced that it is not raining, however much he might wish 
it  were. But ac cep tance involves agency. Even if it is impertinent to criti -
cize epistemic agents for convictions they cannot help but harbor, it is 
not impertinent to criticize them for the premises and rules of inference 
that they accept. For ac cep tance is voluntary. And it is reasonable to ask 
 whether, or to what extent, the ac cep tance of a given premise or rule 
furthers the agent’s cognitive objectives. Fiona can decide to accept the

--- Page 36 ---

Distancing from Truth 23
proposition that Amherst is 90 miles from Boston, and use it as a basis 
for reasoning about Mas sa chu setts geography. In so  doing, she need not 
think the proposition is true. She need only think it is true enough for her 
current purposes. Rather than assuming that as a  matter of fact Amherst is 
exactly 90 miles from Boston, she deems the distance close enough to 90 
miles that it does no harm to identify the  actual distance, what ever it is, 
with 90 miles. To identify a with b is not to hold that a is identical to b. It 
is to hold that in the given circumstances it does no harm to treat a and b 
as identical (Goodman, 1977).
This is not to suggest that any consideration whose ac cep tance would 
cause one to realize one’s cognitive objectives or increase the probability 
of  doing so is thereby acceptable. But a consideration whose integration 
strengthens the tenability of an account has, for that reason, a claim to 
acceptability.
Felicitous Falsehoods
Understanding is often couched in and conveyed by symbols that are not 
true. Many of them do not even purport to be true. Such symbols are epis-
temically felicitous falsehoods.5 Not all scientific models are propositional. 
Besides equations and verbal models, science is rife with diagrams, such as 
harmonic oscillator depictions in physics texts, three- dimensional models 
such as tinker- toy models of proteins, real- life simulations, and computer- 
based simulations. Nonpropositional models and diagrams are not, strictly 
speaking, false. But if interpreted as realistic repre sen ta tions of their refer-
ents, they are inaccurate in much the same way that false descriptions of 
an object are inaccurate. All represent their referents as they are not. So 
despite the fact that it is a bit of a misnomer, for ease of exposition, I label 
all such models falsehoods; if despite (or even  because of) their inaccuracy 
they afford epistemic access to their objects, they are felicitous falsehoods.6 
I contend that we cannot understand the cognitive contributions of science, 
philosophy, or even our everyday accounts of  things, if we fail to account for 
the epistemic functions such symbols perform.
 Here are some familiar cases:
Curve smoothing: Ordinarily, each data point on a graph is supposed to 
represent an in de pen dently ascertained truth. (The temperature at t1, the

--- Page 37 ---

24  Chapter 2
temperature at t2,  . . .) By interpolating between and extrapolating beyond 
 these truths, we expect to discern the pattern they instantiate. If the curve 
we draw connects the data points, this is reasonable. But the data rarely fall 
precisely on the curve adduced to account for them. The curve then reveals 
a pattern that the data do not instantiate. Strictly, it seems, veritism requires 
accepting the data only if we are convinced that they are true, and connect-
ing  these truths to adduce additional truths. In that case, the line should 
connect all the data points no  matter how convoluted the resulting curve 
turns out to be. This is not done. To accommodate  every point would be to 
abandon hope of finding order in most data sets, for jagged lines and com-
plicated curves mask under lying patterns and regularities. Nevertheless, it 
seems cognitively disreputable simply to let hope triumph over experience. 
Surely we need a better reason to skirt the data and ignore the outliers than 
the fact that other wise we  will not get the kind of theory we want. Nobody, 
 after all, promised that the phenomena would obligingly accommodate 
themselves to the kind of account we want.
We often have quite good reasons for thinking that the data  ought not, 
or at least need not, be taken as entirely accurate. Sometimes we recognize 
that our mea sure ments are relatively crude compared with the level of pre-
cision we are looking for. Then any curve that is within some δ of the evi-
dence counts as accommodating the evidence. Sometimes we suspect that 
some sort of interference throws our mea sure ments off. Then in plotting 
the curve, we compensate for the alleged interference. Sometimes we are 
confident that the mea sure ments are accurate, but think the phenomena 
mea sured are complexes only some of whose aspects concern us. Then in 
curve smoothing we, as it  were,  factor out the irrelevant aspects, construing 
them as noise. Perhaps with a bit of hand- waving, veritism could accept 
such rationales for smoothing curves. Sometimes, however, we have no 
explanation for the data’s divergence from the smooth curve. But we may 
correctly judge that what  matters is the smooth curve the data indicate, not 
the jagged curve they actually instantiate. What ever the explanation, we 
accept the curve, taking its proximity to the data points as our justification. 
We ignore the outliers, thinking that  there is something- we- know- not- what 
unacceptable about them. We understand the phenomena as displaying the 
pattern the curve marks out. We thus dismiss the data’s deviation from the 
smooth curve as negligible.

--- Page 38 ---

Distancing from Truth 25
Ceteris paribus claims: Many lawlike claims in science obtain only ceteris 
paribus.7 The familiar law of gravity,
Fg = Gm1m2
r 2
is not universally true, for other forces are in play. The force between charged 
bodies, for example, is a resultant of electrical and gravitational forces. Never-
theless, we are not inclined to jettison the law of gravity. The complication 
that charge introduces just shows that the law obtains only ceteris pari -
bus, and when bodies are charged, ceteris are not paribus. This is not news. 
‘Ceteris paribus’ is Latin for ‘other  things being equal’, but it is not obvi-
ous what makes for equality in a case like this. Strevens (2012) maintains 
that where a ceteris paribus claim is correct, its divergences from truth are 
not difference makers. This is plausible, but uncongenial to veritism. Sklar 
(1999, 702) glosses ‘ceteris paribus’ as ‘other  things being normal’, where 
‘normal’ seems to cash out as ‘typical’ or ‘usual’. Then a ‘ceteris paribus law’ 
states what usually happens. In that case, to construe the law of gravity as 
a ceteris paribus law is to contend that although  there are exceptions, bod-
ies usually attract each other in direct proportion to the product of their 
masses and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance between 
them. Again, veritism could  handle this.
But Sklar’s construal does not always work. Some laws do not even usu-
ally hold. The law of gravity is one, since in addition to gravity, other forces, 
such as charge, always affect falling bodies. Snell’s law, n1sini = n2sinr, which 
expresses the relation between the  angle of incidence and the  angle of 
refraction of a light ray passing from one medium to another, is a more 
vivid case.8 As standardly stated, the law is perfectly general, ranging over 
 every case of refraction. It is not true of  every case, though; it obtains only 
where both media are optically isotropic. The law then is a ceteris paribus 
law. But it is not even usually true, since most media are optically aniso -
tropic (Cartwright, 1983, 46–47). One might won der why physicists  don’t 
simply restrict the scope of the law: ‘For any two optically isotropic media, 
n1sini = n2sinr’. The reason is Gricean: expressly restricting the scope of the 
law implicates that it affords no insight into cases where the restriction does 
not obtain (Grice, 1989). Snell’s law is more helpful. Even though the law is 
usually false, it is often not far from the truth. Most media are anisotropic,

--- Page 39 ---

26  Chapter 2
but many of them— and many of the ones physicists are especially inter -
ested in— are nearly isotropic. The law supplies good approximations for 
nearly isotropic cases. So although explanations and calculations that rely 
on Snell’s law do not yield truths, they are often not off by much. The cog-
nitive utility of the law involves two  factors. One is that the law is approxi-
mately true for nearly isotropic media; the other is that  those are the media 
of interest. The acceptability of the law turns, evidently, not on its being 
true, or being usually true, or even being usually approximately true. It is 
approximately true in the cases that physicists care about.
The law’s generality is valuable for another reason as well. Sometimes it 
is useful to first represent a light ray as conforming to Snell’s law, and  later 
introduce ‘corrections’ to accommodate anisotropic media. If we  were inter-
ested only in the path of a par tic u lar light ray, such a circuitous approach 
would be unattractive. But if we are interested in optical refraction in gen-
eral, it might make sense to start with a prototypical case, and then show 
how anisotropy perturbs. By portraying anisotropic cases as perturbations, 
we point up affinities that direct comparisons would not reveal. The issue, 
then, is what sort of understanding we want. Showing how a variety of 
cases diverge from the prototypical case affords valuable insights into the 
phenomenon we are interested in. And what makes the case prototypical 
is not that it usually obtains, but that it cleanly exemplifies the features we 
deem impor tant.
Stylized facts are close kin of ceteris paribus claims. They are “broad gener-
alizations, true in essence, though perhaps not in detail” (Bannock, Baxter, 
& Davis, 1998, 396–397). They play a major role in economics, constitut -
ing explananda that economic models are required to explain. Models of 
economic growth, for example, are supposed to explain the (stylized) fact 
that the profit rate is constant. 9 The unvarnished fact, of course, is that 
profit rates are not constant. All sorts of noneconomic  factors— such as war, 
pestilence, drought, and po liti cal chicanery— interfere. Manifestly, stylized 
facts are not (what phi los o phers would call) facts, for the  simple reason 
that they do not obtain. It might seem, then, that economics takes itself to 
be required to explain why known falsehoods are true. (Voodoo econom -
ics, indeed!) This cannot be correct. Rather, economics is committed to the 
view that the claims it recognizes as stylized facts are in the right neighbor-
hood, and that their being in the right neighborhood is something eco -
nomic models need to account for. A critical question is what being in the

--- Page 40 ---

Distancing from Truth 27
right neighborhood amounts to. The models may show them to be good 
approximations in all cases, or where deviations from the eco nom ically 
ideal are slight, or where economic  factors dominate noneconomic ones. 
Or the models might afford some other account of their often being nearly 
right. The models may differ over what is actually true, or as to where, to 
what degree, and why the stylized facts are as good as they are. But to fail to 
acknowledge the stylized facts would be to lose valuable economic informa-
tion (for example, the fact that if we control for the effects of noneconomic 
interference such as wars, epidemics, and the president for life absconding 
with the national trea sury, the profit rate is constant). Stylized facts figure 
in other social sciences as well. I suspect that  under a less alarming descrip-
tion, they occur in the natu ral sciences too. The standard characterization 
of the pendulum, for example, strikes me as a stylized fact of physics. The 
motion of the pendulum that physics is supposed to explain is a motion 
that no  actual pendulum exhibits. What such cases point to is this: The fact 
that a strictly false description is in the right neighborhood is sometimes 
integral to our understanding of a domain.
Idealizations: An ideal pendulum— the one discussed in physics books, 
not the one in manuals for clockmakers—is a rigid body consisting of a small 
mass oscillating through a small  angle at the end of a string. It provides a 
model for  simple harmonic motion. The idealization neglects friction and 
gravity, and it treats the mass of the string as 0. Explanations that represent 
the pendulum as a  simple harmonic oscillator would be epistemically unac-
ceptable if abject fidelity to truth  were required. Since  every swinging bob is 
subject to friction and gravity, and  every string has some mass, the assump-
tions built into the model are false. If veritism is correct, its falsity makes it 
epistemically unacceptable. But scientists find it unexceptionable.
A fortiori arguments from limiting cases: Some accounts focus on a single, 
carefully chosen case and argue that what holds in that case holds in general. 
If so, it does no harm to represent the phenomena as having the features 
that characterize the exemplary case. Astronomy sometimes represents 
planets as point masses. Manifestly, they are not. But  because the distance 
between planets is vastly greater than their size, their spatial dimensions can 
safely be neglected. Given the size and distribution of planets in the solar 
system, what holds for properly characterized point masses also holds for 
the planets. Another familiar example comes from Rawls (1971). A Theory of 
Justice represents  people in the original position as mutually disinterested.

--- Page 41 ---

28  Chapter 2
Rawls is  under no illusion that this repre sen ta tion is accurate. He recognizes 
that  people are bound to one another by ties of affection of varying degrees 
of strength, length, and resiliency. But, he believes, if po liti cal agents have 
reason to cooperate even  under conditions of mutual disinterest, they  will 
have all the more reason to cooperate when ties of affection are pres ent. If 
what holds for the one case holds for the  others, then it does no harm to 
represent  people as mutually disinterested. That  people are mutually dis -
interested is far from the truth. Conceivably,  every person cares about the 
fates of some other  people. But if Rawls is right, the characterization’s being 
far from the truth does not impede its function in his argument.
The foregoing examples show that in some cognitive contexts we accept 
claims that we do not consider true. But we do not indiscriminately accept 
falsehoods  either. The question then is, what makes a claim acceptable? 
Evidently, to accept a claim is not to take it to be true, but to take it that the 
claim’s divergence from truth, if any, is negligible. As Strevens (2008) puts 
it, the divergence from truth is not a difference maker. The divergence need 
not be small, but what ever its magnitude, it can be safely neglected. We 
accept a contention, I suggest, when we consider it true enough. The suc -
cess of our cognitive endeavors indicates that we are often right to do so. If 
so, a contention is acceptable when its divergence from truth is negligible. 
In that case it is true enough.
As we have seen, contentions that are true enough diverge from truth 
in dif fer ent ways. Some diverge in irrelevant re spects;  others, in relevant 
re spects, but only a  little. Yet  others diverge (maybe a lot), but only rarely. 
Some diverge in cases their users do not care about;  others, at a finer grain 
than their users care about. Some diverge radically, but in ways that are 
informative.
How might the veritist  handle such divergences? One possibility is sim-
ply to stick to his guns. He might insist that only truths are epistemically 
acceptable. So if a scientific account ineliminably deploys models or ide -
alizations that are not true, that account is unacceptable. If he is feeling 
charitable, the veritist might grant that such devices could play a heuristic 
role in the pre sen ta tion or application of the theory. But he would insist 
that for the account to be epistemically acceptable, they must be excisable 
with no loss of cognitive content or epistemic justification. Such a position 
is likely to implausibly discredit much of our best science.10

--- Page 42 ---

Distancing from Truth 29
How much is not clear. As we have seen, veritism can apparently accom-
modate some of the repre sen ta tions I have labeled felicitous falsehoods by 
construing them as approximations. It might, for example, accommodate 
Snell’s law, by restricting the domain to nearly isotropic media, and endors-
ing not
(1) n 1sini = n2sinr
but
(2) approximately n 1sini = n2sinr.
One difficulty with this approach is that scientists seem to use (1) rather 
than (2) in their reasoning. Perhaps the veritist can insist that the ‘approxi-
mately’ operator, although tacit, is always operative.
But not all felicitous falsehoods are even approximately true. Rawls’s 
repre sen ta tion of deliberators in the original position as mutually indif -
ferent is far from the truth. So is the Hardy— Weinberg model, which repre-
sents the re distribution of alleles in the absence of evolutionary pressures. 
It tracks alleles in an infinite population of organisms that mate randomly 
and are not subject to mutation or migration. That the population is infi -
nite counteracts the effects of ge ne tic drift; that mating is random ensures 
that neither physical proximity nor genes that give rise to attractive phe -
notypes have a preferential advantage; that neither mutation nor migration 
takes place ensures that no novelties are introduced into the gene pool. The 
model is no approximation. Populations are not nearly infinite (what ever 
that might mean). Mating is not nearly random. However indiscriminate 
 actual mating be hav ior is, physical proximity is required. In the long run, 
mating only with nearby partners promotes ge ne tic drift. Natu ral se lection 
and ge ne tic drift are ubiquitous. Migration is widespread. Mutation and ran-
dom fluctuations are, in real life, unavoidable. Still, to understand the effects 
of evolution, it is useful to consider what would happen in its absence. By 
devising and deploying an epistemically felicitous falsehood, biologists find 
out. Veritists evidently have to simply deny that accounts that ineliminably 
deploy devices like the Hardy— Weinberg model or the mutually indifferent 
deliberators  behind the veil of ignorance are epistemically acceptable.
Some approximations are accepted simply  because they are the best we 
can currently do. They are temporary expedients, which we hope and per-
haps expect to eventually replace with truths. Such approximations can be

--- Page 43 ---

30  Chapter 2
construed, in Sellars’s (1968) terms, as promissory notes that remain to be 
discharged. The closer we get to the truth, the more of the debt is paid. 
They are, and are known to be, unsatisfactory. But they can be successively 
improved upon to get them closer to the truth.
Not all approximations have this character. Some are preferable to the 
truths they approximate. It is pos si ble to derive a second- order partial dif-
ferential equation that exactly describes fluid flow in a boundary layer. 
Such an equation describes, for example, how air flows directly over an 
airplane wing. The equation, being nonlinear, does not admit of an analytic 
solution. We can formulate the equation, but no one knows how to solve it. 
This is highly incon ve nient. To incorporate the truth into the theory would 
bring a line of inquiry to a halt, saying in effect: ‘ Here’s the equation; it is 
impossible to solve’. Fluid dynamicists prefer a first- order partial differential 
equation that approximates the truth, but admits of an analytical solution 
(Morrison, 1999, 56–60). The solvable equation advances understanding 
by providing a close enough approximation yielding numerical values that 
can serve as evidence for or constraints on  future inquiry. The approxi -
mation then is more fruitful than the truth.  There is no hope that  future 
inquiry  will remedy the situation if, as may be the case, the second- order 
equation cannot be solved numerically, while the first- order equation can.11 
That real ity forces such a choice upon us may be disappointing, but  under 
the circumstances it does not seem intellectually disreputable to accept and 
prefer the tractable first- order equation. A veritist might argue that ac cep tance 
of the first- order approximation is only practical. It is preferable merely 
 because it is more useful. This may be so, but the practice is a cognitive 
one. Its goal is to understand turbulent flow. In cases like this, the practi -
cal and the theoretical inextricably intertwine. The practical value of the 
approximation is that it advances understanding of a domain. A felicitous 
falsehood thus is not always accepted only in default of the truth. Nor is its 
ac cep tance always second best. It may make cognitive contributions that 
the unvarnished truth cannot match.  These contributions seem out of veri-
tism’s reach.
The veritist’s final alternative is to say that the use of epistemic success 
terms like ‘knowledge’ and ‘understanding’ in cases that involve felicitous 
falsehoods is a courtesy usage. Just as we might say, perhaps a  little conde-
scendingly, that a young child has some understanding of photosynthesis 
if she thinks that sunlight is the flower’s food, the veritist might say, a  little

--- Page 44 ---

Distancing from Truth 31
condescendingly, that Kepler had an understanding of planetary motion, 
even though his contention that the Earth’s orbit is elliptical is strictly 
false. Similarly, the veritist might say that a currently promising theory 
that has its share of successes but some outstanding anomalies constitutes 
an understanding of its subject  matter. In so saying, he is in effect taking 
out a lien on the  future. He credits the current theory  because he expects 
 future science to correct its errors and fill its gaps. Arguably, he could say 
the same  thing about a theory that makes currently ineliminable use of 
felicitous falsehoods. He would then be betting that science  will eventu -
ally discover the resources to eliminate them without replacing them with 
other felicitous falsehoods. Fluid dynamics, for example, might find a way 
to  either solve the second- order differential equation that currently cannot 
be solved, or discover a way to exactly characterize and calculate turbulent 
flow with a solvable equation that states the exact truth. The difficulty with 
this stance is that although scientists expect that current models and ideal-
izations  will be refined with the advancement of inquiry in their field, they 
do not expect that science  will outgrow the use of such devices. Rather than 
being seen as temporary crutches, modeling and idealizing are considered 
valuable ways to embody scientific understanding. So even if the Sellarsian 
lien on the  future is a reasonable perspective to adopt about flawed but 
promising factual claims, it does not seem a plausible way to understand 
the epistemic utility of models and idealizations. If con temporary science is 
our guide, they are  here to stay.
Current science is riddled with epistemically felicitous falsehoods. Cur -
rent scientists are disinclined to repudiate them. This leads me to doubt 
that they  will dis appear with the advancement of inquiry. The veritist dis-
agrees. He thinks such devices  will ultimately be eliminated or consigned to 
merely heuristic uses. Crystal balls are notoriously cloudy, so prognosticat-
ing about the  future of science is a risky business. Instead, in what follows 
I  will develop an epistemological position that shows how felicitous false-
hoods function in understanding, what they contribute, and why they are 
epistemically valuable. What follows  will not show that such devices are 
ineliminable. But it  will suggest that their elimination is neither necessary 
nor obviously desirable.
This chapter has raised an impor tant difficulty for epistemology and 
pointed  toward a resolution. That resolution requires holism, nonfactivism, 
and a reconception of the basis of epistemic normativity. In the next several

--- Page 45 ---

32  Chapter 2
chapters I  will show how to satisfy all of  these requirements. Only then  will 
we be in a position to appreciate the way they equip us to account for the 
epistemic functions of felicitous falsehoods.
Although I have focused on examples drawn from natu ral science, I do 
not contend that all understanding reduces to scientific understanding, or 
that the use of epistemically felicitous falsehoods is peculiar to scientific 
understanding. They are, for example, also found in philosophy, history, and 
the social sciences. As  will emerge, I believe that science is epistemically much 
closer to the arts than is standardly believed. My point in initially focusing 
on natu ral science is strategic.  Because science is manifestly epistemically 
estimable, and is self- conscious about its methods and standards, it is often 
a useful place to focus. The requirement that epistemology accommodate 
science is nonnegotiable. If science incorporates felicitous falsehoods into 
its accounts, epistemology needs to explain what they contribute. Neverthe-
less, I  will begin by considering understanding in general, temporarily leav-
ing issues pertaining to felicitous falsehoods in abeyance.

--- Page 46 ---

As the examples sketched in the previous chapter show, the epistemic excel-
lence of mature science is not easily construed as knowledge. To accom -
modate not just science, but disciplinary epistemic success in general, we 
should focus on understanding. I begin to explicate understanding and 
sketch how it differs from knowledge. Following Kvanvig (2003), I distinguish 
between propositional understanding, which is captured in an individual 
proposition, and objectual understanding, which is captured in an account. 
The cognitive competence involved in understanding is generally charac -
terized as grasping. Propositional understanding involves grasping a fact; 
objectual understanding consists of grasping a range of phenomena. This 
seems right. But it is not clear what grasping is. I suggest that to grasp a 
proposition or an account is at least in part to know how to wield it to fur-
ther one’s epistemic ends. To make this out requires a lengthy discussion of 
know- how. That discussion is far from exhaustive. It is structured to high-
light the aspects of know- how that figure in objectual understanding. Dis-
ciplinary understanding, I argue, is best construed as objectual. In the first 
instance we understand a range of phenomena via an overall account; only 
derivatively, drawing on the resources of that account, do we understand 
that or why something is the case. I argue that scientific (objectual) under-
standing is nonfactive. Although it is not indifferent to the facts it concerns, 
an account that accommodates  those facts need not consist exclusively or 
predominantly of truths.
The Limits of Knowledge
Bill thinks that apatosauruses and brontosauruses are distinct. He has good 
reason to think so. But he cannot know that they are distinct  unless in fact 
3 From Knowledge to Understanding

--- Page 47 ---

34  Chapter 3
they are. We do not consider false beliefs to be knowledge, no  matter how 
well founded they may be. Once Bill discovers that, contrary to what he 
believed, the apatosaurus is the same sort of dinosaur as the brontosaurus, 
he rescinds his claim ever to have known that they  were distinct. He may 
say, ‘I thought I knew that they  were distinct, but I was wrong’. He may even 
say, ‘I had it on excellent authority that they  were distinct, but I and my 
authorities  were wrong’. He  will not say, ‘I knew they  were distinct, but I was 
wrong’. The term ‘knowledge’ is factive. An epistemic agent does not know 
that p  unless ‘p’ is true.
Inasmuch as each bit of knowledge is keyed to a par tic u lar fact, knowl-
edge is granular. Even so, it is (close to) impossible to know one  thing at a 
time. Insofar as knowledge requires justification, in order to know that p, an 
agent’s belief that p must be backed by considerations that bear on  whether 
p is the case. It seems that  these considerations must themselves be known; 
other wise even if p is (externally) justified, the agent would not be justified 
in believing that p. She would have no reason to trust her conviction. But 
if she must know the justificatory chain leading to p, an agent  will have to 
know a lot in order to know (much of) anything. 1  There is then a tension 
between the apparent granularity of knowledge and the nongranularity of 
justification. One way to alleviate the tension might be to consign the justi-
fiers to ‘background knowledge’ and ask  whether, together with the empiri-
cal evidence, the ‘background knowledge’ affords sufficient grounds to 
underwrite a par tic u lar claim. This might work for  simple inductive cases, 
or the sort of amassing discrete bits of evidence that one sees in detective 
stories. But prob lems arise when an account figures in the justification for 
a claim. If the background ethological account together with the empirical 
evidence justifies the conclusion that this bit of grooming be hav ior mani-
fests reciprocal altruism and if that conclusion is true, it might seem that 
we are in a position to know it. Unfortunately,  things are not so straight -
forward. Such a connection reveals  whether an account supports a claim, 
but the assumption that the ‘background knowledge’ is genuine knowledge 
cannot be sustained. The justification for many of the claims making up a 
scientific account is reciprocal; they support one another. How they do so 
 will be discussed in the next chapter.  Here the point is simply that system-
atic accounts are not granular in the way that mainstream epistemology 
takes knowledge to be.

--- Page 48 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 35
Another, potentially more promising, strategy is to take holism at its 
word and relax granularity. The atomic sentences that comprise an account 
cannot be separately justified. Even if the focus of attention is a par tic u-
lar claim, evidence always bears on an account as a  whole. Evidence for 
the claim that a given pro cess is adiabatic is evidence for an entire account 
of heat transfer, which is tested along with the claim. Evidence that the 
grooming be hav ior displays reciprocal altruism is evidence for an entire 
account of primate be hav ior, which is tested along with the claim. In princi-
ple, this is epistemologically unproblematic. The contention that knowl -
edge is propositional says nothing about the length of the propositions 
that constitute knowledge. We might accommodate holism by treating an 
account as a conjunction of its component atomic propositions and saying 
that the evidence bears on the truth or falsity of that long conjunction. If 
the conjunction is true, is believed, is justified or reliably produced, and is 
epistemically lucky, it is known.
This may be as good a schema for scientific knowledge as we are likely 
to get. But it sheds  little light on the epistemic standing of science, for its 
requirements are rarely if ever met. In par tic u lar, the truth requirement is 
seldom satisfied. As we have seen, many epistemically estimable accounts 
contain models and idealizations that do not even purport to be true. For 
now, however, this complication  will be set aside. The current difficulty is 
that even the best scientific accounts confront anomalies. They entail con-
sequences that conflict with the evidence. A conjunction is false if any of 
its conjuncts is; so if a scientific account and the evidence that bears on 
it are a conjunction, an anomaly— being a falsifying instance— tells deci -
sively against the account that it bears on. Since a theory that confronts an 
anomaly is false, it does not amount to knowledge.
Perhaps we can evade this predicament. The characterization of an 
account as a conjunction might seem to offer hope of isolating anomalies 
and screening off their effects. 2 All we need to do is identify and expunge 
the troublesome conjuncts. Consider the following conjunction:
(1) (a) Sally is in Chicago & (b) Sam is in New York.
If Sally is in fact in Detroit, (1) is false, even though Sam is in New York. If 
we lack adequate evidence that Sally is in Chicago, (1) is unjustified, even 
though we have ample evidence that Sam is in New York. If our source 
of information about Sally’s whereabouts is suspect, (1) is unreliable, even

--- Page 49 ---

36  Chapter 3
though our source of information about Sam’s location is impeccable. In 
any of  these circumstances, (1) is not something we are in a position to 
know. Still, we can rescind (a), leaving
(b) Sam is in New York,
which is true, justified, and reliably generated. Since neither (a) nor the evi-
dence for (a) lends any support to (b), (b)’s acceptability is not undermined 
by the repudiation of (a). On standard accounts of knowledge, assuming 
that the relation between the truth of (b) and the evidence for (b) is not 
vitiated by epistemic misfortune, we are in a position to know that (b). If the 
components of a scientific account  were related to one another as loosely as 
(a) and (b) are related in (1), we could simply excise the anomalous sentences 
and be left with a justified, reliable truth— something that could be known.
The prob lem is that the components of an account lack the requisite 
in de pen dence. An account is a tightly interwoven tapestry of mutually 
supportive commitments. Simply excising anomalous sentences would leave 
a moth- eaten fabric that would not hang together.  Toward the end of 
the nineteenth  century, physicists devised a variety of increasingly drastic 
expedients to accommodate the perihelion of Mercury. But even at their 
most desperate, they did not suggest simply inserting an exception into 
the theory. Although ‘All planets except Mercury have regular orbits’ is evi-
dently true, justified, reliably generated, and believed, it pulls so strongly 
against the ideal of systematicity that scientists never considered incorpo -
rating it into astronomy. Temporarily bracketing anomalies can be a good 
investigative tactic, but simply dismissing them as exceptions that need 
not be accommodated is not. The reason is not merely aesthetic. An anom-
aly might be just a pesky irritation that stems from undetected but ulti -
mately insignificant interference, but it might also, like the perihelion of 
Mercury, be symptomatic of a subtle but significant misunderstanding of 
the phenomena. Science would lose potentially valuable information if it 
dismissed anomalies as exceptions that it could simply disregard.  There is 
then no hope of excising anomalous sentences without undermining the 
epistemic support for the rest of the account. The account rather than the 
individual sentence or proposition is the unit we need to focus on.
 These points are familiar and uncontroversial, but their epistemologi -
cal consequences are worth noting. An account can be construed as a con-
junction of the sentences that appear in it. But science does not consist 
of knowledge expressed by such conjunctions. For the conjunction of the

--- Page 50 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 37
sentences that constitute an epistemically estimable scientific account is 
almost surely false. The unavailability of sentence- by- sentence verification 
or justification discredits the idea that science separately delivers knowl -
edge of each component atomic sentence. The hopelessness of selectively 
deleting the falsehoods in, and the false implications of, an account under-
mines the plausibility of claiming that scientific knowledge is what remains 
when an account’s falsehoods have been expunged. Knowledge requires 
truth. And  there seems to be no feasible way to get the scientific accounts 
we admire to come out true. So knowledge is not the cognitive condition 
that good science standardly engenders.
Refocusing Epistemology’s Lens
To accommodate science, I suggest, epistemology should shift its focus from 
knowledge to understanding. In speaking of understanding, we should dis-
tinguish between the objects of understanding and the vehicles of under -
standing (see Greco, 2014). The vehicles of understanding are what ever 
embody the understanding— perhaps sentences, propositions, accounts, 
nonpropositional repre sen ta tions, or dispositions. An object of understand-
ing is what ever the understanding is about. Objects of understanding may 
be concrete or abstract. An epistemic agent can understand linear algebra 
as well as particle physics. She can understand why 
2 is irrational as well 
as why the noble gases are inert. Nor, I maintain, need the objects of under-
standing be articulable. A commuter can understand the New York subway 
system and an avid fan can understand the Celtics’ defensive strategy with-
out being able to express that understanding in words or endorse a descrip-
tion of the phenomena expressed in the language that she speaks.
A critical question is  whether ‘understanding’, like ‘knowledge’, is factive. 
If it is, then the shift from knowledge to understanding may avail us  little. 
Pretty plainly, understanding somehow answers to facts. The question is 
how it does so. If ‘understanding’ is factive, all or most of the propositional 
commitments that comprise a genuine understanding are true. And the 
epistemic status of nonpropositional ele ments is instrumental and depen-
dent on their role in underwriting the epistemic standing of  those truths. 
Many epistemologists consider understanding factive (see Kvanvig, 2003; 
Grimm, 2006). But, I  will argue, a factive conception is too restrictive. It 
does not reflect our practices in ascribing understanding and it forces us

--- Page 51 ---

38  Chapter 3
to deny that much con temporary science embodies an understanding of 
the phenomena it bears on. This is too high a price to pay. A more gener -
ous, flexible conception of understanding accommodates the deliverances 
of science, reflects our practices, and shows a sufficient, but not slavish, 
sensitivity to the facts it bears on.
We cannot  settle the question by inspecting ordinary usage, as we did 
with ‘knowledge’; for the term ‘understanding’ is used in a variety of ways, 
none of which seems to dominate the rest. Some are irrelevant to episte -
mology;  others pull in dif fer ent directions. ‘I understand’ can hedge an 
assertion or attenuate its force. ‘I understand that you are angry with me’ 
may be a mild overture that gives you space to politely demur. ‘Not angry, 
but disappointed’, you might reply. This is a moderating use. Or I might 
say, ‘I understand that the committee has the authority to decide’ when 
I am not sure that it has the authority, but have reason to think so.  Here 
‘I understand’ indicates a backing away from a full- fledged claim to epis -
temic entitlement. This is hedging.  These are not the sorts of usages that 
concern us  here. Our concern is with cases in which understanding is a sort 
of epistemic success. I  shall use the term ‘understanding’ as a success term 
for having an epistemically suitable grasp of or take on a topic. Just what 
constitutes a suitable grasp or take remains to be seen.  Here the point is 
that in such cases the understander has a claim to epistemic entitlement. 3 
The questions, then, are what is the  bearer of that entitlement and what 
is the claim to it? I contend that a nonfactive explication of ‘understanding’ 
yields a concept that better suits epistemology’s purposes than a factive 
one does.
I recognize the existence of factive uses of the term ‘understanding’, just 
as I recognize the existence of hedging and moderating uses. Nor do I deny 
that epistemology could incorporate a factive conception of understand -
ing. My contention is that a factive conception cannot do justice to the 
cognitive contributions of science and that a more flexible conception can. 
But understanding is not restricted to science, so I begin with an historical 
example:
In 490 BCE the Athenian army confronted the invading Persians on the plain of 
Marathon. The Persians vastly outnumbered the Greeks. Nevertheless, the Athenian 
commander, Miltiades, deci ded to attack. Contrary to standard military practice, he 
arrayed his forces in a line with a weak center and strong flanks. The Persians

--- Page 52 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 39
readily repulsed the center of the line. When the Persians pursued the retreating 
Greeks, the flanks moved in and surrounded the Persian army, attacking them from 
all sides. They thereby won the  Battle of Marathon. (paraphrased from Herodotus, 
1985)
The first order of business is to identify the primary object of understand -
ing. Two obvious candidates pres ent themselves: individual facts and more 
comprehensive domains. The former is propositional understanding; the lat-
ter objectual understanding (Kvanvig, 2003). One might doubt that the two 
are distinct. Perhaps the body of information that constitutes an objectual 
understanding of a topic is a single long conjunctive proposition. Then 
objectual understanding reduces to propositional understanding. Alterna -
tively, perhaps the understanding of an individual  matter of fact qualifies as 
understanding only  because it is backed by a complex justificatory network. 
Then the agent’s grasp of the network is implicated in her understanding 
of p.
The basic unit of propositional understanding is the individual sentence 
or proposition. One possibility is that its form is:
x understands that p is so.
For example,
Jack understands that Athens defeated Persia in the  Battle of Marathon.
If this is correct, the difference between knowledge and understanding 
seems slight. To understand that Athens won the  battle, Jack would pre -
sumably require a nonfortuitously justified true belief to that effect. Since 
he learned it from Herodotus, and Herodotus is a good source of such infor-
mation, most epistemologists would prob ably grant that he knows it. If this 
is all it takes to understand that Athens won the  battle, then understanding 
is factive,  because knowledge is.
We might be disinclined to think that Jack understands that Athens won 
if all he can do to support his belief is point to his source. If he did not read 
Herodotus’s full account of the  battle or did not comprehend or register the 
information it provides, he has no idea why Athens won. He merely knows 
that Athens won. It may be preferable, then, to take understanding to be a

--- Page 53 ---

40  Chapter 3
 matter of knowing why, rather than merely knowing that. In that case, the 
fundamental schema is:
x understands why p is so.
Many hold that to understand why is to be in a position to explain (see 
Strevens, 2008; Grimm, 2006). Jill understands why Athens was victorious 
 because she can explain the victory. On this sort of account, to understand 
a fact is dif fer ent from merely knowing that fact. But it is still evidently a 
form of knowledge— knowledge why p is so. According to Lipton, “Under-
standing is not some sort of super- knowledge, but simply more knowledge: 
knowledge of  causes” (2004, 30). This is too narrow. Knowledge of  causes 
might account for understanding that the moon  causes the tides, or that 
Athens won the  battle of Marathon, but it cannot account for understand-
ing that 
2 is irrational. Nonetheless, it may be that even in mathe matics 
understanding is knowing why. This suggests that advocates of a know -
ing why account would do better to explicate propositional understand -
ing in terms of knowledge of dependencies, and let knowledge of  causes 
be a special case (see Greco, 2014; Strevens, 2010; Grimm, 2014). This is 
more plausible. Understanding is not just knowledge, but a par tic u lar sort 
of knowledge. Since knowledge of dependencies, like all knowledge, is fac-
tive, understanding is too.
Perhaps the demand for knowledge of dependencies is too strong. Under-
standing might be factive even if it is not knowledge. Factivity requires 
only that the proposition or account that embodies an understanding be 
true, not that it be known. In view of the plethora of threats to knowledge, 
factivity may be the best we can hope for. The worry comes from Gettier 
cases. Where  there is a misalignment between truth- makers and justifiers, 
an agent can have a justified true belief that does not amount to knowl -
edge. Following Pritchard (2010), let us say that a belief is environmentally 
unlucky if it is formed or sustained in an epistemically hostile environ -
ment. Environmental misfortune defeats knowledge since a belief formed 
in such an environment could too easily have been false. The question is 
 whether such misfortune undermines understanding.
Pritchard says ‘no’. Elaborating on an example developed by Brogaard 
(2005), he sketches the following scenario: Suppose Fred arrives home to 
find his  house in flames. He asks someone who appears to be a fire marshal

--- Page 54 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 41
why the  house is on fire. She reports that the fire was caused by faulty wir-
ing. Given her expertise, we would ordinarily conclude that Fred knows on 
the basis of her testimony that faulty wiring caused the fire. But suppose 
that  there are several  people milling around, all dressed as fire marshals. En 
route to a costume party, they stopped to look at the blaze. If it is just by 
luck that Fred asked the  actual fire marshal rather than one of the costumed 
partygoers, he does not know. He could too easily have chosen an unreli -
able in for mant. Nevertheless, Pritchard maintains, Fred understands why 
the  house is on fire, since he has accurate information that coheres with 
his relevant background beliefs. “The agent  . . . has all the true beliefs 
required for understanding why his  house burned down, and also acquired 
this understanding in the right fashion. It is thus hard to see why the mere 
presence of epistemic luck should deprive the agent of understanding” 
(2010, 78–79). I do not find this case compelling. But if it is, or if a more 
compelling case could be devised, then understanding is not knowledge, 
for one can have propositional understanding where the anti- luck condi -
tion on knowledge is  violated.
Some (Kvanvig, 2003; Grimm, 2014; Hills, 2015) argue that understand-
ing is keyed to explanation. To propositionally understand a fact is to grasp 
an explanation of that fact. In mathe matics the explanation is not causal; 
in empirical disciplines it is. If an agent can provide a suitable explanation 
of a fact, we are inclined to credit her with understanding that fact. The 
challenge comes where the agent cannot provide or comprehend an expla-
nation. Does this completely disqualify her from understanding a given 
fact?
Strevens (2008, 2010) takes the basic unit of understanding to be the 
proposition. On his picture, Sara understands why p, only if she can explain 
p or grasp an explanation of p, where the explanation is a derivation from 
more fundamental truths that ground p. If p is a  matter of empirical fact, 
the explanation is causal. It includes all and only causal  factors that make a 
difference to  whether p obtains. If p is a fundamental truth (such as a funda-
mental law of nature), then the explanation why that figures in understand-
ing it is an explanation of what derivative or higher- order facts p is a cause 
of. According to Strevens, then, all understanding of the material world is 
causal. To understand the Athenian victory is to be able to explain or com-
prehend an explanation of how it arose from more basic truths. Other sorts 
of understanding— mathematical, ethical, aesthetic— are still grounded in

--- Page 55 ---

42  Chapter 3
explanations that reflect real, metaphysical de pen dency relations, but the 
explanations are not causal (Strevens, 2010).
 There are a number of worries about this picture. Not all understand -
ing involves explanation or grounding of any sort. A savvy commuter who 
understands the New York City subway system may have no explanation 
of the regularities she observes. Her understanding is exhibited in her fa cil-
i ty in negotiating the subway system, in accommodating her travel to its 
vicissitudes. She knows, for example, that the number 2 train is generally 
faster than the number 3, but not when it rains. She knows where to stand 
on the 14th Street platform to maximize her prospects of getting a seat. She 
readily accommodates herself to delays and disruptions, having a feel for 
when it makes sense to wait  things out and when it is better to switch to a 
dif fer ent line, and so forth. Such understanding is, or is akin to, know- how. 
I  will have more to say about that below.
Nor is it obvious that all scientific understanding is causal. Ecol ogy and 
population biology, for example, study patterns of population growth and 
diminution. Animal populations are known to regulate their own size. But 
the mechanisms by which populations self- regulate are not known. Still, it 
seems, even if they cannot fully explain how it is done, ecological models 
of population size embody an understanding of the dynamics of popula -
tion regulation (Sarkar, 2014).
Mathe matics poses an even greater difficulty. According to Strevens, “If 
mathematical explanation is pos si ble at all,  there must be a dependence 
relation whereby some mathematical facts depend in some sense on other 
mathematical facts. It is in virtue of this dependence relation that some 
mathematical facts are fundamental and  others should be understood as 
holding in virtue of the fundamental facts”; he goes on to say, “A proof in 
mathe matics may or may not be explanatory. In order to be explanatory, 
the entailment structure of the proof must mirror the relevant mathemat -
ical dependencies” (2010, 14–15). What ever the merits of this as a view of 
mathematical explanation, mathematical understanding seems not so tightly 
tied to metaphysical grounds. Any axiomatized branch of mathe matics 
can be reaxiomatized.  Under dif fer ent axiomatizations, dif fer ent pat -
terns emerge. All contribute to mathematical understanding in that each 
reveals networks of mathematical relations that  others obscure. It seems 
tendentious to insist that someone who grasped a valid proof of a theo -
rem had no understanding of the subject  because the theorem in question

--- Page 56 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 43
derived from an axiomatization that did not mirror the right dependence 
relations.
Questions arise even with re spect to the understanding of ordinary 
 matters of fact. Must the ele ments of the grounding explanation be in de-
pen dently understood? Strevens (2008) recognizes that the ultimate laws 
of nature cannot be explained in terms of anything more basic. In under -
standing them, we understand how they underwrite less basic claims. This is 
not my worry. Rather, I am concerned about the epistemic relation between 
explanandum and explanans. If the explanandum must be epistemically 
prior to the explanans, it is  going to be difficult to understand the Athe -
nian victory, since the ele ments of the explanation— the details about the 
deployment of forces and the effectiveness of the strategy— seem hardly 
more secure than what they are adduced to explain.4 Since ultimately, most 
of the information that figures in the explanation comes from Herodotus, 
if the explanation must be known, although Jill can explain the victory, she 
seems to be not much better off epistemically than Jack.
If the ele ments of the explanans need not be known,  there is something 
potentially misleading about claiming that to understand why p is to be 
able to explain it or comprehend an explanation of it. Such a contention 
suggests that the explanans is known in de pen dently of, and is epistemically 
prior to, the explanandum. What we actually see is something more holistic, 
with the understanding embodying not only the fact to be explained but 
also the ele ments of the explanation and what ever supports them. Herodo-
tus’s  whole account of the  battle then stands or falls together. In that case, 
however, it appears that the basic schema for understanding is
x understands φ
where φ is a topic, discipline, or subject  matter. This is objectual. Jill, in the 
first instance, understands the  Battle of Marathon, and thereby derivatively 
understands and can explain or comprehend an explanation of par tic u lar 
 matters of fact such as the course of the  battle, the strategies and tactics of 
the two armies, and the history of relations between Athens and Persia. The 
epistemological standing of ‘Athens defeated Persia in the  battle of Mara-
thon’ then implicates a more comprehensive understanding of the history 
of Greece or of Persia or of warfare. I do not deny that the sort of under -
standing why that figures in explanation is real. I simply doubt that it is

--- Page 57 ---

44  Chapter 3
 either as comprehensive or as fundamental as its adherents think. I believe 
that the understanding of a par tic u lar  matter of fact derives from the under-
standing of a suitably unified, integrated, tenable body of information that 
bears on that fact. Objectual understanding, I take it, is the core conception 
of understanding. It affords a basis for distinguishing between understand-
ing a topic and knowing par tic u lar truths about it.
Objectual Understanding
At a first approximation, an understanding is an epistemic commitment to a 
comprehensive, systematically linked body of information that is grounded 
in fact, is duly responsive to reasons or evidence, and enables nontrivial 
inference, argument, and perhaps action regarding the topic the informa -
tion pertains to. This rough approximation is far from a full explication. 
But we can augment it with accepted verdicts about what we take to be clear 
cases. Astronomy affords an understanding of the motions of celestial bod-
ies and their effects; astrology does not. Chemistry affords an understand -
ing of the constitution of  matter; alchemy does not. Biology affords an 
understanding of the origin of species; ‘intelligent design’ does not. An ade-
quate epistemology should, at least for the most part, re spect such verdicts.
Although one mark of understanding on this conception is an ability to 
explain or comprehend an explanation, no such ability is required. Gareth 
is incapable of explaining the apparent retrograde motion of the outer 
planets. Nor can he comprehend a verbal description of the phenomenon. 
But he can demonstrate what happens using an orrery (Lipton, 2009). If his 
demonstration is effective, and if he can display enough cognitive dexter -
ity in accommodating dif fer ent scenarios to show that his demonstration 
is not a fluke, it is hard to deny that he understands the phenomenon. 
Pat understands the New York subway system in that she can use it to get 
around the city efficiently, being aware of such  matters as which lines are 
fastest at dif fer ent times of day, how foul weather affects dif fer ent subway 
lines, which transfer points are likely to be uncrowded, and so forth. She 
may have no idea how to explain such  matters, no appreciation of a trans-
portation engineer’s explanation of  these  matters, and no reason to think 
they need explaining. Her understanding is exhibited in the adroitness of 
her subway- riding be hav ior and in the advice she gives to other riders, not 
in any capacity to explain. A physician understands the course of a disease,

--- Page 58 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 45
being aware of the sequence of signs and symptoms, the duration of the 
contagious phase, the potential complications, and the ranges of respon -
siveness to treatment, even if neither she nor anyone  else can explain why 
the disease pres ents in the way it does.
 Whether this sort of understanding is factive is the question I need to 
address. Understanding on my view is a (perhaps tacit) endorsement of a 
fairly comprehensive, interconnected constellation of cognitive commit -
ments. The understanding encapsulated in individual propositions derives 
from an understanding of larger bodies of information that include  those 
propositions. In understanding the Athenian victory in the  Battle of Mara-
thon, Jill grasps how the proposition stating the fact that Athens won fits 
into, contributes to, is justified by reference to, and figures in the justifica-
tion of a more comprehensive understanding that embeds it.
Obviously, not just any comprehensive, mutually supportive set of cog-
nitive commitments  will do. A coherent body of manifestly unfounded 
contentions does not constitute an understanding of the phenomena they 
purportedly bear on. Even if it is coherent, astrology affords no understand-
ing of the cosmic order. The issue that divides factivists and nonfactivists is 
not  whether understanding must answer to the facts, but how it must do 
so. Following Plato (1997), let us call the required connection between a 
comprehensive, coherent account and the facts it bears on an understand-
ing’s tether. Even if astrology offers a comprehensive, internally coherent 
account of the cosmos, it yields no understanding  because it lacks a suitable 
tether.
To be sure, we sometimes say  things like ‘Joe understands astrology’, 
or ‘Paul understands my thol ogy’, or ‘Michael understands rationalism’, 
meaning only that the epistemic agent knows his way around the field. He 
knows how its contentions hang together, and is  adept at reasoning within 
the framework that they constitute. In such cases, the epistemic agent’s 
commitments are tethered to the doctrine or account, not to the phenom-
ena that doctrine or account purports to be about. One can understand 
an account regardless of its fidelity or infidelity to the phenomena it con -
cerns. Such an understanding takes an account— astrology, rationalism, or 
whatever—to be its object rather than the phenomena the account purport-
edly pertains to.  There is nothing epistemically special about this sort of 
understanding. It is of a piece with understanding a natu ral phenomenon 
or a historical episode or a transportation system. Still, it is worth noting

--- Page 59 ---

46  Chapter 3
that it is pos si ble for an account to be the object of understanding even 
if, owing to its untenability, it affords no understanding of its purported 
subject  matter.
Understanding the Athenian victory involves more than knowing the 
vari ous truths that belong to a suitably tethered comprehensive, coherent 
account of the  matter. The understander must also grasp how the vari ous 
truths relate to each other and to other ele ments of the account. Ceteris 
paribus, she should also be both willing and able (and perhaps be aware 
that she is willing and able) to use that information—to profess it, to rea -
son with it, to apply it, perhaps to use it as a source of working hypotheses 
about related  matters when her ends are cognitive.5 Someone who knows 
geometry, for example, knows all the axioms, all the major theorems and 
their derivations. You can acquire this knowledge by rote. But someone 
who understands geometry can reason geometrically about new prob lems, 
apply geometrical insights in dif fer ent areas, assess the limits of geometri-
cal reasoning for the task at hand, and so forth. Understanding a historical 
event like the Athenian victory is not exactly like understanding geom -
etry, since the applications and extensions are more tentative, the range to 
which insights can reasonably be applied is more restricted, the evidence 
for a successful application is empirical (and may be hard to come by), and 
so on. But in both cases understanding involves an adeptness in using the 
information one has, not merely an appreciation that  things are so. Evi -
dently, in addition to apprehending connections, an understander needs 
the ability to use the information at his disposal.
Know- How
Understanding is widely held to be a  matter of grasping. The difficulty is to 
spell out in nonmeta phorical terms what grasping is. I suggest that an impor-
tant ele ment of grasping is knowing how to exploit the information or 
insight one’s understanding provides. Someone who understands a propo-
sition knows how to wield it to further her cognitive (and perhaps practical) 
ends. Someone who understands a topic knows how to use the epistemic 
resources her take on that topic affords. To make this out I need to take a 
detour to consider the nature of know- how.
Ryle (1949/2009) contends that knowing how is entirely a  matter of hab-
its and dispositions. To know how to  ride a bicycle, he believes, is just to be

--- Page 60 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 47
disposed to behave (or to be in the habit of behaving) in certain ways while 
astride a bicycle. Obviously knowing how to  ride a bicycle does not consist 
in a disposition to engage in a single specific be hav ior. Knowing how to 
 ride a bicycle is not like a propensity to dissolve in  water or to shatter when 
struck. Ryle construes knowing how to do something as a multitrack dis -
position, “consisting of more or less dissimilar exercises” (1949/2009, 56). 
Knowing how, he believes, is a propensity to perform any of a variety of 
systematically linked but distinct acts in a range of diverse but not wholly 
unanticipated circumstances. Since circumstances vary, sensitivity to cir -
cumstances gives rise to a cluster of available responses.
A standard criticism is that Ryle’s theory is excessively behaviorist. 
He explicates virtually  every  mental predicate as a disposition to overtly 
behave somehow or other (Carr, 1979). But we need not accept Ryle’s entire 
theory of mind to accept (or adapt) his explication of know- how. Nor 
need we hold that all the habits and dispositions involved in knowing 
how to do something are habits and dispositions to overt be hav ior. A dis-
positional account can recognize that knowing how often involves dispo -
sitions not only to behave, but also to think, notice, infer, and/or feel; to 
ignore, marginalize, emphasize, and/or find salient. To construe knowing 
how dispositionally is to characterize it in terms of propensities, or readi -
nesses, or reluctances to do vari ous  things in vari ous circumstances. It may 
involve propensities to think certain  things, to represent  things mentally 
in certain ways, to feel certain emotions, and to refrain from thinking, rep-
resenting, or feeling  others. No commitment to behaviorism is required 
for a dispositional account of know- how. Indeed, the knowing how that 
figures in epistemic understanding is largely if not completely  mental. It 
is a disposition to reason well about a given topic in a range of relevant 
circumstances.
 Whether or not Ryle is correct to identify knowing how to do something 
with a multitrack disposition, know- how clearly involves multitrack habits 
and dispositions. A person does not know how to  ride a bicycle  unless she 
is disposed to peddle, steer, and maintain her balance on a bike. And in 
dif fer ent circumstances (when the surface is slippery, in traffic, on steep 
hills, over rough terrain,  etc.) dif fer ent fine- grained be hav iors are required 
to peddle, steer, keep one’s balance, and so forth. A person does not know 
how to recognize ad hominem arguments  unless she is disposed to spot the 
fallacy in a variety of rhetorical guises.

--- Page 61 ---

48  Chapter 3
Knowing how to φ does not require reliably φ- ing. In basketball, even 
the best outside shooters make fewer than half of the three- point shots 
they attempt.6 That they even come close to 50  percent is a tribute to their 
know- how. A recently para lyzed pianist still knows how to play the Moon-
light Sonata even though she can no longer display her know- how. An emer-
gency medical technician knows how to perform CPR even though she is 
never called upon to do so.  These caveats are all compatible with a Rylean 
position.
But knowing how is not a mere multitrack disposition. Knowing how 
is an achievement. It involves a capacity to do something well, or rightly, 
or correctly. An adequate explication should do justice to this normative 
character. Some habits are bad; some are neutral; some are good. Some dis-
positions are benign; some are beneficial; some lead us astray. If someone 
who takes himself to be serious about tennis is complacent about habitually 
stepping on the base line while serving, he evidently does not know how 
to serve. If he is unconcerned about or even unaware of his habit of wiping 
his brow before serving, it makes no difference. That habit is irrelevant to 
 whether he knows how to serve. If he is indifferent to his propensity to hit 
the ball into the net, he does not know how to serve. On the other hand, 
if he reliably serves into the diagonally opposite ser vice box, rarely double 
faults, occasionally aces, and recognizes the value of  doing so, he knows 
how to serve. What is missing from Ryle’s account is the normative ele-
ment. But what sort of normativity is at issue  here?
Abel (2012) characterizes knowing how as rule- following: actions take 
place within practices, and the rules of the practices supply the norms that 
govern the actions  those practices embed. Whereas bad habits and dis -
positions are propensities to flout relevant rules, and neutral habits and 
dispositions are uninfluenced by the rules, knowing how consists in a 
propensity to follow the rules. If Jim knows how to play chess, his chess- 
playing be hav ior typically follows the rules of chess. If Jane knows how to 
play tennis, her tennis- playing be hav ior typically follows the rules of ten-
nis. This seems almost trivial. But it raises a number of questions.
One is  whether all knowing how is a  matter of following the rules of 
a practice. Games like tennis and chess are plainly rule- governed. So are 
practices like standing in line and paying one’s taxes. Participants have a 
pretty good idea what the rules are and what it is to follow them. But not all 
knowing how is keyed to the norms of a practice. Consider knowing how

--- Page 62 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 49
to swim (by which I mean no more than to propel oneself through deep 
 water so as not to drown). Dogs can swim. They do not follow the rules of 
a practice. Why should we think that our basic ability to propel ourselves 
through  water is dif fer ent from a dog’s? If a child learned to swim by mim-
icking the motions of her dog, would we say that she did not know how 
to swim? Or consider Abel’s example of tying a necktie. Suppose someone 
regularly engages in a variety of deviant contortions that reliably result in 
a perfect Windsor knot. Should we say that he does not know how to tie 
the necktie simply  because he fails to follow the rules for necktie tying that 
are canonical in his society? Or should we say, ‘If it works, it works’? Some 
know- how appears straightforwardly consequentialist. The standard for dis-
playing it seems to be no more than reliably producing the desired result. 
In such cases the end justifies the means. Beyond the rules that govern 
all actions within a given practice (such as ‘ Don’t kill anyone while  doing 
it’), the rationale for the be hav ior that constitutes a straightforwardly con-
sequentialist action seems to be justified by the ends it seeks to promote, 
not by rules of the practices (if any) it belongs to. It is not obvious, then, 
that knowing how to perform straightforwardly consequentialist actions is 
properly explicated as rule- following.
Still, much know- how seems to be a  matter of following the rules of a 
practice. And it is plausible that the know- how required for epistemic ac cep-
tance is practice based. So let us consider such cases.
What is it to follow a rule? A plausible answer is that to follow a rule 
is to intentionally regulate one’s be hav ior by reference to the rule. The 
novice chess player mutters to herself, ‘The bishop moves diagonally’, 
then moves her bishop along a diagonal. As a general account, this  will not 
do. First, it apparently sets off an infinite regress. Since language is itself a 
rule- governed practice, the novice would have to invoke rules for interpret-
ing her muttering, and rules for interpreting  those rules, and so forth. We 
cannot do this in def initely. Nor can we plausibly maintain that  there is a 
self- interpreting level of discourse where the regress ends. Second, it is no 
accident that my example concerns what a novice chess player might do. An 
experienced player— someone who knows how to play chess— does no such 
 thing. In Wittgenstein’s (1953, §219) terms, she acts blindly. Although she 
may deliberate about strategy and tactics, she has so internalized the rules 
governing ways the vari ous pieces can move that they have become second 
nature to her. For her, to be a chess bishop is to be able to move only along a

--- Page 63 ---

50  Chapter 3
diagonal. Once she recognizes a chess piece as a bishop, how it can move is 
settled. No inference need be drawn, no rules consulted. The capacity to act 
blindly while being subject to norms requires explanation.
If we act blindly in exercising know- how, what role do the norms play? 
We evidently do not consult them or intentionally regulate our be hav ior 
by reference to them. Once we know how to do something,  doing it in 
appropriate circumstances is second nature to us. It might seem then that 
knowing how is simply a  matter of automatically, unthinkingly behaving 
in accord with the norms of a practice.
This  will not do. Knowing how is sensitive to why we automatically, 
unthinkingly behave as we do. Consider the following case: Except in New 
York City,  drivers in the United States are permitted to turn right at a red 
light  unless a sign saying ‘No Turn on Red’ is posted at the intersection. In 
New York City, right turns on red are never permitted.  Drivers from out of 
town tend to be unaware that New York is an exception to the general rule. 
Suppose Meg, a denizen of a small town in Kansas, is driving in New York. 
Unsurprisingly, she finds the experience harrowing. She stops at  every red 
light, not  because she is aware of or sensitive to the law, but  because she 
considers New York  drivers and pedestrians reckless and wildly unpredict-
able. She deems it safer to proceed only when the light is green. She acts in 
accord with the law, but not on account of it. The regularity in her be hav-
ior is not an instance of following the traffic law. Although it may be an 
instance of knowing how to drive safely, it is not an instance of knowing 
how to obey New York traffic laws. Acting in accord with the law is not the 
same as acting on account of the law (see Kant, 1981). And only acting on 
account of the law qualifies as knowing how.
Virtue
Again we face the tension: On the one hand, knowing how to follow the 
rules of a practice seems to require us to be cognizant of  those rules; on 
the other, we act blindly. How is it pos si ble to do both?  Here it pays to 
turn to Aristotle. The virtuous person, Aristotle says, does the right  thing, 
in the right way, at the right time, for the right reason; and she does so 
from a firm and stable character (Aristotle, 1985, 1105a30). But she does 
not, and need not, deliberate about what to do. She need not even be con-
scious or expressly aware of why she does what she does. For being virtuous,

--- Page 64 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 51
she has internalized the rules.  Doing the right  thing in the right way, at 
the right time, for the right reason has become second nature to her. Aris -
totle (1985, 1103b) likens virtues to crafts. Anything that can be done can 
be done well or badly. And to do something well— not accidentally, but as 
a result of a stable, acquired disposition—is to do it with a trait that is, or is 
at least analogous to, a virtue. A good harp player knows how to play the 
harp and normally displays that know- how when playing the harp; a good 
builder knows how to build well and normally displays that know- how 
when building.
I suggest that, being sensitive to norms, agents who follow rules blindly 
exhibit something akin to Aristotelian virtues. Although Aristotle restricts 
the term ‘virtue’ to characteristics that make the actions of certain agents 
morally or intellectually good, I  shall use it in a broader sense. Virtues are 
what make the actions of certain agents ( those who standardly do the right 
 things in the right way at the right time for the right reasons) good of their 
kind. The virtues integral to a practice are vari ous, and some are  matters of 
degree. The propensity to follow the rules of chess at all is a real but mini -
mal virtue in a chess player. The propensity to devise and execute compli -
cated strategies effectively is a greater chess- playing virtue, for it makes one 
a better chess player.
What are rules for the novice transmute into virtues when they are 
internalized so that they automatically, unthinkingly guide practice. The 
attractive ele ment in Ryle’s account of multitrack dispositions is that it 
accommodates sensitivity to circumstances. What Abel and Aristotle add is 
that the sensitivity in question is not just to the physical, material, or so cio-
log i cal circumstances, but also to the normative circumstances.  Human 
be hav ior is circumscribed by norms. Being duly sensitive to circumstances 
involves being sensitive to the norms of the practices one takes part in. 
Such sensitivity is a part of knowing how to participate in  those practices, 
for the norms govern what may be done, what must be done, and what 
must not be done within the practice. If this sensitivity has become second 
nature, we need not deliberate, and may not be able to articulate the norms 
that constrain and guide us. Still, our be hav ior is responsive to  those norms.
Dispositions have a counterfactual dimension. To ascribe a disposition 
is to indicate something not only about what does happen, but also about 
what would happen had circumstances been dif fer ent. The glass that never 
is struck and never breaks nonetheless has the disposition of brittleness

--- Page 65 ---

52  Chapter 3
if it would break if it  were struck. Similarly, I suggest, for dispositions that 
involve norms. Someone who has internalized the rules of the road auto -
matically and unthinkingly follows them. She does the right  thing. But 
given that her be hav ior is automatic, what makes it the case that she does it 
for the right reason? The answer depends on what counterfactuals are true 
of her. Meg is not only ignorant of the law pertaining to right turns in New 
York, she is also completely indifferent to it. She would not turn right on 
red in New York no  matter what the law allowed. Although Mark, like Meg, 
stops at  every red light as he drives in the city, he would often turn right on 
red if the law allowed. His driving be hav ior is constrained by the law in a 
way that hers is not. His propensity to modulate driving to the local laws 
is evidence that he knows how to drive in New York. His disposition is, as 
hers is not, sensitive to the normative structure of the New York City traf -
fic laws. Displaying that sensitivity constitutes acting for the right reason.
Internalizing the norms of a practice does not just engender a disposi -
tion to behave, but a normative disposition— a disposition to hold one -
self accountable. Someone who has internalized the norms of a practice 
considers herself subject to criticism if she violates  those norms. She may 
flinch, or blush, or correct herself, or glance furtively around to see if any-
one noticed. She may resolve to do better next time. She may also consider 
herself entitled to disapprove of, criticize, or correct other participants in 
the practice who violate its norms, and perhaps to praise or admire  those 
who observe the norms.
The norms that concern us are epistemic norms, norms that bear on 
thinking or reasoning or arguing well. A fluent speaker of a language typ -
ically follows its grammatical rules automatically. She may be unable to 
articulate the rules she follows. She may even harbor doubts about the cor-
rectness of the rules a knowledgeable grammarian proposes. When asked 
what is wrong with a par tic u lar construction, she might have nothing 
more helpful to say than that it sounds funny. This is surely an instance 
of following the rules blindly. But a fluent speaker is not a flawless speaker. 
Occasionally she says something odd. Some odd utterances are simply 
unexpected. In a discussion of reverberations, Maude says, ‘A duck’s quack 
does not echo’. Although her claim is surprising,  there is nothing untoward 
about her utterance. Not considering it problematic, she is not embarrassed 
about having uttered it and is not inclined to correct it. Nor are other speak-
ers of the language apt to take her to task. Other utterances are factually

--- Page 66 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 53
incorrect.  These may go uncorrected  because the speaker is unaware of the 
error. If she realizes her error, she is likely to rescind or correct her claim. 
But to become aware, she needs  either to acquire new information or to be 
reminded about information she already has. Then she admits (at least to 
herself), ‘I was wrong to say that Peoria is in Indiana; it is in Illinois’. Her 
correction has a dif fer ent semantic content from her original claim. Yet 
other utterances are grammatically flawed.  Here, the error may be obvious 
to the speaker as soon as the words leave her mouth. Perhaps she says, ‘The 
data demonstrates that the ice caps are melting’. She immediately recog -
nizes that ‘data’ is a plural noun and requires a plural verb. The correction 
she makes is to simply change the verb form. The substantive semantic 
content of the claim remains the same. If she fails to recognize her error, 
other speakers— even  those who know nothing about what the data are or 
show— can correct her  mistake. The recognition of a need for correction 
shows that the agent takes herself to be answerable to a norm. The kind of 
correction she makes indicates what norm she takes herself to be account -
able to.
An  adept reasoner does much the same  thing. She constructs sound argu-
ments, draws on relevant evidence, holds herself responsible for flaws in 
her reasoning. The corrections she makes or accepts, as well as the princi ples 
she adduces, are indications of the norms she takes herself to be answer -
able to.
What may be articulable as the rules and conventions that, from the 
outside, constitute an agent’s rule- following be hav ior, function as quasi- 
Aristotelian virtues in the agent’s own sense of what he is  doing. Once he 
knows how to play chess, tie a necktie, construct an argument, or speak 
grammatically, he does the right  things at the right times for the right rea-
sons, and does so from a steady disposition. The regularities that charac -
terize his be hav ior have become second nature. And the right reasons are 
internalized norms.
Abel maintains that knowing how is more fundamental than knowing 
that. If so, the model provided by the novice chess player is misleading. She 
internalized antecedently articulated rules. And she was expressly aware 
of the rules before she internalizes them. This sometimes happens. But, 
Abel maintains, often no articulated rules are available. A speaker learns 
her native language by being brought up in a community where it is spo -
ken. She models her utterances on  those of other speakers, and subjects her

--- Page 67 ---

54  Chapter 3
linguistic be hav ior to correction from them. She counts as fluent when, in 
the opinion of her compatriots, she speaks like a native. That is all it takes. 
The pro cess can occur without explicit instruction in the rules of gram -
mar. Indeed, it can occur in a linguistic community whose grammar has 
never been codified. Unlike chess, where the constitutive rules are prior to 
the practice, grammatical rules precipitate out of the practice. What makes 
a construction grammatical is that fluent speakers treat it as such. They 
understand it and do not think it needs correction. Rather than saying that 
the language learner internalizes the rules, it would be more accurate to say 
that the linguist externalizes the linguistic virtues of competent speakers.
This sheds light on how to resolve Wittgenstein’s worry about rule- 
following (Wittgenstein, 1953; Kripke, 1982). Like Abel, Ginsborg (2010) 
recognizes that not all norms are reducible to rules. To evade the skepti -
cal puzzle Kripke identifies as arising from the absence of rules, she argues 
that some norms are primitive. When asked what comes next in a series, 
or what the sum of 68 and 57 is, she maintains,  there is an answer that we 
primitively  ought to give. That answer is right: other answers are wrong. 
This is so even though it is pos si ble to articulate a rule that a ‘deviant’ 
answer would conform to. Ginsborg characterizes primitive normativity 
negatively. It is “normativity which does not depend on conformity to 
an antecedently recognized rule” (2010, 233). She evidently assumes that 
 either normativity is grounded in rules or it is sui generis. If  there are virtues 
that are not the internalization of antecedently recognized rules, they are, 
on her view, primitively normative. We  ought to act on them, but  there is 
just no saying why.
This seems wrong. Practices are public; a performer learns to conform to 
their norms, and is subject to criticism and correction if he fails to conform. 
Knowing how is, as Abel says, a product of “triangular relations of subject, 
other subjects or agents, and the world” (2012, 248). A four- year- old child is 
given the first numbers in the sequence ‘1, 2, 3’ and asked what comes next. 
She might answer ‘4, 5, 6’; or she might answer ‘5, 8, 13’. If she does the lat-
ter, her answer is mathematically impeccable; the numbers 5, 8, 13 are the 
next ones in the Fibonacci series. Still, we want to say, her answer is incor-
rect. If correctness turns entirely on the rules of mathe matics, we have no 
grounds for criticizing her. But if correctness turns on attuning herself not 
just to the rules of mathe matics but to the practice she is participating in, 
 things are dif fer ent. Given the practice in effect in her preschool classroom,

--- Page 68 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 55
she has reason to give and prefer the standard answer. Assuming that the 
class is not studying arcane mathematical sequences, the immediately sub-
sequent integers are standard.  Because Abel recognizes the importance of 
other agents, he has the resources to assess practices, and assess par tic u-
lar be hav iors within practices from a perspective that Ginsborg, who looks 
only at the agent, her past intentions, and her current mindset, cannot. 
Abel can say, as Ginsborg cannot, that what makes an action correct is that 
it is required (or permitted) by a practice, and that practice promotes some-
thing that the members of a given community regard as worth achieving. 
He can look outward to the public good that the norms achieve, rather than 
exclusively inward to what the agent thinks she is trying to do.
We are brought up in practices, and often learn from examples. So, 
unlike the chess novice, we may never have learned the “rules” of practices 
we participate in. Indeed, such practices may have few articulable rules. We 
 were simply socialized to emulate  adept prac ti tion ers. This is why native 
speakers can fail to recognize, much less be able to state, the grammatical 
rules of their language. Outsiders— perhaps linguists or anthropologists— 
may formalize the normative regularities that they find in the practice. But 
practices proceed without expressly formulated rules. The fact that prac ti-
tion ers not only typically conform to certain regularities but teach  others to 
conform, and correct or disparage the be hav ior of nonconformists, makes 
it manifest that norms are operative. Normatively informed be hav ior, then, 
is more extensive than explic itly rule- governed be hav ior.
The novice tennis player hits hundreds of balls in learning how to serve. 
The novice cellist saws away for untold hours in learning how to bow. Abel 
insists that learning by  doing is typically needed to acquire know- how. Aristo-
tle agrees. One becomes just by  doing just acts. But Aristotle emphasizes that 
“the sources and means that develop each virtue also ruin it” (1985,1103b9). 
What the novice does repeatedly can be repeatedly done well or repeatedly 
done badly, or intermittently done well and done badly. Only if it is done 
well  will repetition lead to the development of a virtue. Rote repetition  will 
not do. The novice’s actions must be monitored (by himself or  others), and 
encouraged or corrected as appropriate.
That being so, the student needs standards by which to judge. But if 
the actions are ones for which  there is no adequate articulable rule, where 
do they find the standards? They appeal to exemplars— telling instances— 
where the action is manifestly well done. With or without the aid of a

--- Page 69 ---

56  Chapter 3
mentor, the novice emulates the be hav ior of  those who already know how 
to perform the actions he seeks to master. We  will discuss exactly what such 
emulation involves in chapter 9. For our purposes  here, it is enough to rec-
ognize that it is an ave nue to acquiring know- how.
The epistemic norms of knowing how are quasi- Aristotelian virtues; they 
are goods realized in action and may be uncharacterizable apart from the 
practices they belong to or the ends they promote. When this is so, it is 
impossible to state exactly what knowing how involves. But this does not 
make knowing how epistemically inaccessible, or learning how mysterious. 
A student can learn how to perform the action by emulating exemplary 
per for mances of it. Once his be hav ior accords with his exemplar, he knows 
how to do the action in question. Knowing how, then, is not inscrutable so 
long as we have the resources to identify and interpret exemplary instances.
Although knowing how is subject to epistemic norms, it is fundamen -
tally dif fer ent from knowing that. It is not an attitude  toward the truth of a 
sentence or proposition. That Fred knows how to tie a necktie is  either true 
or false. But his knowing how is not itself truth evaluable. Nor is knowing 
how a  matter of belief. Molière’s M. Jourdain knew how to speak in prose, 
even though he did not believe that he knew how to do any such  thing. 
Henceforth, for clarity, when I use the term ‘knowledge’ and related terms 
without qualification, I  will be speaking of knowledge that.
I said earlier that an understanding of a topic involves know- how. We 
now can see that it involves knowing how to wield the commitments that 
bear on the topic— how to draw the inferences and perform the actions 
that the understanding licenses. That know- how is, in Rylean terms, a mul-
titrack disposition—an ability and propensity to make certain inferences 
and eschew  others, to perform certain actions and refrain from  others, to 
engage in and endorse certain forms of higher- order evaluation and criti -
cism and avoid and repudiate  others. The network of commitments func -
tions normatively. It constitutes the permissions and prohibitions that 
constrain and facilitate the epistemic agent’s relevant thoughts and actions 
(see Hetherington, 2011). In Sellars’s (1963, 169) terms, the network struc-
tures a space of reasons. If the agent has internalized the commitments, she 
may deploy them blindly. In that case they function as quasi- Aristotelian 
intellectual virtues.
Earlier I characterized epistemic ac cep tance of φ as a willingness and abil-
ity to use φ as a basis of inference or action when one’s ends are cognitive.

--- Page 70 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 57
That ability is a  matter of know- how. When an epistemic agent accepts a 
proposition, rule, norm or account, she knows how to use it to further her 
relevant cognitive ends.
Factivity
Knowledge is factive in that one does not know that p  unless ‘p’ is true. 
So if propositional understanding is knowledge of dependencies, it is fac -
tive. We would not say that Lavoisier understood that phlogiston is the 
volatile ele ment in combustion, since it  isn’t. But objectual understanding 
concerns topics rather than individual propositions. So what it means to 
claim that objectual understanding is factive is a bit harder to make out. 
Perhaps objectual understanding is factive if it is impossible to understand 
a topic— say, the history of Athenian warfare— unless one is committed to 
some identifiable, suitably comprehensive proposition that is true. That 
proposition might be the long conjunction of all the atomic propositions 
belonging to the coherent body of information that constitutes the under-
standing. (This parallels the interpretation of coherence theories of knowl-
edge as requiring the truth of the conjunction of the atomic propositions 
in a coherent system of beliefs.) On such an account, understanding would 
be a sort of knowledge, namely the knowledge captured in long, subject- 
matter- connected conjunctions.
This proposal  faces several prob lems, beyond its difficulty in accom -
modating science. First, it does not re spect the requirement that the under-
stander grasp the relations among the atomic propositions— that the 
understander appreciate how they bear on one another. Although the body 
of information understood must be coherent, if the understander need only 
know the conjunction,  there is no requirement that she grasp the coher -
ence. Second, it does not accommodate the insight that the student who 
understands geometry can do more with it than the student who knows 
the axioms, the main theorems, and their derivations by rote. Third, it is 
at odds with the recognition that not all the propositions that comprise a 
genuine understanding of a topic need be true. We would be inclined to say 
that a historian understood the Athenian victory even if he harbored a few 
relatively minor false beliefs about the  matter.
Although Kvanvig (2003) considers understanding factive, he concedes 
 these points. He does not believe that understanding a topic consists in

--- Page 71 ---

58  Chapter 3
believing a long conjunction. Nor does he insist that  every proposition in the 
comprehensive body of information that constitutes an epistemic agent’s 
understanding be true. Rather, he maintains, an agent cannot understand 
a topic  unless most of the propositions and all of the central propositions 
that constitute her coherent take on that topic are true. He allows that a 
few peripheral falsehoods can degrade an agent’s understanding of a topic 
without destroying it. That understanding is factive in this sense is the the-
sis I want to dispute.
Unlike knowledge, understanding admits of degrees. A freshman has 
some understanding of the Athenian victory, while her teaching fellow 
has a greater understanding and her professor of military history has an 
even greater understanding. Epistemology should explain what such dif -
ferences in degree consist in. A factive account can easily recognize three 
dimensions along which understanding can vary: breadth, depth, and sig -
nificance. The professor might have a broader understanding of the Athe -
nian victory, being able to embed his coherent body of largely true beliefs 
into a more comprehensive account of Greek warfare. He might also have a 
deeper understanding. In that case, his web of belief is more tightly woven; 
it contains more propositions, and/or more nontrivial inferential connec -
tions among propositions. But according to a factivist epistemology, both the 
student and the professor understand the Athenian victory insofar as they 
grasp coherent bodies of predominantly true propositions, and believe the 
propositions that belong to  those bodies. The student and the professor 
might weigh the facts differently. Even if each believes a given truth and 
incorporates it into a coherent account of the  matter, the professor might 
consider it highly significant, while the student considers it just another 
truth about the  battle. If the truth  really is significant—if, for example, it 
is central to explaining how the Athenians’ novel  battle formation con -
tributed to the victory— then the professor’s better understanding consists 
in his appreciating the significance of the truth, not merely in his recog -
nizing that it is a truth. Strevens (2008, 2016) is a factivist who allows for 
what I call felicitous falsehoods; he holds that not all (or even most) of 
the ele ments of an objectual understanding need be true. But, he insists, 
 those that are difference makers must be true. So the professor’s broader 
understanding consists in his incorporating more difference makers into 
his account; his deeper understanding consists in  there being tighter con-
nections among the difference makers. And what is impor tant is not the

--- Page 72 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 59
weight the professor assigns to  every ele ment of the account, but the weight 
he assigns to the difference makers. Factive accounts, then, can accommo-
date some differences in degrees of understanding.
However,  there is another dimension along which we can mea sure greater 
and lesser understanding which factivists cannot take on board. It involves 
conceding that some accounts, even though they are not true, nonetheless 
display a mea sure of understanding. The growth of understanding often 
involves a trajectory from contentions that, although strictly false, are in 
the same general neighborhood as contentions that are closer to the truth. 
The sequence may terminate in truths. But even the earlier steps in the 
sequence should fall within the ambit of epistemology. For they are, to an 
extent— often to a considerable extent— cognitively valuable.
An eight- year- old’s understanding of  human evolution might include as 
a central strand the proposition that  human beings descended from apes. A 
more sophisticated understanding has it that  human beings and the other 
 great apes descended from a common hominid ancestor who was not, 
strictly speaking, an ape. The child’s opinion displays some grasp of evolu-
tion. It is clearly cognitively better than the belief that  humans evolved 
from butterflies. But it is not strictly true. Since it is central to the child’s take 
on  human evolution, factivists like Kvanvig must conclude that her take on 
 human evolution does not qualify as understanding.  Unless we can plau-
sibly abstract from the child’s claim about apes to some more generic ‘ape- 
like creatures’, which may be difficult if she does not distinguish between 
apes and ape- like creatures, Strevens cannot take her to harbor an under -
standing  either. In that case, epistemology need give no account of what 
makes the child’s grasp of evolution cognitively good, or cognitively better 
than a view of her classmate who holds that  humans evolved from butter-
flies. This may not appear to be a major objection, since the child’s opinion 
is fairly naïve. Perhaps it is reasonable to conclude that she does not ( really) 
understand. But the pattern exhibited in this case is endemic to scientific 
education. We typically begin with rough characterizations that properly 
orient us  toward the phenomena, and then refine the characterizations as 
our understanding of the science advances. Think of the trajectory from 
naïve folk physics through Newtonian mechanics to relativity and quan -
tum mechanics.
Kvanvig (2003) believes that when we construe such a take on a subject 
as understanding, we use the term ‘understanding’ in an honorific sense,

--- Page 73 ---

60  Chapter 3
just as we use the term ‘knowledge’ in an honorific sense when we speak 
of ‘the current state of scientific knowledge’, while conceding that some of 
what belongs to the current state of scientific knowledge is false. Such hon-
orific usages of epistemic terms, he maintains, are extended usages that fall 
outside the scope of epistemology. Only in an extended sense, then, does 
the child have any understanding of evolution.
Perhaps it would be feasible to dismiss such uses of ‘understanding’ 
as merely honorific if they applied only to young  children or neophyte 
students of a subject. I think other wise, for I believe that epistemology 
should have something to say about what makes the views of the child 
who thinks that  humans evolved from apes better than the views of a 
child who thinks that  humans evolved from butterflies. But the main prob-
lem with the contention that understanding is factive is that the trajectory 
displayed as she moves from the naïve view of  human evolution up to the 
view held by the evolutionary biologist is the same trajectory that science 
displays in the sequence of accounts it develops. It is intellectually arrogant 
to insist that it is only in an extended sense that a con temporary biologist 
understands morphological evolution, given that the precise role of cis- 
regulatory sequences (noncoding sequences of DNA) is currently unclear. 
That  there are always unclarities at the cutting edge of inquiry does not 
diminish the epistemic status of the understanding that brought us to the 
current cutting edge.
A central tenet of Copernicus’s theory is the contention that the Earth 
travels around the sun in a circular orbit. Kepler improved on Copernicus 
by contending that the Earth’s orbit is not circular but elliptical. Newton 
realized that  because the planets exert gravitational force on each other, the 
Earth’s orbit is not quite elliptical. Having abandoned the commitment to 
absolute space, current astronomers can no longer say that the Earth travels 
around the sun simpliciter, but must talk about how the Earth and the sun 
move relative to each other. Despite the fact that Copernicus’s central claim 
was strictly false, the account it belongs to constitutes a major advance 
in understanding over the Ptolemaic account it supplanted. Kepler’s and 
Newton’s accounts are further advances in understanding, and the cur -
rent account is yet a further advance. The advances are clearly cognitive 
advances. With each step in the sequence, we understand the motion of the 
planets better than we did before. But no one claims that science has as yet 
arrived at the ultimate truth about the motion of the planets. Should we say

--- Page 74 ---

From Knowledge to Understanding 61
that the use of the term ‘understanding’ that applies to such cases should be 
of no interest to epistemology?
One might follow Kvanvig and contend that even  here the use of ‘under-
standing’ is honorific. We apply the term in  these cases only  because we 
think that the strides scientists have taken are on the way to the truth— the 
comprehensive, general account of celestial motion that gets it right. In 
effect, current science borrows its epistemic status from its descendants. Sel-
lars (1963) argues that in a mature science,  later theories should show why 
their pre de ces sors  were right to the extent that they  were. So  later theories 
are supposed to at least partially vindicate their pre de ces sors. Where this 
does not happen, we are apt to conclude that the earlier scientists did not 
understand the phenomena that their theories purported to explain. We 
do not, for example, consider phlogiston theorists to have had any under-
standing of combustion.
Suppose we concede this point. Let us admit that in saying that the vari-
ous astronomical accounts embody an understanding, we take out a lien 
on the  future of science. Still, I would urge, the cognitive achievements 
embodied in such accounts should be a central concern for epistemology. 
Even if we do not yet have (and may never get) the truth, we have made real 
cognitive pro gress. We understand the motions of celestial bodies better 
than our pre de ces sors did. Epistemology should explain what makes cur-
rent understanding better. If we say that the uses in question are honorific, 
epistemology should explain why certain attitudes  toward certain topics are 
worthy of honor.
Another aspect of science is even more troublesome for the factive 
view— namely, science’s penchant for idealization. Science streamlines, 
simplifies, and distorts. It devises and deploys comparatively austere mod-
els that diverge from the phenomena it seeks to explain. The ideal gas law 
accounts for the be hav ior of gases by describing the be hav ior of a model 
gas composed of dimensionless, spherical molecules that are not subject 
to friction and exhibit no intermolecular attraction. The Hardy— Weinberg 
formula describes the distribution of genes in an infinite population whose 
members mate randomly.  There are no such  things. Indeed, as far as we 
can now tell,  there could be no such  things. But the ideal gas law figures in 
the understanding provided by thermodynamics and the Hardy— Weinberg 
formula figures in the understanding provided by population ge ne tics. Sci-
entists purport to understand the phenomena in terms of  these laws. The

--- Page 75 ---

62  Chapter 3
contention that such laws degrade but do not destroy understanding is sim-
ply not credible.
Idealization is not taken by scientists to be an unfortunate expedient, 
but rather to be a power ful tool. Although they expect  today’s idealiza -
tions to be replaced, they harbor no expectation that in the fullness of time 
idealizations  will be eliminated from scientific theories. So the ‘promissory 
noteishness’ that we saw in talk about the pro gress in our understanding of 
celestial motion has no role  here. Elimination of idealizations is not a desid-
eratum. Nor is consigning them to the periphery of a theory. It is simply not 
the case that the bodies of information that constitute scientific understand-
ing are, or that their ultimate successors can be expected to be, composed 
of truths, with any residual falsehoods occurring only at the periphery. The 
ideal gas law lies at the core of thermodynamics, and some such model is 
likely to lie at the core of any successor to current theories.
I concede that many of the propositions that fall within the scope of 
‘the current state of scientific knowledge’ are not strictly knowledge  because 
they are not true. If we are being scrupulous, we should prob ably not speak 
of the current state of scientific knowledge  unless we are convinced that the 
propositions in question are true. But the contention that ‘understanding’ 
is factive does not have the same strong support from ordinary language. 
When ‘understanding’ applies to large, often somewhat inchoate bodies 
of information, it takes a direct object that is not a proposition. Jill under -
stands the Athenian victory, Joe understands the motions of the planets, 
Pat understands the New York subway system. We typically acknowledge 
that  people can have a mea sure of understanding even if the contentions 
making up the bodies of information they endorse diverge somewhat 
from the truth. So our ordinary use of ‘understanding’ as applied to bodies 
of information does not supply a strong argument for a factive analy sis. 
 There is, however, a recognition that ‘understanding’ is a cognitive success 
term. If I am  going to reject the factive analy sis, I need some way to identify 
or characterize that cognitive success.

--- Page 76 ---

In the previous chapter, I argued that disciplinary understanding— indeed, 
any sort of systematic understanding—is objectual.  Here I argue that it follows 
that accounts must be assessed holistically. Rather than asking  whether each 
component sentence expresses a fact, we should ask  whether the account 
as a  whole is in reflective equilibrium. If so, I  will urge, it is acceptable in 
the epistemic circumstances.  After explicating reflective equilibrium I show 
how adopting it as a standard of acceptability enables us to appreciate the 
way individually weak considerations can weave together to make a strong 
case. I then consider objections. Although my theory is not a pure coher -
ence theory, coherence plays a major role. I discuss familiar worries about 
coherence theories and explain why they do not undermine my position.
Reflective Equilibrium
The move to holism raises questions about justification.  After several hun-
dred years of theorizing, it is fairly easy to see why empirical evidence for 
a hypothesis is truth conducive. Relevant empirical evidence increases the 
probability that the hypothesis is true. If an account is construed as a long 
conjunction whose conjuncts are statements of its commitments, it might 
seem that the same holds of it. The total evidence increases the probability 
that the long conjunction is true, thereby justifying the conjunction. The 
difficulty is that  under such a construal, even the best accounts turn out to 
be unjustified. If p and q are evidentially in de pen dent, and each has a prob-
ability of less than 1, the probability of the conjunction p & q is less than 
the probability of each conjunct. The longer the conjunction, the lower 
the probability. Comprehensiveness is considered an epistemic virtue, but 
4 The Fabric of Understanding

--- Page 77 ---

64  Chapter 4
if justification consists in probability raising through empirical evidence, it 
is not. Holism  ought not then contend that the justification of the  wholes 
derives from the justification of the parts. Or at least it  ought not contend 
that the probabilistic justification of the parts increases the probability that 
the  whole is justified as well.
The challenge, then, is to explain how systematic interconnections 
give rise to justification— how the fact that considerations dovetail affords 
reason to accept them. In previous works I argued that a system of cogni -
tive commitments in reflective equilibrium is epistemically tenable (Elgin, 
1996, 2011). This is a procedural account of epistemic tenability. An account 
is tenable just in case it is, or is rationally reconstructable as, a result of 
a pro cess of adjudication that brings a collection of initially tenable com-
mitments into reflective equilibrium. It is as reasonable as any available 
alternative in light of  those initially tenable commitments, and the com -
mitments that comprise the account are in general more reasonable in light 
of one another than they would be alone. I do not claim that reflective 
equilibrium shows an account to be true or even to prob ably be true. I claim 
only that a system of epistemic commitments in reflective equilibrium is 
the best we can do in the epistemic circumstances. But that is enough to 
make it acceptable right now. This needs to be spelled out.
Inquiry, as Quine insists, always begins in medias res. We start with opin-
ions, values, methods, and standards that we consider relevant and that we 
are inclined to credit. Although we recognize that they are less than wholly 
satisfactory as they stand, they comprise our current best take on the  matter 
 under investigation.  These commitments can include hunches, rules of 
thumb, superstitions, and old wives’ tales as well as confirmed generaliza-
tions, proven theorems, firmly established princi ples, and solid evidence. 
The only requirement at the outset is that we have some inclination to 
accept them.  Because we do, they are initially tenable. Clearly that inclina-
tion does not endow them with a high level of tenability. To be initially 
tenable is not to be presumptively acceptable, or prima facie acceptable, or 
ceteris paribus acceptable. It is merely to have some very slight mea sure of 
epistemic standing. If a consideration is initially tenable, we need a reason 
to give it up. But since initial tenability is weak and precarious, even a weak 
reason may suffice to abandon it. So construing a consideration as initially 
tenable is not saying much in its  favor. Reasons to give up initially tenable 
commitments are legion.

--- Page 78 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 65
That being so, why should we think that the mere fact that we have 
some inclination to accept a consideration gives it any level of epistemic 
standing? This much can be said in its  favor. Since beliefs form the basis for 
action, the success of our actions affords some evidence that the beliefs that 
underwrite them are true enough. And the per sis tence of the inclination, 
however slight that inclination, is evidence that the consideration has not 
unduly impeded our actions. Granted, brute luck may explain why certain 
untoward initially tenable commitments have not yet caused our efforts to 
go awry. Or the untoward commitments may bear on  factors that are too 
distant from day- to- day experience for the success or failure of our actions 
to make much difference to their continued ac cep tance. Or we may have made 
compensating errors. Nevertheless, that they have not caused enough trou-
ble to induce us to abandon them is at least a minuscule mark in their  favor. 
Moreover, we learn from experience. When we learn that premonitions tend 
not to be borne out, we cease to credit them. Although we may continue to 
experience feelings of foreboding, once we lose any inclination to credit their 
deliverances, they cease to be initially tenable. The fact that we have not yet 
had reason to give a commitment up is then a small reason to accept it.
Our initially tenable commitments pertaining to a topic may at the out-
set constitute a motley collection; they include our current convictions 
about the topic, the methods for investigating it, the standards to which a 
cogent account of that topic should be held, and the cognitive ends such 
an account should serve. Taken together they are apt to leave relevant ques-
tions unanswered and relevant prob lems unsolved. The ele ments of the 
collection may be in tension with one another. Our convictions may fail to 
satisfy the standards we consider them subject to. We may have incompat-
ible or noncotenable convictions and/or mutually unsatisfiable cognitive 
desiderata. Considerations that seem in de pen dently plausible may seem 
jointly implausible. To achieve an acceptable account, we correct, reject, 
refine, and extend the commitments we started with. Some, such as ‘Fish 
have gills’, may come to be seen as crude approximations.  Others, such as 
‘Objects falling near the Earth fall at a rate of 32 ft/sec2’, turn out to be accept-
able only within certain limits— for example, where air re sis tance is negli-
gible. Yet  others turn out, like Frege’s Basic Law V , to be hopeless, regardless 
of their antecedent plausibility.
Nor is our task just to corral and tame our initially tenable commit -
ments. For even duly pruned and connected, a constellation of initially

--- Page 79 ---

66  Chapter 4
tenable commitments is apt to be gappy. Achieving reflective equilibrium 
often requires integrating into our emerging account commitments that 
we have no in de pen dent inclination to believe. The scientific community 
was originally committed to the existence of positrons not  because it had 
any direct evidence of them, but  because it was strongly committed to 
symmetry princi ples and to the existence of electrons. If electrons exist 
and symmetry holds, then  there exist positively charged counter parts to 
electrons— that is, positrons. The relation between the embedding account 
and the positron hypothesis is one of mutual support. The hypothesis gains 
tenability from its place in the account; the account increases in tenability 
as well. Given the other commitments, the asymmetry that would result 
from denying the electron a positively charged counterpart would be an 
irregularity that required explanation that physics was in no position to 
provide. By rejecting, correcting, revising, and augmenting, we bring com-
mitments into accord.  Because the ele ments of the resulting account are 
reasonable in light of one another, they are in equilibrium;  because the 
account as a  whole is as reasonable as any available alternative in light of 
the relevant antecedent commitments, its equilibrium is reflective. It is an 
account that the community of inquiry can, on reflection, endorse.
Initially tenable commitments perform two functions. Being, at the out-
set, our current best take on how  matters stand and on how to figure out, 
mea sure, and assess how they stand, they provide the raw material out of 
which to construct tenable accounts. They capture what we start out think-
ing we understand about the domain. In constructing a better account, we 
leverage that understanding. Their mutual support makes for equilibrium. 
By playing a second role, initially tenable commitments ensure that the 
equilibrium is reflective. They serve as touchstones against which to assess 
revisions.
Their capacity to play the second role may seem doubtful. I conceded 
that the initial commitments are to one degree or another inadequate. To use 
them as a touchstone for judging revisions may therefore appear misguided. 
How can an account be vindicated by being shown to be reasonable in light 
of considerations that are acknowledged to be unsatisfactory?  Because our 
initial commitments constitute our previous best guesses about the topic, 
we use  those commitments as a threshold for assessment. The account we 
arrive at should be recognizable as an improvement upon them. We engage

--- Page 80 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 67
in inquiry  because we suspect that they are inadequate and in need of cor-
rection, fortification, elaboration, and/or extension. We revise our previous 
commitments when we arrive at something we consider better. The require-
ment that an acceptable account answer to our initial commitments is not 
a requirement that it incorporate or validate them. But where it does not, it 
should, at least for the most part, show why they seemed as reasonable as 
they did when they did.
Epistemic advancement, then, consists in improving on the commit -
ments we currently hold, where improvement itself must be mea sured by 
current standards. We are in no position to adopt a God’s eye view and say 
that in absolute terms one account is better than another. But we do not 
need a God’s eye view to characterize cognitive changes as improvements. 
We can recognize, for example, that Newton’s account of planetary motion 
is an improvement over Kepler’s  because Kepler’s account accommodates 
only the relation between the Earth and the sun, while Newton’s also accom-
modates the gravitational attraction of one planet on another. We appreci-
ate that having acknowledged the significance of the sun’s gravitation, we 
have no grounds for ignoring other sources of gravity.
The method of reflective equilibrium is dialectical and its results are pro-
visional. We judge our commitments and potential revisions of our com -
mitments against one another to see which combination seems best on 
balance. But we also judge our criteria for being best on balance by seeing if 
they yield verdicts that we can on reflection endorse. Reflective equilibrium 
can be upset by new findings. However well it fits with our other ornitho -
logical commitments, the conviction that birds cannot hover is discredited 
by the discovery that hummingbirds hover. (We might accommodate the 
discovery by abandoning the conviction that birds cannot hover or by aban-
doning the conviction that hummingbirds are birds. But something’s got to 
give.) No account or component of an account is irrevocable, but an account 
in reflective equilibrium is acceptable  until prob lems emerge or improve-
ments are envisioned. The justification for this verdict lies in the fact that 
the commitments that comprise such an account are collectively at least 
as reasonable as any available alternatives in the epistemic circumstances.
The requirement that each ele ment be more reasonable in light of the 
 others than it was alone may seem too demanding.  After all, one might 
think, when an observer sees a camel before her very eyes, in good light, in

--- Page 81 ---

68  Chapter 4
the  middle distance, and uncamouflaged, her belief that she is looking at a 
camel needs no further support. I agree that her perceptual deliverance alone 
yields a presumption that she sees a camel. That she is actually looking at 
a camel is initially tenable. But that deliverance does not stand alone. It 
gains or loses backing from collateral commitments. If the perceiver har -
bors an account (even a Moorean commonsensical account) that includes 
the beliefs that camels are vis i ble and that organisms like her are capable of 
seeing them, her perceptual belief is more reasonable than it would be if she 
had no views about the visibility of camels or if she thought that they  were, 
like proverbial pink elephants, figments of the imagination that appear 
only to the inebriated. Her belief is strengthened if backed by a plausible 
reason for why  there might be a camel in front of her. Is she at the zoo, at a 
circus, wandering the Sahara? If not—if, for example, her experience is as of 
a camel on Main Street— she might need to discredit the hypothesis that her 
apparent camel sighting is a hallucination or a dream. If she has no reason 
to think that she is taking mind- altering drugs or is  under posthypnotic 
suggestion, the absence of such competing potential explanations con -
tributes to her warrant. But if she has no idea  whether camels are vis i ble, 
 whether she has been taking mind- altering drugs,  whether she has recently 
been hypnotized, or  whether  human beings can see, her belief that she sees 
a camel is epistemically precarious. Much of the support we depend on in 
cases where  things seem obvious is so deeply tacit and uncontroversial that 
we may be unaware of it (Adler, 2002). But that tacit background contrib -
utes to the tenability of even the most seemingly obvious deliverances.
Some ele ments of a tenable account have no in de pen dent presumption 
in their  favor. They gain all their support from their place in the account 
they figure in. Had physics abandoned or attenuated its commitment to 
electrons or to symmetry, early twentieth- century physicists would have 
had no reason to believe that positrons exist. Similarly, Robinson Crusoe, 
seeing what he takes to be  human footprints in the sand, concludes that 
he is not alone on the island, basing his conclusion on the conviction that 
the presence of what look to be footprints is a strong indication of the 
recent presence of  human feet. If he discovered that the configuration that 
he took to be  human footprints could as easily be produced by local sand 
crabs, his belief would lose its support.

--- Page 82 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 69
Mutual Support
A critical question is how reflective equilibrium provides justification. Why 
should we think that mutual accord among our commitments, backed by a 
tie to our previous commitments affords any indication of how  things are? 
Perhaps this  will become clearer if we consider a case.
Yesterday Meg’s Latin book was stolen from her school locker. Three stu-
dents may have witnessed the theft. None of them is very reliable. Anne 
is given to proving theorems in her head and tends to be oblivious to her 
surroundings when preoccupied with a tricky proof. To compensate for 
her habitual distractedness, she draws plausible inferences about mundane 
events, and often fails to register  whether an opinion is due to observation 
or to such an inference. Being rather vain, Ben frequently does not wear his 
glasses. Like Anne, he draws plausible inferences about events around him, 
and tends not to remember having done so. Chauncy is simply a liar. Pre -
sumably he knows when he is speaking sincerely, but given the fluency and 
frequency of his lies, virtually nothing he says is trustworthy. Not surpris -
ingly, the social circles of the three students do not intersect; none would 
deign to speak to the  others. When questioned about the theft, Anne and 
Ben report what they think they saw, but confess that they are not sure what 
they actually witnessed and what they inferred. Chauncy insists that his 
report is accurate, but in view of his rec ord, his claim is suspect.
Individually, none of the reports would count for much. Had only one 
of the putative witnesses been pres ent, the most we could reasonably con-
clude would be that the thief might fit the description. But all three reports 
agree, and agree in alleging that the thief had an unusual appearance: he 
had spiked green hair. This makes a difference. Even though individually 
each report is dubious, and the probability of a green- haired textbook 
thief is low, the fact that the three reports provide the same antecedently 
improbable description inclines us to believe it. Their accord evidently 
enhances the epistemic standing of the individual reports (C. I. Lewis, 1946, 
346). We have more reason to believe each of them in light of the  others 
than we have to believe them separately. The question is why? How can 
multiple statements, none of which is tenable on its own, coalesce to yield 
a tenable conclusion? How can their relation to other less than tenable 
claims enhance their tenability?

--- Page 83 ---

70  Chapter 4
Given the unreliability of the witnesses, we would not be surprised if 
they  were wrong about the thief. But we would not expect them to all be 
wrong in the same way. Their agreeing needs an explanation.  Were they 
coconspirators, the explanation would be straightforward: They plotted to 
tell the same tale. But not being on speaking terms with one another, they 
are unlikely to be in cahoots. If the descriptions they provided fit a rel -
evant ste reo type, a penchant for plausibility might explain their accord. 
But someone with green spiked hair is far from anyone’s ste reo type of a 
textbook thief. So despite Anne’s and Ben’s propensity to draw inferences 
based on plausibility, their descriptions of the thief seem not to result from 
such an inference. Evidently the best explanation of the agreement is that 
the reports are accurate (Lipton, 2004).
It is not just our ability to exclude obvious alternatives that leads us to 
credit the allegation. A variety of collateral considerations support it. Some 
bear directly, albeit weakly, on the content of the claim. The principal’s 
secretary dimly recalls seeing an odd- looking stranger lurking in the hall -
way, but cannot remember what made the stranger look odd. The custodian 
thinks he recently saw a container of hair dye in the trash, but cannot 
remember which day. Although the tentativeness of  these reports makes 
them less than wholly creditable, they are suggestive enough to buttress 
the eyewitness testimony. Other collateral considerations concern the wit-
nesses and their circumstances. Book thefts are observable events, so  there 
is nothing inherently dubious about a claim to have seen someone steal 
a book. The light and sight lines  were such that the witnesses could have 
seen what they report from where they said they  were standing. The wit -
nesses, teen agers themselves, are  adept at recognizing furtive adolescent 
be hav ior. None was subject to psychological experiments with implanted 
memories. None was on drugs. And so on. Separately,  these  factors count 
for  little.  Either their credibility is low, their bearing slight, or their eviden-
tial support minimal. But they coalesce to make a solid case. This suggests 
that the epistemic tenability of the several reports and the conclusion they 
sanction derives from their mutual supportiveness.
Although our focus is on the status of the allegation, it is  really the 
account as a  whole that is or is not acceptable. Many of the justificatory rela-
tions are reciprocal. The allegation is acceptable only if (at least much of) 
the rest of the constellation of supporting considerations is. Since the eye-
witnesses are individually unreliable, and the contentions of the collateral

--- Page 84 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 71
witnesses or the bearing of  those contentions on the theft is tenuous, the 
acceptability of the testimony likewise depends on the acceptability of the 
allegation. The epistemic status of the allegation is inseparable from the sta-
tus of the rest of the story. Some of the background information may be 
separately secured, but to a considerable extent, the vari ous components 
of the story stand or fall together. Epistemological holism contends that 
the primary unit of acceptability is an account comprised of mutually sup-
portive ele ments. The acceptability of individual ele ments largely derives 
from the acceptability of the account they belong to or follow from. This 
suggests that epistemic justification is at base a property of a suitably com-
prehensive, coherent account, when the best explanation of its coherence 
is that the account is at least roughly correct. The epistemic justification of 
individual claims derives from their figuring in such an account.
Coherence evidently plays a major role. Although  there is no universally 
accepted criterion of coherence, at least this is required: the components of 
a coherent account must be mutually consistent, cotenable, and supportive. 
Logical consistency is not enough. Two claims can be consistent with one 
another  because they are mutually irrelevant. ‘Napoleon died in exile’ and 
‘Penguins cannot fly’ are consistent with one another, but neither lends 
support to the other.  There is no more reason to accept their conjunction 
than  there is to accept the separate conjuncts. Since both cotenability and 
supportiveness are  matters of degree, coherence is too. So if it can be shown 
that epistemic justification requires coherence,  there remains the question 
of how coherent an account must be in order for it to be epistemically jus-
tified. Before facing that worry, though, other challenges need to be met. 
At least two worries immediately arise. The first is that coherence is too 
demanding an epistemic requirement. The second is that it is not demand-
ing enough.
Even where we take ourselves to be on solid ground, contravening con-
siderations are not uncommon. Mrs. Abercrombie, the aging geometry 
teacher, says that during the relevant period she saw a young man sporting 
a green hat. A green hat is not green hair, so strictly speaking her report is in 
tension with the reports of the other putative witnesses. Mr. Polk, the hall 
monitor, insists that no one was in the corridor at the time of the alleged 
theft. Mr. Miller, the classics teacher, disputes the allegation on the strong 
so cio log i cal grounds that students do not steal Latin books; they shun 
them.  These reports are clearly relevant to and at odds with the emerging

--- Page 85 ---

72  Chapter 4
account of the theft. If we incorporate them into it, we render it incoherent. 
But they are initially tenable, so we have no legitimate reason to disregard 
them. The prob lem is this: The discussion so far suggests that the credibil-
ity of the vari ous claims comprising an account depends on how well they 
hang together. If so, the failure of other, equally relevant information to 
cohere with them threatens to discredit the account.
Although true, this is not so daunting as it appears. The immediate threat 
of incoherence comes from assuming that we must take seemingly contra-
vening considerations at face value, incorporating them into the account 
of the theft as they stand. We need do no such  thing. Rather, we assess con-
travening considerations just as we do the rest of our evidence. Recall that 
we did not take the eyewitness reports at face value. We initially deemed 
them suspect  because our background information indicated that the in for-
mants are unreliable. The credibility of the reports increased  because of 
their agreement with one another and the support provided by collateral 
information. That agreement gave us reason to think that the general unreli-
ability of the witnesses did not affect the standing of  these par tic u lar reports. 
Contravening considerations are subject to similar assessments. Mrs. Aber-
crombie, being dreadfully near- sighted and woefully out of date, cannot 
even imagine, much less see, that a green thatch on someone’s head is his 
hair. That being so, her characterization of the suspect as wearing a green 
hat seems close enough to count as supporting rather than undermining 
the original allegation. It is, then, true enough. Although Mr. Polk flatly 
denies what the  others say,  there are reasons to doubt his veracity. The three 
putative eyewitnesses purportedly saw each other in the corridor during 
the interval when Mr. Polk denies that anyone was  there, so his contention 
is dubious on in de pen dent grounds. Since he occasionally goes AWOL to 
smoke a cigarette, it is not implausible that he was absent when the theft 
occurred. Mr. Miller’s argument cannot be so easily discredited. The prior 
probability of a Latin book theft is slight. But the book is gone. Meg put it in 
her locker when she arrived at school. It was not  there when she returned. 
None of her classmates admits to having borrowed it. Even if Latin books 
are not normally attractive targets for teenage thieves, the book’s having 
been stolen may explain its absence better than any available alternative 
would. Just as other considerations compensate for the improbability of a 
green- haired thief, other considerations compensate for the improbability 
of a Latin book’s being stolen. In determining the acceptability of a claim,

--- Page 86 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 73
we assess the considerations that afford evidence pertaining to its tenabil -
ity. This is not always a  simple yes/no  matter. We may find that although 
an evidence statement is unacceptable or unsupportive as it stands, with 
suitable modifications, it would be. And we may find that the modifica -
tions themselves are acceptable. Coherence remains crucial. Sometimes it is 
achieved directly, sometimes by discrediting or disarming threats.
Although we are initially inclined to take putatively eyewitness testimony 
at face value, we reject Mr. Polk’s claims when we find that they conflict 
with the testimony of the other witnesses, and we reconstrue Mrs. Aber -
crombie’s claim so that it supports rather than conflicts with the con -
tention that the thief had green hair. Since none of the school’s students, 
faculty, or staff has green hair, we entertain and fi nally accept the hypoth-
esis that the thief was an outsider, despite our initial conviction that it was 
an inside job. If our methods prove wanting, or our standards inadequate, 
they too are subject to modification or rejection. If we seek to understand 
the theft rather than merely identify the thief, we may appeal to psycho -
logical and so cio log i cal insights about motivation and the conditions that 
give rise to it.
The coherence that affords epistemic justification is not just coherence 
among object- level considerations. We have higher- order commitments 
about what sorts of object- level considerations are trustworthy, what level 
of credibility they enjoy, how they  ought to mesh, and what to do when 
commitments clash.  These higher- order commitments supply reasons to 
revise or reject some contentions rather than  others when conflicts occur. 
The coherence that constitutes epistemic justification is something we 
achieve, not something that simply falls out of the relations in which our 
object- level deliverances happen to stand to one another.
Although epistemology generally focuses on the beliefs of a single indi-
vidual, I began with a public case  because the other wise unlikely agree -
ment of in de pen dent witnesses clearly shows how the best explanation of 
the coherence of a given body of claims enhances their acceptability. The 
case of a single individual can be trickier.  People sometimes confabulate. 
This is a  matter not of lying or intentionally seeking to mislead, but of self- 
deception. A confabulator composes a coherent narrative by unconsciously 
ignoring, bracketing, or downplaying  factors that detract from the story 
he seeks to construct. It might seem that such self- deception undermines 
my case for epistemic holism, since an account that achieves coherence by

--- Page 87 ---

74  Chapter 4
bracketing, ignoring, or misinterpreting relevant  factors has no claim to be 
epistemically acceptable.
But coherence through confabulation is not so easy to achieve as phi-
los o phers imagine. Adler (2002, 67–72) argues that self- deception typically 
undermines coherence. Confabulators achieve coherence among their 
first- order beliefs by sacrificing coherence between first-  and second- order 
beliefs. A doting  father deceives himself into thinking that his  daughter’s 
dismal grades are due to her dimwitted teachers’ failure to recognize her 
quirky brilliance. To sustain this belief he needs to overlook  factors that 
he normally takes to bear on the assessment of student performance— her 
dreadful study habits, her incomplete homework, her ignorance of the 
most basic facts about the subjects she is studying. He may ‘explain away’ 
 these  factors to his own satisfaction, thereby sustaining his self- deceptive 
belief. Nevertheless, he weakens the overall coherence of the relevant 
neighborhood of his belief system by carving out exceptions for a special 
case. His thinking violates his other wise accepted methodological commit-
ments about how to assess such  matters. He would not, for example, invoke 
them to account for his paperboy’s poor grades. This is not to say that the 
self- deceptive agent can recognize his error. He has,  after all, managed to 
deceive himself. But  because self- deception weakens coherence, it does not 
automatically discredit the contention that coherence plays a major role in 
justification.
Even if mundane self- deception is not a serious worry, delusions might 
pose a stronger challenge. Suppose a delusional  mental patient believes he 
is Napoleon in exile. He interprets all of his experiences in the locked ward 
in terms of his delusion. He takes the nurses, doctors, and attendants to be 
lackeys, courtiers, and palace guards; visitors to be loyal subjects;  those who 
refuse to do his bidding to be traitors;  those who tell him he is ill or mis -
taken in his beliefs to be part of the plot to prevent him from retaking the 
throne. Unlike the self- deceptive  father, he does not carve out special excep-
tions. He explains all of his experiences in terms of the delusion. Whenever 
a tension occurs, he rejects or radically reinterprets the deliverance that 
conflicts with his self- identification with Napoleon. His beliefs may well 
be more coherent than the self- deceptive  father’s. But notice how deeply 
deluded he would have to be to achieve anything like the level of coherence 
that normal epistemic agents effortlessly achieve. He would have to believe 
that he and every one around him was speaking French rather than En glish.

--- Page 88 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 75
He would have to believe that oil lamps or candles rather than electric lights 
 were illuminating the area. He would have to believe that the vehicles he 
sees are horse- drawn carriages rather than cars and trucks. He would have to 
construe computers, tele vi sions, and elevators as early nineteenth- century 
artifacts. He would prob ably have to blind himself to a vast number of 
familiar items— Velcro fasteners, ballpoint pens, cell phones, and so forth. 
I do not deny that this is pos si ble. But it is impor tant to see how thorough-
going a delusion must be to retain coherence. It is doubtful that he could 
achieve anything like the level of coherence that ordinary clusters of beliefs 
typically exhibit.
Obviously, when epistemic agents are self- deceptive or deluded, the 
coherence of their beliefs is not explained by their being true or true enough. 
If it is hard to tell  whether they are deceiving themselves, it is hard to 
tell  whether coherence confers epistemic standing on their beliefs. But to 
understand how, why, and when coherence engenders credibility, it is best 
to put this complication aside. Then we see that the story I have told about 
the book theft could be told of a single epistemic agent as well. If the agent’s 
account reaches an acceptable threshold of coherence and the best explana-
tion of that coherence is that it is at least true enough, then so long as she 
has no overriding reason to think other wise, she is justified. Anne is aware 
of what she thinks she saw, and what she thinks the other witnesses report. 
She is privy to the relevant background information about apparent sight 
lines and the like. Since her vari ous relevant cognitive commitments mesh 
and the best explanation of their meshing is that they are at least roughly 
right, according to my epistemological holism, she is justified in accepting 
them.
The second worry is that coherence is not demanding enough, for it can 
readily be achieved through epistemically illicit means. A good nineteenth- 
century novel is highly coherent, but not credible on that account. Even 
though Middlemarch is far more coherent than our regrettably fragmen -
tary and disjointed views about the book theft, the best explanation of its 
coherence lies in the novelist’s craft, not in the truth or approximate truth 
of the story. The novel’s coherence affords virtually no reason to think it 
is anywhere near literally true. This is surely right. But rather than taking 
this objection to completely discredit the contention that coherence con -
duces to epistemic acceptability, I suggest that it indicates something dif-
fer ent: coherence conduces to epistemic acceptability only when the best

--- Page 89 ---

76  Chapter 4
explanation of the coherence of a constellation of claims is that they are (at 
least roughly) correct. That is, the claims that purport to be true are at least 
roughly true and  those that purport to be true enough are true enough.
One might argue that even the best nineteenth- century novel does not 
pose as  great a threat as we sometimes suppose. No  matter how deeply 
immersed I am in the story, a single glance up from the page suffices to con-
vince me that I am not in a drawing room in nineteenth- century  England. 
The content of the story, though internally coherent, manifestly fails to 
mesh with the rest of my experience. This is so, but the question is what to 
make of it. On the one hand, too restricted a cluster of mutually supportive 
claims seems inadequate to engender tenability. We cannot render the story 
tenable simply by ignoring every thing  else we believe. On the other hand, 
insisting that all our commitments need to cohere seems unduly demand-
ing. If acceptability requires coherence with every thing we accept, or with 
every thing we accept for cognitive purposes (Lehrer, 1986), it is but a short 
step to skepticism. One wayward belief, however remote from current con-
cerns, could discredit an entire constellation of beliefs. Epistemological the-
ories that ground justification in coherence then face a prob lem of scope.
Worries about scope, however, seem not to do justice to the difficulty 
that confronts us  here. Faced with a clash between the deliverances of the 
novel and  those of my glance, it is obvious which I should accept. 1  There 
is no temptation to resolve the tension by dismissing perceptual deliver -
ances or taking them to be fiction. They seem to possess an epistemic privi-
lege that prevents considerations of coherence from overriding them. The 
capacity of perceptual deliverances to override the claims of a tightly knit 
novel may seem conclusively to demonstrate that epistemological justifica-
tion cannot consist in coherence.
Perception’s Putative Privilege
Although I do not contend that justification consists in coherence alone, 
the  matter deserves further consideration.  Until the source of perception’s 
epistemic privilege is clear, it is premature to rule coherence out. Founda -
tionalists argue that knowledge requires that  there be some in de pen dently 
credible beliefs. Many foundationalists hold that perceptual deliverances 
are among the in de pen dently credible beliefs  because perceptual deliver-
ances derive at least some of their warrant from the circumstances in which

--- Page 90 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 77
they occur, not their relation to other deliverances. Exactly how credible 
they are is a  matter of dispute (BonJour, 1985, 26–30). But they must, foun-
dationalists contend, have some mea sure of credibility that does not derive 
from their accord with other convictions. Reliabilists argue that a deliver -
ance is epistemically acceptable if produced by a reliable mechanism. Since 
some perceptual mechanisms are reliable, some perceptual deliverances are 
acceptable. Since the reliability of perceptual mechanisms is in de pen dent 
of the relations of their deliverances to other deliverances, perceptual deliv-
erances are in de pen dently credible.
 There are at least two separate insights  here. The reliabilist argument 
targets the need for a link to the world. The reason for crediting the deliver-
ances of a casual glance while dismissing  those of the novel is, they main-
tain, that perception provides the link. The way the world is constrains 
our perceptual deliverances more immediately and directly than it does our 
other beliefs. Insofar as the contents of knowledge claims concern the way 
the world is, it makes sense that the constraints the world supplies should 
override other considerations. The foundationalist position underscores the 
idea that some deliverances—in par tic u lar,  those of perception— seem to dis-
play some mea sure of credibility in de pen dently of their connections to 
other beliefs.
What the objections show is that if perception is to provide the sort of 
check on theorizing that we think it should, egalitarianism with re spect to 
object- level deliverances  will not do. An egalitarian account would hold 
that each deliverance has an equal claim on our epistemic allegiance. On an 
epistemic princi ple akin to ‘One Person, One Vote’, it would maintain that 
 there is no basis for privileging some commitments over  others. If a per -
ceptual deliverance fails to cohere with an other wise coherent account, the 
perceptual deliverance  ought to be rejected, since the claims of the many 
outweigh the claims of the one. But no  matter how comprehensive and 
integrated an empirical account is, no  matter how many other beliefs the 
account manages to incorporate, observations should have the capacity to 
discredit it. They have that capacity only if the epistemic claims of per -
ceptual deliverances at least sometimes outweigh  those of an antecedently 
accepted account. Still, it does not follow that perceptual deliverances must 
be immune to revision or rejection on the basis of considerations of coher-
ence. Nor does it follow that the epistemic privilege granted to perceptual 
deliverances is in de pen dent of considerations of coherence.

--- Page 91 ---

78  Chapter 4
If we think about our situation when we glance away from the novel, we 
recognize that we draw on more than the sentences comprising the novel 
and our current perceptual deliverances. We tacitly rely on a fairly exten -
sive and epistemologically informed understanding of novels and of per -
ception. We know enough about under lying mechanisms and track rec ords 
to have reason to credit some perceptual deliverances. We know enough 
about lit er a ture to realize that novels typically are not literally true. That 
constitutes sufficient reason for even casual perceptual deliverances to over-
ride the claims of the novel.
Juxtaposing the novel with perception might seem to make the prob-
lem too easy, though. Regardless of what we think about perception, if we 
recognize that a novel is a work of fiction, we have reason to discount any 
direct claims it may seem to make on our epistemic allegiance. 2 The seri -
ous challenge comes from a coherent factual account that conflicts with 
perceptual deliverances. If holism holds that such an account always over-
rides perceptual deliverances, it seems plainly unacceptable. However tightly 
woven an empirical account may be, we would be epistemically irrespon -
sible to ignore recalcitrant evidence. Foundationalists take this latter point 
to be decisive: if observation can show an account to be unjustified, then 
coherence cannot be the locus of justification.
This would be so if observation worked in isolation. For then, owing to its 
epistemic privilege, a single perceptual deliverance would have the capacity 
to discredit an entire system of thought. But that is a myth. Only observa -
tions we have reason to trust have the power to unseat theories. It is not an 
observation in isolation, but an observation backed by reasons, that actu -
ally discredits the account.
The holist response to the challenge presented by observation is this: a 
priori, perceptual deliverances have no special weight. They are just initially 
tenable commitments jockeying for inclusion in epistemically acceptable 
accounts. But as we attend to the fates of our vari ous initially tenable com-
mitments, we learn that the incorporation of some, but not  others, yields 
accounts that are borne out by further experience and that retain their place 
in a coherent system over time. This gives us grounds for discrimination. 
We realize that the deliverances we take to be perceptual are more likely 
to be confirmed than spontaneous deliverances that just leap to mind. So 
we assign greater weight to perceptual deliverances than to hunches and 
premonitions. Eventually, hunches and premonitions cease to qualify as

--- Page 92 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 79
initially tenable. Moreover, we learn that not all perceptual deliverances 
are on a par.  Those that are credible tend to come in mutually reinforcing 
streams, so isolated perceptual deliverances count for relatively  little. We 
begin to draw distinctions among perceptual deliverances. We discover that 
peripheral vision is less trustworthy than foveal vision. So we have reason 
to discount what we see out of the corner of the eye. This is not to say that 
we dismiss the deliverances of peripheral vision out of hand, only that we 
demand more in the way of corroboration. A passing glance that reveals 
what looks to be a goldfinch at the bird feeder requires additional support 
if  there is good reason to think that goldfinches have flown south for the 
winter. Some of us discover that we are color- blind or tone deaf or myopic. 
That is, we learn that our perceptions as of colors, pitches, or the dimen -
sions of distant objects are not to be trusted. And so on. We come to assign 
dif fer ent weights to perceptual deliverances depending on how well they 
accord with other  things we take ourselves to have reason to credit— other 
appearances of the same object, the reports of other observers, the implica-
tions of our best accounts of the perceptible properties of items of the kind 
in question, and so forth.
The issue is not simply how well a given content meshes with other 
 things we believe, but how well a given content from a given source in given 
circumstances does. The weight we attach to perceptual deliverances derives 
from our understanding of the world and our access to it. Perhaps initially 
this is just a  matter of track rec ords. Some perceptual deliverances seem to 
integrate better into acceptable accounts than spontaneous thoughts that 
just leap to mind.  Later, as we develop physiological and psychological 
accounts that explain our perceptual mechanisms, we gain additional rea -
sons to credit some perceptual deliverances. The epistemic privilege that 
some perceptual deliverances enjoy then derives from an understanding of 
ourselves as perceiving organisms. That is, the reason for assigning  those 
deliverances significant epistemic weight derives from the coherent account 
of perception that backs the assignment. Contrary to the foundationalist’s 
contention, the justification for privileging perception derives from the 
relation of perceptual judgments to the rest of our account of ourselves as 
cognitive agents interacting with a mind- independent world.
The reliabilist account seems to fare slightly better. What justifies assign-
ing visual inputs significant epistemic weight seems to be that vision is a 
reliable perceptual mechanism. What justifies dismissing forebodings is

--- Page 93 ---

80  Chapter 4
that premonition is not. This is not quite right, though. It is not the brute 
reliability or unreliability of a source that supplies the justification, but a 
recognition of that reliability or unreliability. Reliabilists disagree. They hold 
that the sheer fact that a pro cess is reliable renders its deliverances at least 
prima facie justified (see Goldman, 1986). They would say that if my fore -
bodings  were reliable, they would be justified.  Were I to believe them, their 
deliverances would be knowledge. Maybe so. But the knowledge would 
avail me  little. If I had no reason to trust my forebodings, they would not 
be acceptable. It would be irresponsible for me to use them as a basis for 
inference or action when my ends are cognitive. From my perspective, they 
would appear no dif fer ent from lucky guesses. Even if my forebodings are 
accurate and their source is reliable, so long as we have no reason to trust 
them, they rightly bear  little epistemic weight.
This argument explains both why some perceptual deliverances have 
the capacity to unsettle an account, and why  those deliverances are not 
intrinsically privileged. They owe their epistemic status to their place in 
our evolving understanding of the world and our modes of access to it. This 
has two welcome consequences. The first is that the privilege they enjoy 
is revocable. When Bill learns that he is color- blind, he needs to revise his 
views about which of his visual deliverances are acceptable. The second 
is that nonperceptual deliverances can in princi ple be equally weighty. This 
is an advantage in accounting for the epistemic status of scientific evidence 
and of testimony.
A look at modern science shows that it is not just (and perhaps not even 
mainly) bare perceptual deliverances that have the capacity to discredit a 
scientific account. The outputs of mea sur ing devices do too. In an effort to 
retain a tie to classical empiricism, some phi los o phers of science argue that 
mea sur ing devices are simply extensions of our senses. Just as eyeglasses 
enable the myopic to see what other wise they could not, telescopes and 
microscopes enable every one to see what other wise we could not. So if 
seeing something in suitable circumstances has sufficient weight to under-
mine a coherent cluster of commitments, seeing something through a tele-
scope or microscope should be able to do so too.
This idea is not unreasonable so long as we restrict ourselves to devices 
like optical telescopes and microscopes. But it stretches the bounds of plau-
sibility to contend that radio telescopes, electron microscopes, MRIs, and 
the like are also mere extenders of the sense of sight. It seems preferable to

--- Page 94 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 81
forgo the strained analogy and simply characterize such devices as detectors. 
Then an understanding of what they detect, how they detect, and why they 
should be trusted supplies reason to accord their outputs considerable epis-
temic weight. Even without the strained analogy, the argument for cred -
iting outputs of scientific instruments thus parallels the argument  for 
crediting perceptual deliverances. For although they are not perceptual 
mechanisms or even quasi- perceptual mechanisms, the devices are among 
our modes of access to the world.
Testimony poses a similar prob lem. We acquire many of our beliefs from 
the testimony of  others, and we consider  those beliefs justified. Some phi-
los o phers say that the justification for accepting testimony is a priori, albeit 
defeasible (e.g., Burge, 1993). Ceteris paribus, we are justified in accept -
ing what  people tell us.  Others say it is inductive. We should believe only 
 those who have shown themselves to be relevantly reliable in the past 
(E. Fricker, 1994). The former threaten to endorse gullibility, the latter to 
unduly limit acceptability. Something more sensitive is wanted. Evidently 
the question is not  whether testimony per se is or is not prima facie accept-
able. Some testimony is frankly incredible; some requires a good deal of 
corroboration; some is straightforwardly acceptable. The acceptability of a 
bit of testimony depends on how well its content coheres with other rel -
evant deliverances, how well the belief that the testifier is competent with 
re spect to her allegation coheres, and how well the belief that she is sincere 
coheres (Hume, 1977).  Because of its mesh with our background beliefs, 
straightforwardly acceptable testimony scores high on all  these mea sures. 
Just as dif fer ent perceptual deliverances are accorded dif fer ent weights, so 
are dif fer ent bits of testimony. Testimony with sufficiently strong backing 
can discredit a hitherto tenable cluster of beliefs. Even though the deliver -
ances of perception, testimony, and instrumental readings have no special 
standing a priori, in light of our evolving theories of the world and our 
modes of access to it, some of them turn out to bear considerable epistemic 
weight. This satisfies the demand that acceptable beliefs be appropriately 
constrained by the way the world is. It also reveals that holism has the 
resources to recognize that initially tenable commitments can differ in 
weight, some being more credible than  others. The claims of the few can in 
suitable circumstances outweigh the claims of the many.

--- Page 95 ---

82  Chapter 4
Adjudication
In adjudicating among competing claims, we prioritize. We do not consider 
all initial commitments on a par. When they clash, we preserve some at the 
expense of  others, and consider our decisions reasonable. Systematizing is 
informed by higher- order commitments that assign weights to first- order 
commitments. Although in princi ple any commitment can be revised or 
rejected in the interests of systematicity, commitments differ in cognitive 
inertia. Some are readily given up;  others are abandoned with  great reluc-
tance. We readily relinquish the initially tenable commitment that  there 
is a cowbird at the bird feeder in Mas sa chu setts in January. Since it is at 
best only weakly interwoven with our other commitments,  little is lost by 
abandoning it.
But, as Quine recognizes, even central, tightly woven contentions may 
justifiably be surrendered. ‘Inanimate material objects are identical when 
and only when their parts are identical’ is a highly plausible princi ple that 
many metaphysicians consider necessary. If so, it cannot be false. Being a 
universal claim, it should hold for particles of a viscous fluid. However, if it 
holds, ‘F = ma’ does not. The reason is this: The molecules in a viscous fluid 
move at dif fer ent rates. In prototypical applications of ‘F = ma’, forces act on 
objects like billiard balls that have some sort of material integrity or sharp 
boundary. But in viscous fluids, the ‘forces’ on the ‘object’ are the effects on 
momentum of molecules moving in and out of that ‘object’. So preserving 
‘F = ma’ requires continually redefining what constitutes a particle, letting 
dif fer ent molecules comprise it at dif fer ent times. Although physicists con-
cede that ‘F = ma’ does not hold at the quantum level or at speeds and dis-
tances where relativistic  factors play a major role, it is an extremely valuable 
law for characterizing the be hav ior of slow- moving middle- sized items in 
this region of the cosmos. That includes the viscous fluids flowing around 
 here. Fluid mechanics thus characterizes its particles so as to comport with 
the law. Rather than insisting that all component molecules of a particle be 
the same from one instant to the next, they let the individual molecules 
come and go, but keep the average enclosed mass constant (Wilson, 2006, 
158–159). ‘F = ma’ evidently is so central a law of physics that scientists are 
willing to make drastic revisions in the criteria for the identity of a particle 
over time in order to preserve it. In this case, the tension is acute. One way 
or another, a radical revision in antecedently plausible princi ples is needed.

--- Page 96 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 83
 Either scientists must revise a very reasonable metaphysical commitment 
about the identity of an object over time, or they must revise a fundamental 
law of physics.
The issue of scope remains. The totality of a person’s epistemic commit-
ments is unlikely to be coherent. Not only are  there outliers and inconsisten-
cies among commitments, but an epistemic agent also harbors constellations 
of commitments that are relatively isolated from one another. Meg’s cluster 
of beliefs about the pituitary gland, the evidence that bears on the accept -
ability of  these beliefs, the trustworthiness of testimony on the subject, and 
the proper methods for assessing such  matters has few and loose connec -
tions to her cluster of views about parliamentary procedure, the evidence 
that bears on  these views, the trustworthiness of testimony about the sub-
ject, and the proper methods for assessing them. It seems that she could 
easily be badly wrong about the former without her error having any sig -
nificant effect on the tenability of her views about the latter. Outliers and 
inconsistencies among beliefs are in princi ple relatively unproblematic. 
According to holists, outliers lack justification.  Because they lack suitable 
connections to other epistemic commitments, although they are initially 
tenable, the epistemic agent has  little reason to credit them. Inconsistencies 
among commitments conclusively demonstrate that some of them are false. 
But it is not obvious that mutual indifference of clusters of commitments 
is objectionable. It would be unreasonable to consider Meg epistemically 
defective  because of the lack of close ties between the two clusters. On the 
other hand, if the clusters of commitments are too small and too numer -
ous, complacency over their mutual indifference seems problematic. We do 
not want to license ignoring incon ve nient tensions among commitments 
by consigning them to mutually irrelevant clusters.
The prob lem neither has nor needs an a priori resolution. Our evolv -
ing theories of the world and our access to it provide us with an appreciation 
of the relations in which our vari ous clusters of commitments should stand 
to one another and the requirements they should satisfy. Such a laissez- faire 
attitude might seem to allow for the acceptability of crazy constellations 
of views. If we leave it to our evolving worldviews to decide what range 
of considerations acceptable accounts must answer to, we may be forced 
to endorse isolated islands of claptrap. The worry is more apparent than 
real. We have metalevel accounts that enable us to assess the reasons, meth-
ods, standards, and evidence that our vari ous object- level accounts appeal

--- Page 97 ---

84  Chapter 4
to. Some requirements, such as logical consistency, apply globally. Regardless 
of the distance between them,  unless they can be conjoined without con-
tradiction, Meg’s po liti cal and endocrinological commitments are not all 
acceptable. Other requirements, like the need to re spect judicial pre ce dents 
or to accord with biochemical findings, are more limited in range. But even 
 these do not enable us to completely isolate clusters of commitments. Even 
if Meg’s views about endocrinology and politics have few points of contact, 
her views about endocrinology and hematology have many.
Consistency requirements do more than rule out express contradictions. 
The general requirement that like cases be treated alike demands that if a 
consideration has weight in one area but not in another,  there must be an 
acceptable reason for the difference. To be tenable, a system of mutually 
reinforcing claims must  either answer to the logical and evidential stan -
dards to which other theories are subject or be backed by a tenable account 
of why  those standards do not apply. Some theories have such backing. 
 There are, for example, cogent reasons why mathe matics is not subject to 
empirical testing. So infinitary mathe matics is not threatened by the absence 
of empirical evidence for its findings. In epistemically objectionable cases, 
no such reasons are available. The claims of ‘creation science’, although 
purportedly mutually reinforcing, are epistemically unacceptable  because 
they are indefeasible. According to their adherents, nothing could count as 
evidence against them, for what ever we find is the way God created  things. 
To say that something cannot be ruled out a priori is not to say that it can-
not be definitely and decisively ruled out.
A familiar objection to coherentism is that coherence is so easily achieved 
that it affords no reason to believe that the contentions in a coherent 
account are true, hence no justification for them. This assumes that any 
coherent collection of claims is as good as any other and that whenever 
incoherence threatens, we can restore coherence by throwing out what ever 
poses the threat. What ever its merits as an objection to pure coherentism, 
it does not apply to positions that ground acceptability in reflective equilib-
rium. First, not all initially tenable commitments are object- level statements 
pertaining to the topic at hand. Among  those we seek to accommodate 
are ostensible epistemic values, such as simplicity and relevance; ostensible 
epistemic standards, such as standards of statistical significance and of evi-
dential support; ostensible epistemic criteria, such as  those specifying what 
counts as validity and as argument; and ostensibly acceptable methods,

--- Page 98 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 85
such as controlled experiments and random sampling. It is by no means 
easy to bring all of  these into accord. Second, the objection overlooks the 
special role that initially tenable commitments play.  Because they are con-
siderations that pres ent themselves as creditable, they serve as touchstones 
for theorizing. They supply epistemic ballast, preventing us from restoring 
coherence by simply rejecting considerations cavalierly.
Not all initially tenable commitments, of course, pres ent themselves as 
candidates for belief. Putatively felicitous falsehoods pres ent themselves 
as being presumptively true enough. Putatively acceptable values, methods, 
standards, and criteria are ele ments of the constellations within which dox-
astic commitments function. So the slight presumption in  favor of doxastic 
commitments extends to axiological and methodological commitments 
and felicitous falsehoods as well. They, too, are initially tenable.
We devise a flexible network of cognitive commitments that, through 
continual readjustments, achieves an understanding of the topic that is on 
balance reasonable. None of the commitments is absolutely unrevisable. Dif-
fer ent potential revisions have dif fer ent costs and benefits. To decide among 
potential revisions requires asking what sort of understanding we seek, what 
resources we have to draw on, and what limitations we currently face. We 
have multiple cognitive desiderata— simplicity, fecundity, elegance, predic-
tive power, and so on. Insofar as is feasible, revisions in our initially ten -
able commitments should yield an account that satisfies them. Moreover, 
with the advancement of inquiry, methods, standards, values, and goals 
evolve.  There emerge new understandings of how to find or figure  things 
out, what sorts of methods and results stand the test of time, what sorts of 
repre sen ta tions are apt, what desiderata are worth pursuing and when and 
how they might conflict. When the account that emerges is grounded in 
considerations that are collectively as good as any available alternatives, it 
is an account we can on reflection accept.
Some might dispute this. If our initial commitments  were quite wide of 
the mark, the account that results might still be far from the truth. This is 
so. Nevertheless, such an account is an epistemic improvement over our 
starting point and is as good as anything we have reason to accept in  those 
dismal epistemic circumstances. It affords a relatively stable platform for 
research that may yield yet further improvements.
To see this, consider a skeptical scenario. Imagine that unbeknownst 
to themselves, a group of scientists live in a Berkeleyan universe. What

--- Page 99 ---

86  Chapter 4
they take to be material objects are  really immaterial ideas in the mind of 
God. Initially, they have fairly crude, unsystematic opinions about how 
 things behave and about how to find out how they behave. Over time, they 
correct, extend, and systematize their approach to the point where they 
develop the scientific method. They subject their findings to peer review. 
They insist on controlled, repeatable experiments whose results are statisti-
cally significant. The geniuses among them come up with laws that reveal 
an astonishing order and regularity among the phenomena they observe. 
The order  those laws describe obtains. The ‘orbits’ of the ‘planets’, the ‘tides’, 
and ‘falling bodies’ fall  under the same equations. Their account is wrong, 
however, in that it takes the substrate for that order to be material rather 
than  mental.
 There is no denying that this is a big  mistake. But, I would urge, we 
should also acknowledge their significant epistemic achievement. Other-
wise we would have to construe the success of their science as a fluke. They 
can, like all scientists, make further pro gress by extending, correcting, and 
deepening their account, improving their methods, fine- tuning their crite-
ria, and so on. Maybe someday they  will be in a position to recognize that 
 matter, as they conceive it, does not exist; maybe not. But it seems churl -
ish to discount their achievement  because it yields insight only into the 
structure of real ity, not into its metaphysical ground. Rather, I contend, 
we should recognize that  because their opinions, methods, criteria, and 
standards are in reflective equilibrium, they are reasonable in the epistemic 
circumstances. The system they have constructed is as good epistemologi -
cally as could have been achieved given their unfortunate starting points.
Some might concede that the method of reflective equilibrium is the 
way we go about developing our accounts. It is,  after all, a schematic ideal-
ization of the self- correcting scientific method. But, they would insist, it is 
only a method. What makes an account a good account is not that it was 
generated by the method, but that it satisfies some in de pen dently specified 
standard. Typically the standard is truth. And what makes the method a 
good method is that it tends to produce theories that satisfy the external 
standard. The justification for the method of reflective equilibrium, they 
would maintain, is that it is truth conducive.3
 There are at least two replies. One is that we have no assurance that the 
accounts we accept satisfy the standard. If the standard is  really in de pen-
dent of the method, we might legitimately won der  whether the accounts

--- Page 100 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 87
we credit are true.  Going back and garnering more evidence would plunge 
us back into the method of reflective equilibrium, whose bona fides are in 
question. This is a version of the prob lem of the criterion (Chisholm, 1973). 
Moreover, if the standard is truth, the account devised in the Berkeleyan 
world is devoid of epistemic merit. Perhaps we can concede that the scien-
tists did the best they could, but in the circumstances,  there was no way to 
come up with an epistemically estimable account. From a purely epistemo-
logical point of view, they are no better than their compatriots who cava -
lierly jump to conclusions without even trying to amass or assess evidence.
This is not just a point about some fictional scientists in a made-up 
world. We have no conclusive evidence that we are not in their situation. 
That being so, the acceptability of accounts that satisfy the standards we 
actually use is doubtful.  Unless we can explain why being in reflective equi-
librium is truth conducive, we seem hostages to epistemic fortune. From our 
perspective,  whether we live in a Berkeleyan world is a  matter of epistemic 
luck. If we can explain it, we can treat being true or truth conducive as an 
objective that we attempt to accommodate in devising theories in reflective 
equilibrium. And, if we like, we can assign truth or truth- conduciveness 
a high priority so that other desiderata would be given up to achieve it. I 
 will argue below that science tends to be much more flexible in its attitude 
 toward truth, but in princi ple we could take a hard line.
It might seem that the requirement on epistemic acceptability it is too 
lenient. ‘As good as any available alternative’ is not ‘better than any avail-
able alternative’, much less ‘better than any alternative, available or not’. 
Why  settle for so  little? The method I sketched plainly leaves room for 
ties. When commitments clash, dif fer ent trade- offs may be equally good 
on balance. One might sacrifice a mea sure of sensitivity for an increase in 
scope; the other might sacrifice scope for sensitivity. It seems dogmatic to 
insist that one must be better than the other when, by our standards, both 
do an equally good job and none does a better job at realizing our cognitive 
desiderata.
Some phi los o phers think that such ties just reveal our epistemic inad-
equacy.  There is one way the world is, so  there is one and only one correct 
account of the world. If at a certain point in our investigation, we have 
two or more equally good accounts (and none better), that just shows that 
our methods, standards, or criteria are too weak. We need to introduce tie 
breakers (D. Lewis, 1999a). But even if  there is just one way the world is, 4

--- Page 101 ---

88  Chapter 4
the contention that  there is exactly one best account of the world is unwar-
ranted. What makes for a good account depends not just on the subject 
 matter of the account but also on our goals and resources in theorizing. 
Even if the world’s contribution is fixed, dif fer ent accommodations to our 
inevitably limited resources may be equally reasonable. No argument is given 
that would privilege a preference for a more sensitive account over one with 
greater scope, or conversely. Sensitivity and scope are both desiderata. We 
can explain why each of them is desirable. But the conviction that  there 
is a unique optimal balance between them is unwarranted. Requiring that 
we refine our standards  until we achieve uniqueness is idle. Without an 
epistemically accessible indication of what justifies one refinement over 
another, any decision would be arbitrary.
To insist that an account is unacceptable  unless it is better than any 
alternative,  whether available or not, is perilously close to an argument for 
skepticism. To suspend judgment  until we have reason to believe that an 
account we have devised is better than any imaginable or unimaginable 
alternative is to suspend judgment permanently; to accept an account on 
the assumption that it is better than any imaginable or unimaginable alter-
native is intellectually arrogant. It intimates that the account satisfies a 
standard it cannot plausibly be known or reasonably believed to satisfy. To 
insist that uniqueness is required is to consign our accounts to inadequacy, 
what ever merits they display. Or it is to contend disingenuously that the 
accounts we consider acceptable satisfy standards we have no evidence that 
they satisfy, indeed standards we cannot even articulate. The best policy, 
then, is to take the standard of acceptability to be ‘as good as any available 
alternative’ and to forgo a demand for uniqueness.
Earlier I said that truth has a more peripheral role in understanding than 
epistemologists standardly think. We are now in a position to see what that 
role is. A tenable account affords an understanding of its topic. An account 
is tenable only if it is in reflective equilibrium. This may require that claims 
in the account that purport to be true actually be true, or anyway not off 
by much. Although science endorses felicitously false models, it does not 
consider false observation reports to be felicitous. Fidelity to the evidence 
seems mandatory. Observation reports are not, of course, the only asser -
tions in scientific accounts. Assertions— about laws, boundary conditions, 
methods, and so forth— are scattered throughout. It might seem, then, that 
 there is a streamlined answer to our question: tenability requires that the

--- Page 102 ---

The Fabric of Understanding 89
assertions in an account be true and the professions be felicitously false. For 
assertions purport to be true, and professions purport to be felicitous. Only 
then, we might think, would an account embody an understanding of the 
phenomena it concerns.
This does not quite work, for understanding grows over time. One of 
the ways it grows is by overthrowing previously accepted accounts. Sellars 
(1968) maintains that when one theory supplants another, it should have 
the resources to explain why its pre de ces sor did as well as it did. Often the 
reason the pre de ces sor was so successful is that some of its central assertions, 
which  were put forth as true, turned out to be felicitously false. Kepler’s 
laws, presented as true, neglected the gravitational force on the Earth of 
every thing except the sun. As Newton recognized, Kepler’s laws are false. 
For the gravitational forces exerted by the other planets affect the Earth’s 
orbit. But  because the forces exerted by the planets are relatively insignifi-
cant compared with that of the sun, Kepler’s laws are not off by much. So 
Newton’s theory satisfies Sellars’s demand by reinterpreting statements that 
purport to be true as felicitously false. That a sentence is asserted shows 
only that it purports to be true. It does not show that its truth is what it 
contributes to the tenability of account it belongs to. Truth evidently is 
epistemically impor tant only to the extent that it contributes to tenability.
My position does not privilege any sorts of beliefs or repre sen ta tions a 
priori. Nothing  favors the verbal, the literal, the descriptive, or the true. 
Acceptability derives from reflective equilibrium. So  whether a repre sen-
ta tion (true or false, verbal or pictorial, literal or figurative, denotative or 
exemplificational) is acceptable turns on  whether it is an ele ment of an 
account in reflective equilibrium. What commitments are worthy of ac cep-
tance is something we learn by developing increasingly comprehensive, 
coherent accounts of the world and our access to it. The method enables us 
to start from what ever initially tenable commitments we happen to have. 
But  because it insists that we subject them to rigorous assessment, such 
a starting point is not question begging. The standards of assessment are 
themselves the fruits of epistemic activity and can change in response to 
feedback (Goodman, 1984, 69). Hence, nothing is in princi ple immune to 
revision. An account that we can on reflection accept  today may be one 
that we cannot on reflection accept tomorrow. But so long as an account is 
in reflective equilibrium, it and its components are justified. What results 
is neither certainty nor skepticism but a fallible, provisional, reasonable

--- Page 103 ---

90  Chapter 4
epistemic stance. We judge our commitments and potential revisions of 
our commitments against one another to see which combination seems 
best on balance. But we also judge our criteria for being best on balance by 
seeing if they yield verdicts that we can on reflection endorse. No account 
or component of an account is irrevocable, but an account in reflective 
equilibrium is acceptable  until prob lems emerge or improvements are 
envisioned. The justification for this verdict lies in the fact that the com -
mitments in reflective equilibrium are as reasonable as any alternative in the 
epistemic circumstances.

--- Page 104 ---

The repudiation of veritism opens an impor tant gap.1 If truth- conduciveness 
is not the standard by which epistemic policies and practices are to be 
judged, what is? I suggest that rather than epistemic practice having an 
exogenous aim, its aims are delineated by and within the practice itself. 
Epistemic standards are vindicated not by being reliable promoters or indi-
cators of truth or any other external end, but by being products and pro -
moters of responsible epistemic agency. Epistemic norms, then, are norms 
of responsible epistemic agency. In this chapter I argue that epistemic norms 
are norms that would emerge from the deliberations of suitably idealized 
epistemic agents. Drawing on Kant, I urge that such agents are to be con -
strued as legislating members of a realm of epistemic ends. This is an ideal-
ized model of real- life communities of inquiry. The idealization eliminates 
 factors that distort deliberations. I argue that legislators must be, in a 
 politi cal sense,  free and equal. They must be  free to advance any hypothesis 
they consider  viable and equally entitled to be heard. This does not mean 
construing them as equally smart or construing their views as equally worthy 
of ac cep tance. It means only that they are entitled to be heard. The result 
is a form of epistemic responsibilism. It explains why a system in reflective 
equilibrium is worthy of ac cep tance even though  there is no guarantee that 
it is true.
Reflective Endorsement
If epistemic normativity is keyed to epistemic responsibility, what are the 
criteria for epistemic responsibility? One familiar requirement on respon -
sibility is ‘ ought’ implies ‘can’: x is responsible for y only if  whether y 
obtains is  under x’s (direct or indirect) control. If x cannot bring about y, or 
5 Epistemic Normativity

--- Page 105 ---

92  Chapter 5
x cannot prevent y, then x is not responsible for the occurrence or nonoc -
currence of y.2 Epistemic agents have  little if any control over their epis -
temic environment. They cannot, for example, control  whether they live 
in a Berkeleyan world. So they are not epistemically remiss if the falsity of 
their beliefs derives from an undetectable mismatch between the evidence 
and its metaphysical ground. Nor are agents epistemically remiss if, in a 
more auspicious world, they form a false belief on the basis of evidence 
that is scrupulously garnered and carefully analyzed but misleading. Truth- 
conduciveness, then, is not the criterion of epistemic responsibility. What 
is the alternative? Even in an inauspicious world, agents can exercise epis -
temic self- discipline (see Weatherson, 2008). They can decide  whether on 
reflection to endorse considerations that pres ent themselves as candidates 
for ac cep tance.
According to Kant (1981), someone who acts autonomously makes the 
laws that bind her, while someone who behaves heteronomously is bound 
by constraints he neither makes nor endorses. He is not strictly an agent, 
for he does not act; he merely reacts. He responds to stimuli. Although Kant 
describes the heteronomous subject as driven by his inclinations or desires, 
action is a joint product of belief and desire. So a subject is equally heteron-
omous if he is driven by beliefs that are not  under his control. This suggests 
that it may be fruitful to import Kant’s distinction into the epistemic realm.
Inasmuch as we are cognitive beings with sensory and repre sen ta tional 
capacities, a variety of  things simply strike us as being the case. Deliverances 
of sensation, emotion, apparent memory, and imagination pres ent them -
selves as candidates for ac cep tance. It might seem that this makes us, at base, 
epistemically heteronomous. We  can’t help but see, hear, and feel what we 
do. But the issue is not  whether we are passive in the reception of inputs; 
it is what we do with  those inputs. The heteronomous individual simply 
takes deliverances at face value. For him, seeing is believing. Or perhaps 
seeing is not always believing, but  whether he believes what he sees is not 
up to him. He simply finds himself believing something on the basis of his 
deliverances, being  under the sway of what ever belief forming mechanisms 
happen to be operative. Since his beliefs are considerations that just strike 
him— since he can neither defend nor criticize them— they are not  under 
his control.
The beliefs he finds himself with might be reliable. Perhaps  humans 
evolved in such a way that what strikes us as dangerous usually is dangerous.

--- Page 106 ---

Epistemic Normativity 93
If so, when the subject thinks an animal is dangerous, it usually is; when 
he thinks an animal is harmless, it usually is. Maybe this generalizes. To 
the extent that his dispositions are reliable, he is objectively secure. Never-
theless, he is in a subjectively precarious position. Reliabilism is a form of 
veritism that holds that a disposition or pro cess is epistemically creditable 
just in case it is reliably truth conducive and a true belief is knowledge just 
in case it is a nonfortuitous product of exercising a reliable disposition or of 
appropriately using a reliable pro cess.  Whether the reliabilist requirement 
is satisfied is in de pen dent of  whether the subject thinks it is and in de pen-
dent of her reasons (if any) for thinking it is. Evidentialist veritism holds 
that a subject’s true belief qualifies as knowledge just in case it is backed 
by adequate evidence, where the adequacy condition covers not just the 
amount of evidence but also its being nonfortuitously linked to the belief’s 
truth- maker. Again it makes no difference  whether the agent thinks that the 
requirement is satisfied. As far as veritism is concerned, heteronomous, jus-
tified, nonfortuitously true beliefs, and the pro cesses and dispositions that 
underwrite them, are epistemically creditable. Still, insofar as the subject’s 
reflective endorsement or repudiation of his beliefs and the pro cesses that 
gave rise to them have no bearing on their epistemic status, he is a victim 
of circumstances.
Perhaps his situation is not so dire as I make it out to be. The believer can 
register his successes and failures, and credit the dispositions and mecha -
nisms that engender success. He might notice that deliverances of foveal 
vision tend to be borne out by subsequent experience more frequently than 
deliverances of peripheral vision. So he assigns foveal deliverances greater 
credence. But the question then arises for the second- order beliefs, pro-
cesses, and dispositions he credits. Do they just strike him as correct? Can 
he defend the way he registers, identifies, rec ords, and tallies successes and 
failures? Even if his methods are in fact reliable, so long as he has nothing 
more to say than that it strikes him that this is a good way to proceed—
to identify, tally, or measure—he remains vulnerable. Second- order heter -
onomy is as problematic as first- order heteronomy.3 Moving to yet higher 
 orders is of no help. Regardless of the level, so long as the best that can be 
said for the princi ples or pro cesses he ultimately relies on is that they strike 
him as correct, he is vulnerable. He may be on safe ground, but he has no 
reason think he is. He is driven to believe by considerations he happens to 
be struck by. And he is not responsible for what strikes him.

--- Page 107 ---

94  Chapter 5
Is the autonomous agent any better off? She too may be struck by  things. 
Her inputs may be exactly the same as  those of the heteronomous subject.4 
But her relation to them is dif fer ent. Forming opinions is something she 
does, not something that happens to her. What she does in forming opin-
ions is, as it  were, filter deliverances (such as putatively perceptual inputs, 
apparent memories, or simply ideas that cross her mind) through a critical 
sieve, accepting only  those she considers worthy of her reflective endorse-
ment. What blocks the regress to ever higher- order heteronomy is that 
second- order endorsement is the product of agency. The agent decides to 
accept, reject, or withhold. Epistemic subjects are epistemic agents; they 
take their beliefs, practices, and policies to be answerable to certain norms 
 because they think that epistemically acceptable beliefs, practices, and poli-
cies  ought to be answerable to  those norms.
To be sure, an epistemic agent does not entertain deliverances one by 
one and ask herself, ‘Am I buying this?’ Rather, she develops and deploys 
a variety of methods, mechanisms, heuristics, and habits that enable her 
to credit or discredit wide swaths of inputs efficiently. Apparent sightings 
of not unexpected middle- sized objects in good light in the center of her 
visual field are apt to be readily accepted. Given her prior experiences and 
other epistemic commitments, having no reason to reject them may con -
stitute reason enough to accept them. But if  there is something incongru-
ous about a deliverance—if, for example, she seems to see a camel on Main 
Street in small town Amer i ca— she does not simply accept it. She may reject 
it as a hallucination, an illusion, or a misperception; or she may suspend 
judgment  until she investigates  whether a camel is part of a local publicity 
stunt, po liti cal rally, or circus parade. Similarly if she is aware of something 
untoward about her condition as an observer: if she is half awake or on new 
medi cation or intently focusing on something  else, she may refuse to credit 
a surprising deliverance. The critical point is that what she accepts is a prod-
uct of her reflective endorsement. She is willing to stand  behind it  because 
it satisfies her standards. Even if her ac cep tances are largely automatic, she 
could, if she chose, withhold ac cep tance of the content of a deliverance, or 
of a source of deliverances. What makes the epistemic agent responsible for 
her opinions is that she takes responsibility for them.

--- Page 108 ---

Epistemic Normativity 95
Voluntarism
Can she  really choose? Doxastic voluntarists, such as William James (1951), 
maintain that belief is at least sometimes subject to the  will. According 
to James, if someone thinks his life would go better if he believed that a 
benevolent God watches over him, it is both pos si ble and epistemically per-
missible for him to do so. Pretty much every one acknowledges that the  will 
can indirectly influence belief. An agent can garner evidence, put herself in 
a position to be influenced, even arrange to be hypnotized in hopes that 
the belief she desires  will result. Sometimes such strategies are effective. But 
voluntarists like James claim that the influence of the  will is direct: A per-
son can believe something simply by deciding to do so. James restricts his 
voluntarism to realms, like the religious, where empirical evidence does 
not have much purchase. Such a restriction is imperative if the position is 
to be at all plausible. It would hard to maintain that a driver could simply 
decide to believe that she was cruising down a country lane in the south of 
France when all the evidence points to her being caught in a traffic jam on 
the Cross Bronx Expressway. But, James maintains, where  there is no evi -
dence  either way, a person can believe that God exists or believe that God 
does not exist, as she desires.
Williams disagrees. He argues that  because belief is world directed, and 
belief formation is responsive to evidence, the state that would emerge 
from such a resolution would not be belief.
If I could acquire a belief at  will, I could acquire it  whether it was true or not; more-
over I would know that I could acquire it  whether it was true or not. If in full con -
sciousness I could  will to acquire a ‘belief’ irrespective of its truth, it is unclear that 
before the event I could seriously think of it as a belief, i.e., as something purporting 
to represent real ity. At the very least,  there must be a restriction on what is the case 
 after the event; since I could not then, in full consciousness, regard this as a belief 
of mine, i.e., as something I take to be true, and also know that I acquired it at  will. 
(1978, 148; see also Adler, 2002)
In order to be responsive to the world, Williams maintains, belief must be 
resistant to the  will.
The issue is trickier than Williams recognizes. A standard objection to 
doxastic voluntarism is that if belief (or belief formation)  were voluntary, 
an agent could form any belief she likes, just by deciding to do so. The man-
ifest impossibility of believing what ever one likes regardless of the evidence

--- Page 109 ---

96  Chapter 5
seems to  settle the case. But voluntary actions are not completely unfet -
tered. Walking is voluntary even though no one can at  will walk from San 
Francisco to Honolulu. Voluntary actions are subject to constraints.
Some are what we might call enterprise- specific constraints. An enter -
prise both enables and limits the range of a participant’s voluntary actions. 
Only in chess is a knight fork pos si ble; and how a player can create a knight 
fork is constrained by the rules of the game. Nevertheless, moving one’s 
knight so as to create a fork is a voluntary action. The fact that a player can-
not perform that action whenever she pleases— while playing football, for 
example, or while baking brownies— does not undermine the status of the 
move as a voluntary action. Nor does the fact that a chess player cannot 
create a fork just by wanting to. The pieces on the board must be distributed 
in such a way that a player can move her knight into a position that puts 
two of her opponent’s pieces in jeopardy. This is not always pos si ble. But 
when it is pos si ble, her decision to move her knight to the relevant position 
is surely a voluntary act.
How does this bear on belief? As we have seen, to take belief formation 
to be subject to the unfettered  will is a  mistake. We cannot make ourselves 
believe that it is snowing (Feldman, 2008), or that  we’re driving through 
France, or that a benevolent God exists (Pascal, 2007) simply by decid -
ing to do so. The question is  whether the doxastic realm is, like a chess 
game, a realm in which voluntary actions are subject to enterprise- specific 
constraints (see Shah, 2002). I suggest that it is. Beliefs are supposed to be 
responsive to evidence. Still, agents can and often do cut corners, jump to 
conclusions, reason carelessly, and think sloppily. They are subject to criti-
cism for their errors and omissions, for they could do better if they tried. 
Or so, evidently, we think.  There is apparently a range of freedom available 
to agents in their evidence gathering and assessing. The availability of that 
freedom to maneuver affords a basis for praise and blame,  because how 
scrupulous epistemic agents are is  under their voluntary control. The free-
dom to maneuver is delimited by the epistemic enterprise. To accept that p 
is to be willing to use p as a basis of inference or action when one’s ends are 
cognitive. This is not the same as to be willing to use p whenever one likes. 
The agent is not  free to import into the epistemic realm  factors, such as 
wishes or desires, that reside elsewhere. So the prob lem with James’s ‘ will 
to believe’ is not, as Williams thinks, that belief is wholly involuntary. It is

--- Page 110 ---

Epistemic Normativity 97
that James contends that epistemic agents can draw on  factors outside the 
epistemic realm in deciding what to believe.
Nevertheless, a case sketched by Firth (1981) and elaborated by Berker 
(2013) might seem to raise a serious difficulty for my position. Suppose 
Jane is a talented chemist with a promising hypothesis. She needs funding 
to test it and the only available source of funds is a foundation that only 
supports research by theists. Jane, unfortunately, is an atheist and a terrible 
actor. She knows that she cannot persuasively fake religious belief. So she 
has herself hypnotized into believing that Odin exists. (The foundation 
insists on belief in a god but is ecumenical about which god it is.) She gets 
the grant, does the research, and makes contributions that advance the 
understanding of her subject considerably. Despite the good that came of 
it, one wants to say that her belief in Odin’s existence is epistemically unac-
ceptable. It was illicitly imported from an extra- epistemic realm.
It might seem, however, that I can say no such  thing. Jane accepted the 
contention that Odin exists as a basis for action (the action required to get 
the grant) when her ends  were cognitive ( doing the research). So ‘Odin 
exists’ looks like a felicitous falsehood. If I am committed to this, my posi-
tion is in trou ble. Luckily, I am not. Jane’s false and unwarranted belief 
is instrumentally relevant to her contributions to science. An epistemic 
consequentialist should recognize that it is truth conducive, hence pre -
sumptively acceptable. But the belief does not figure in Jane’s contributions 
to science. Talk of Odin appears nowhere in her scholarly work. Nor is it 
presupposed by that work. Once she has obtained the funds, her belief in 
Odin’s existence plays no further role. It is not woven into her fabric of 
epistemic commitments. Felicitous falsehoods, on my theory, are integral 
to tenable accounts. They are not merely causal antecedents. My position 
is nonconsequentialist.
An agent’s epistemic be hav ior is, in a variety of obvious ways, subject 
to her  will. She can decide when to stop gathering evidence, when to stop 
checking inferences, when to stop investigating other perspectives, and so 
on. Epistemic ac cep tance thus is properly subject to ‘ ought implies can’.
Still, it might seem that to some extent belief is heteronomous. Given 
her evidence for p, an agent cannot help but believe it.  Here the distinction 
between conviction and ac cep tance pays dividends. Perhaps she cannot 
help but feel that p is so; p, then, is her conviction. But ac cep tance is a

--- Page 111 ---

98  Chapter 5
product of autonomous agency. An agent decides to accept p as a basis for 
cognitively serious inference and action when she reflectively endorses that 
p. In ac cep tance, the  will has a role to play.
Williams is right that the world impresses itself on epistemic agents. 
We do not get to simply wish its deliverances away. Nor can we cavalierly 
refuse to countenance deliverances  because we want to. The issue is what 
we can endorse upon reflection— that is, in light of our other epistemic com-
mitments. We can responsibly reject or suspend judgment about a deliver-
ance if it seems sufficiently implausible. This is what Nozick (1981) calls 
the Optional Stop Rule. It is always open to epistemic agents to refuse to 
countenance a conclusion that they consider sufficiently implausible. They 
can deem that the argument for it contains an undetected flaw. In everyday 
epistemic practice, we thus have a mechanism for responsibly withhold -
ing reflective endorsement. But consigning a deliverance to the realm of 
misperceptions or hallucinations, or an argument to the realm of  those 
with undetected flaws, has costs. Consigners then face the job of explain -
ing what gave rise to the misperception or hallucination, or where the flaw 
is located. To bring their views about their recent experience into reflective 
equilibrium, they need to account for the recalcitrant deliverance.
The role of the  will in reflective endorsement is not at the level of asking 
 whether the agent wants to accept a par tic u lar contention. An agent cannot 
reflectively endorse a contention simply  because she wants  things to be as it 
says they are. Nor can she reflectively endorse it  because, despite its mani-
fest untenability, it would be, as it was in Jane’s case, epistemically fruitful 
to do so. Rather, the agent, along with other members of her epistemic 
community, sets standards of evidence and thresholds for ac cep tance. They 
determine how much evidence is required for a contention of a given sort 
to be worthy of reflective endorsement. The agent is not at liberty to decide 
as she likes  whether she sees a camel on Main Street. But she and the other 
members of the community have a mea sure of liberty in deciding how much 
evidence she needs for the contention that she sees the camel on Main 
Street to be acceptable. That liberty is constrained by requirements of con-
sistency and coherence with other  matters they reflectively endorse.
Epistemic endorsement, then, is a product of agency. Ac cep tance is  under 
an epistemic agent’s voluntary control. But it does not follow that a respon-
sible epistemic agent can accept what ever she pleases. Reflective equilib -
rium requires that her epistemic commitments be mutually supportive and

--- Page 112 ---

Epistemic Normativity 99
that they constitute an account that is at least as reasonable as any available 
alternative in the epistemic circumstances.
Reasons
Reflection does not occur in a vacuum. It involves sensitivity to epistemic 
ends and means, capacities and limitations. It is imbued with (often tacit) 
background assumptions and is responsive to epistemic circumstances. A 
sighting of what looks to be camel on Main Street typically warrants further 
investigation; a sighting of what looks to be a mid- priced American car on 
Main Street ordinarily does not. An argument leading to an astonishing con-
clusion often provokes further inquiry; an argument leading to an expected 
one normally does not. An agent’s reflective endorsement is a willingness 
to be bound by an epistemic commitment (an opinion, method, or stan -
dard)  because, given her background epistemic commitments, she thinks 
that her epistemic purposes  will be served by her being so bound. She con-
siders the items she reflectively endorses trustworthy bases for inference 
and action when her ends are cognitive.
It might seem that this too leaves the agent vulnerable. She is willing to 
stand  behind the commitments she reflectively endorses. But should she 
be? The reliable but heteronomous subject is vulnerable  because he cannot 
reflectively endorse his beliefs. It might seem that the autonomous agent, 
as I have characterized her, has the opposite prob lem. She can reflectively 
endorse her opinions, but they might be unreliable. She is perhaps sub -
jectively secure, but she remains objectively at risk. In fact, if her personal 
standards are sufficiently skewed, her reflective endorsement may be epis -
temically worthless. Can we evade an untenable subjectivism  here?
When an agent’s commitments are ones she reflectively endorses, they 
are at least prima facie defensible. She can adduce what she takes to be 
reasons for them. But it is not enough that the agent has something she 
considers a reason. If her claim that chicken soup alleviates colds  were chal-
lenged, she could not prevail by saying that she read graffiti to that effect. 
Reasons, as Korsgaard (1996b) argues, are considerations we give to each 
other. They are not mere expressions of personal conviction, but consider-
ations our interlocutors should countenance. The agent could give as her 
reason that she had amassed and evaluated the relevant evidence, that she 
read about the correlation in the New  England Journal of Medicine  or the

--- Page 113 ---

100  Chapter 5
New York Times, that she had been told by her physician that this par tic u lar 
old wives’ tale is true. She might even say that her grand mother told her. 
Assuming her grand mother is not an expert on contagious diseases, this 
would be a relatively weak reason. But if members of her epistemic com -
munity  were inclined to give the grandmotherly voice of experience some 
epistemic weight, it would still be a reason.
Among the considerations that are within the agent’s epistemic purview 
are  those she can call to mind. She has learned them and has not forgotten 
them.  These are her available reasons. If she recognizes their relevance, she 
can surely appeal to them to defend her claim. But her purview is wider 
than that: it includes information she can readily draw on— information 
obtainable in her epistemic milieu,  whether she is currently privy to it or 
not.  These are her accessible reasons. In some contexts, we take available 
reasons to set the limits of accountability. Phil has an available reason to 
believe that Jane is old enough to vote,  because he knows that Jane is older 
than Jim and he knows that Jim can vote. In  others, we appeal to accessible 
reasons. Meg has an accessible reason to believe that the course has a pre -
requisite, since that is clearly stated in the cata log, and she has access to the 
cata log. Accessibility and availability are  matters of degree. Some reasons are 
readily accessible;  others take considerable digging. Some available reasons 
are easily called to mind;  others need to be dredged up. The resources avail-
able to an agent’s epistemic community figure in her range of accessible 
reasons. She can in princi ple gain access to what ever information or insight 
is publicly available to the members of her community. She can draw on 
her intellectual compatriots and, as a member of that community, she has 
reason to endorse them.
Reasons are considerations that can properly be adduced to support a 
conclusion. Drawing on Scanlon (1998), I suggest that a consideration c can 
properly be adduced to support p only if  others who are competent to assess 
the relation between p and c and motivated to know  whether p is accept-
able could not responsibly reject the claim that c supports p. Reasons thus 
are public. No purely subjective consideration counts as a reason; for  others 
who are similarly motivated to find out  whether p is acceptable could 
responsibly reject private intimations. However heartfelt, Pat’s feeling that 
the Red Sox  will win is not a reason to think that they  will win. It is merely 
a hunch. Moreover, since nothing epistemically inaccessible qualifies as a 
reason, a reliable method for establishing that p is not a reason to accept or

--- Page 114 ---

Epistemic Normativity 101
believe that p  until investigators establish that the method is, or is likely to 
be, reliable. Currently, then,  there is no reason to accept the deliverances of 
Marie’s ESP, even if it is reliable. And a motley collection of evidence does 
not supply a reason to accept that p,  unless its connection to the conclusion 
is accessible to the agent.
No truth that fails to satisfy accessible standards of relevance counts as a 
reason. Considerations that enhance the objective probability that p are not 
reasons if, according to current or foreseeable standards of relevance, they 
have no bearing on  whether p. Even if left- handed  people are more likely 
to develop arthritis than right- handed  people, so long as we are unaware of 
the correlation and are not remiss in being unaware, Ben’s left- handedness 
affords us no reason to think that he is more at risk for arthritis than his 
right- handed  brother. The correlation is epistemically inert.
 Whether a consideration qualifies as a reason depends on the epistemic 
circumstances. Public standards of evidence and relevance rest on back -
ground assumptions about the topic  under investigation and what is known 
or reasonably believed about it. Considerations that at one point in his -
tory could not responsibly be rejected may be readily rejected  later, when 
 matters are better understood. In 1975, it was widely accepted that stress 
 causes peptic ulcers. A gastroenterologist could not at that time responsibly 
reject the contention that the high incidence of ulcers among Wall Street 
traders was due to their stressful jobs. Once the bacterial basis for ulcers was 
discovered, stress can no longer be adduced as a reason why so many trad-
ers have ulcers. A  factor that functions as a reason in one cognitive environ-
ment may fail to so function in another.
Reasons are keyed to methodology. Among the  factors that figure in 
 whether  others can responsibly reject the claim that c supports p are views 
about methods for establishing  whether p. Are standardized aptitude tests a 
good predictor of college success, or can one responsibly reject the conten-
tion that a student’s acing the SATs indicates that he  will do well? Are focus 
groups a good way of gauging public opinion, or can one responsibly reject 
the contention that  because a focus group found the candidate’s message 
compelling, the public at large  will do so too? Answering such questions 
requires validating the methods that connect c and p, and insuring that 
appropriate standards of rigor are satisfied. A major question is: whose 
opinions  matter? To be exceedingly tolerant, to allow just about every-
one to have a say, is to court skepticism. For any in ter est ing thesis,  there

--- Page 115 ---

102  Chapter 5
are bound to be  people whose background commitments are such that they 
could, without violating their own epistemic princi ples, reject a contention 
that c is a reason to hold that p. A blind person might reject the conten -
tion that the car’s looking blue in daylight is reason to think that it is blue. 
He has no direct evidence of that. A statistical novice looking at gradu ate 
school admissions might conclude that the university discriminates against 
 women. (Cartwright, 1983, 36–38). Being unaware of Simpson’s paradox, 
he does not understand why, if departments do their own admissions, look-
ing department by department rather than surveying the university as a 
 whole yields the appropriate statistics. A religious fundamentalist might 
reject the contention that the fossil rec ord affords reason to believe that 
birds evolved from dinosaurs. He denies that anything could afford genu -
ine reason to believe that evolution occurred. To disqualify such reactions 
requires a principled way to delineate the class of  others whose reactions 
 matter.
More is needed than that the standards be shared. All three rejecters 
might be deploying standards they share with  others. The issue is  whether 
 those standards are cognitively acceptable standards, standards whose satis-
faction fosters the advancement of understanding. To resolve this, we need 
to look at the standards and the goods they promote.
In all three cases, we dismiss the rejecters’ opinions  because we know 
better. This is not intellectual arrogance. We know what relevant resources 
are accessible and how and why to draw on them. We dismiss the statisti -
cal novice’s opinion  because it rests on a misunderstanding of statistical 
methods. This indicates that acceptable reasons must be consonant with 
the proper use of acceptable methods, where the acceptability of the meth-
ods turns on their having been validated and endorsed by experts on the 
subject and the best available ways to justify conclusions about it. But it is 
not enough if by chance statistics are properly used. The proper use of the 
methods should be based on an understanding of the methods, their ranges 
of application, their powers and limitations. This sounds circular, but it 
is not. Rather, it is a manifestation of holism. For reflective equilibrium, 
methods, standards, and results must mesh. When one strand of the net -
work of commitments is doubtful, the rest of the network is properly called 
on for support. We dismiss the blind man’s opinion  because it is based on 
a dearth of direct evidence and a failure to make appropriate use of acces -
sible indirect evidence. This indicates that epistemic agents are expected to

--- Page 116 ---

Epistemic Normativity 103
be aware of their own limitations and of the resources they can draw on to 
compensate for them. We dismiss the fundamentalist’s stance  because it is 
dogmatic. It is not sensitive to evidence, since he would retain his position 
what ever the evidence. This indicates that for something to count as a rea-
son for an empirical claim, it should be responsive to evidence.
The fundamentalist might reply that his opinion is responsive to evi -
dence. Scripture, he maintains, provides incontrovertible evidence that 
evolution did not occur. He disregards the fossil rec ord  because nothing it 
shows could override scripture. His belief then rests on shaky grounds. He 
relies on a single source, so his belief is unstable. Should that source be dis-
credited, he has nothing to shore up his belief. He relies on a single, disputed 
interpretation of the deliverances of that source, so it is fragile.
The scientist is in an epistemically stronger position.  Because her opin-
ion is multiply tethered, it is solidly grounded. We would have to be mas -
sively wrong about ge ne tics, anatomy, and physiology to discredit the 
direct biological evidence for evolution; wrong about physics to discredit 
the evidence provided by carbon dating; and wrong about geology to dis -
credit the evidence of the fossil rec ord. The scientist then can draw on a 
sophisticated theory of empirical evidence, which explains why and how 
the sorts of  factors biology relies on should be considered trustworthy. A 
second strength to her position is its fallibilism. Science does not consider 
any methods or results incontrovertible. Even the best of  today’s methods 
and results might need to be reconsidered on the basis of  future findings. 
So science builds in stabilizers to accommodate its recognition that with 
the advancement of understanding come refinements in methods and epis-
temic standards. The conviction that standards and methods neither can 
nor need ever be revised leaves the dogmatist in an epistemically precarious 
position.
It may seem paradoxical that commitments we are prepared to revise are 
epistemically more solidly grounded than ones its adherents consider unre-
visable. But that is so. The epistemic value of science lies not in the con -
clusiveness of its results, but in the self- correcting character of its methods 
and the self- refining nature of its standards.  Because we consider a method 
good, we consider its deliverances trustworthy.  Because it delivers results 
that satisfy our epistemic standards, we consider it a good method.  Because 
results that satisfy  these standards promote our epistemic ends, we consider 
 these standards the proper ones. Our views about the par tic u lar  theses we

--- Page 117 ---

104  Chapter 5
take ourselves to have reasons for intertwine with the methods we take to 
count as generating reasons, and the standards we take reasonable opinions 
to have to satisfy. The interdependence is dynamic. As our understanding 
of a topic grows, so does our understanding of the best ways to investigate 
it, to validate the methods for investigating it, to calibrate the instruments 
used to investigate it, to identify the standards to which views about it 
should be held, and hence to characterize what counts as evidence in that 
area (see Hacking, 1983). Solidity does more than just provide insurance. 
It also deepens understanding. The vari ous strands tie a solid opinion to 
dif fer ent commitments, yielding a wider perspective as to where it fits and 
how it functions in our overall account.
Still, the publicity requirement may raise a worry. Suppose a brilliant 
mathematician constructs a valid proof that no one  else can grasp.5 Given 
what I’ve said, it might seem that he has no reason to accept the proof, since 
his colleagues cannot back him up. The worry is unfounded. If the proof 
proceeds from publicly accepted axioms via publicly accepted rules, it satis-
fies the publicity requirement. No mathematician has reason to reject it, 
since it satisfies the community’s standards for an acceptable proof. Other 
mathematicians might, and prob ably should, suspend judgment about its 
validity  until they can follow the proof. But they lack grounds for rejection. 
Nonetheless, the theorem prover’s position is epistemically precarious. If 
the proof is so complicated that no other mathematician can follow it, he 
 ought not be confident that it is  free of subtle errors. This is why mathema-
ticians check one another’s proofs.
The dialectical interplay needed to achieve reflective equilibrium may 
take time. In the case  we’ve been considering the proof is merely a com -
plicated application of antecedently accepted commitments. The only dif-
ficulty is how to bring  others to see that it satisfies standards that they 
all already endorse. Innovations can be more radical. Sometimes it is only 
with hindsight that we can tell that an initially tenable consideration was 
acceptable. When it was first proffered, its epistemic status was doubtful. 
The method of reflective equilibrium accords a presumption in  favor of 
what has already been accepted. But that presumption is defeasible. So a 
putative proof or finding that skirts, or even violates, currently accepted 
standards, or is generated by methods that are not currently accepted, has 
an uphill  battle.

--- Page 118 ---

Epistemic Normativity 105
But a novelty can prevail. If it is power ful or intriguing enough, it may 
prompt reconsideration of prevailing standards of acceptability. When first 
introduced, the Monte Carlo method did not satisfy accepted statistical 
standards. To assimilate it, statisticians had to rethink the nature of statis -
tical sampling. They had to recognize that the pseudo- random numbers 
generated by von Neumann’s algorithm  were random enough to be reli -
ably unbiased, and had to reconcile themselves to the ineliminable use of 
computers for  running simulations (Metropolis, 1987). The power of the 
method, and the recognition that, for the purposes for which it was used, 
its deviations from statistical orthodoxy  were unproblematic, made a con-
vincing case for the revision.6
By itself, the requirement that considerations worthy of reflective endorse-
ment be responsive to reasons says nothing about what range of reasons a 
par tic u lar contention or account must be responsive to. That varies with 
subject  matter, available resources, and the relevant community of inqui -
ry’s tolerance for epistemic risk. The point  here is only to show that  there 
is a  viable conception of a reason and a  viable schema for responsiveness to 
reasons that are in de pen dent of truth- conduciveness.
The Realm of Epistemic Ends
We have seen that reasons are public and are keyed to community stan -
dards. This raises questions about the nature of the relevant community. 
 Here again it pays to turn to Kant. One formulation of the categorical imper-
ative is that an agent should act only on a maxim that he could accept as a 
legislating member of a realm of ends.  These maxims are not just laws that 
the members of the realm of ends are subject to, they are laws that mem -
bers make themselves subject to. In the moral realm, Kant (1981) maintains, 
agents are legislators who enact the laws that bind them. I suggest that the 
same holds in the epistemic realm. What gives second- order norms their 
epistemic authority is that they express standards, rules, or princi ples that 
epistemic agents can on reflection endorse. Extending Kant’s idea to epis -
temology, then, an epistemic agent should accept only considerations that 
she could advocate and endorse as a legislating member of a realm of epis-
temic ends. Let us call this the epistemic imperative. Although Kant’s argu-
ment for the categorical imperative is transcendental, my argument for its

--- Page 119 ---

106  Chapter 5
epistemic counterpart is pragmatic. It focuses on the practices of inquiry 
and seeks to delimit the aspects of  those practices that figure in their epis-
temic esteemability.  There is no claim that  these aspects are metaphysically 
necessary.
If agents in a realm of epistemic ends make the laws that bind them, 
they are not merely subject to the requirements that govern their cognitive 
be hav ior; they set  those requirements. Since epistemic agents would not 
make commitments that they consider it inappropriate to be bound by, 
they think it right that they be subject to the laws of the realm of epistemic 
ends. They reflectively endorse  those laws and the commitments that flow 
from and are mandated by them. They think that their being bound by a 
par tic u lar constellation of norms fosters their epistemic success.
In making and reflectively endorsing commitments, an agent exercises 
her autonomy.  Because she is an agent, she can both start and end a justifica-
tory path.7 She considers herself justifiably bound by a network of commit-
ments pertaining to methods, rules of inference, standards of acceptability, 
and the like,  because she believes that being so bound  will promote her 
epistemic ends, given her epistemic resources. The ends may, as the veritist 
maintains, be truths; they may be truths that satisfy further standards (for 
example, standards of significance or relevance); they may be nontruths 
(perhaps nonpropositional repre sen ta tions, effective models, informative 
idealizations, or illuminating fictions) that she takes to exemplify features 
of the phenomena; they may be more holistic desiderata pertaining to the 
system of commitments as a  whole. The critical point is that agents set their 
ends. So even if an agent agrees with the veritist that the overarching end is 
truth, her relation to that end is dif fer ent from his.
It might seem that reflective endorsement yields only subjective value. 
The agent sets epistemic ends for herself, makes epistemic commitments 
for herself, and on reflection is willing to stand  behind them. At best this 
seems to assure a mea sure of internal consistency, but not much more. But 
Kant does not say that a maxim is acceptable only if an agent could enact it 
as the phi los o pher king of a realm of ends. Satisfying merely personal pre-
dilections is not enough. When an agent reflectively endorses an epistemic 
princi ple, she considers it reasonable that her cognitively serious actions— 
asserting, professing, and inferring— accord with that princi ple. She repu -
diates the gambler’s fallacy  because she recognizes that in committing the 
fallacy she makes herself vulnerable to Dutch books— sets of commitments

--- Page 120 ---

Epistemic Normativity 107
that are jointly incoherent in the strong sense that  were a person to bet on 
all of them, he would inevitably lose. She endorses modus ponens  because 
she recognizes that it is truth preserving. She has no reason to think that 
as an epistemic agent she should be subject to princi ples that other simi -
larly situated epistemic agents are not subject to. She does not think, for 
example, that the desirability of avoiding Dutch books is a  matter of per -
sonal preference, for she recognizes that commitments vulnerable to Dutch 
books are not cotenable.  Because she takes the princi ples she reflectively 
endorses to be reasonable and rational in the epistemic circumstances, she 
thinks that they should be binding on similarly situated epistemic agents. 
But she recognizes that epistemic agents should be subject only to princi-
ples that they consider worthy of their reflective endorsement. By her own 
lights, then, the only princi ples that merit her reflective endorsement are 
 those that similarly situated epistemic agents— those who constitute her 
epistemic community— could also endorse. If she is wrong to think that 
her compatriots can reflectively endorse p, she is, by her own lights, wrong 
to endorse p.
Her relation to other epistemic agents pays dividends. Their commit -
ments serve as a check on hers. Confronted with what looks to be a camel 
on Main Street—or indeed, a car on Main Street— she can ask, ‘Did you see 
that?’ Arriving at a surprising solution for a complicated calculation, she 
can ask, ‘What did you get?’ Her interlocutors’ agreement serves as corrobo-
ration for the conclusion and for the adequacy of the first- order consider-
ations that led to it. Their disagreement should give her pause.
For all I’ve said so far, the support compatriots provide is consonant 
with an epistemic individualism where each agent amasses and assesses 
her own reasons for a conclusion. She thinks that similarly situated agents 
 will share her conclusions,  because each has amassed the same evidence on 
his own and assessed it using the same standards. If her reasons are good 
reasons for a par tic u lar contention, her standards for assessing such  things 
are appropriate, and she has applied them correctly to her reasons, it is 
no surprise that her similarly scrupulous compatriots agree. According to 
epistemic individualism, it is each epistemic agent’s standing in the same 
relation to the evidence, not each agent’s standing in any par tic u lar relation 
to other agents, that accounts for their agreement. I suggest, however, that 
epistemic interdependence runs deeper. It both underwrites certain judg -
ments and grounds the norms that govern epistemic practice.

--- Page 121 ---

108  Chapter 5
Compatriots’ responses can validate or invalidate the methods by which 
agents form and justify their opinions. For example, by himself, an agent 
cannot tell that he is color- blind. He can tell  whether he is a consistent 
judge of color. The items that looked red to him yesterday look red to him 
again  today; variations in the apparent colors of enduring objects correlate 
with variations lighting conditions; one visual deliverance as of color sup -
ports another. Even so, some items that consistently appear red to him might 
be green.  People discover that they are color-blind by learning that other 
 people discriminate shades that they cannot tell apart. If an agent cannot 
appeal to other  people’s color perceptions to check his own, he has no way 
to tell  whether his socks match. For all he knows, he might be color- blind. 
The same holds for the other secondary qualities. On his own, the epistemic 
agent does not know what he is missing.
Such reliance on  others is not restricted to the sensory realm. Without 
the support of an epistemic community, an individual lacks the resources to 
discover certain sorts of systematic error, such as confirmation bias. If Life- 
long Crusoe (who was shipwrecked at birth and reared by wolves) is given 
to confirmation bias, he weighs evidence that supports his convictions 
more heavi ly than evidence that undermines them. He may have no way 
to discover his bias, particularly if its impact is slight. Nevertheless, many 
of his beliefs are fated to be unjustified. Suppose, however, that he is not 
prey to confirmation bias or kindred failings. Then he is, we may assume, 
as reliable as the rest of us, and his first- order evidence supports his conclu-
sions as strongly as our first- order evidence supports ours. It might seem 
therefore that he is just as capable of epistemic success as we are. But we 
have a resource that he lacks. We are members of communities that embed 
and reinforce certain epistemic values. Confirmation bias involves believ -
ing or accepting that p on the basis of considerations that one wrongly 
takes to be sufficient. If, as is likely, the agent endorses her own basis, it 
is unlikely that her further scrutiny of that par tic u lar basis  will disclose 
their inadequacy. But if she appeals to community standards and subjects 
her belief to (implicit or explicit) peer review, she can discover the error of 
her ways. She realizes that what ever she may think of her evidence, it  will 
not pass muster with the relevant community of inquiry. To be sure, the 
fact that some community or other disagrees neither shows nor automati -
cally gives her reason to suspect that she is wrong in the assessment of her 
evidence. But if she shares the values of that community, and recognizes

--- Page 122 ---

Epistemic Normativity 109
that the opinion in question is properly subject to its standards, she is in a 
position to see that her belief does not mea sure up. The protection against 
epistemic failings like confirmation bias derives not from the mere fact that 
 there is a community whose standards bear on her views, but from her tak-
ing her views to be rightly subject to the judgment of that community. She 
endorses the public standards by which her belief is to be judged.  There 
need, of course, be no  actual public assessment. Having internalized the 
standards she can invoke them to assess her own views. This is why the bril-
liant mathematician can accept his proof.
We assess our beliefs in light of the standards that an epistemic commu-
nity has designed to (among other  things) filter out failings like confirma-
tion bias. So we have reason to think that beliefs that satisfy  those standards 
are not products of such failings. Life- long Crusoe has no such reason. His 
reasons for confidence in his beliefs are thus epistemically impoverished 
compared with ours. His epistemic situation is precarious. It is just by luck 
that he has managed to avoid the pitfalls.8
It is no accident that Kant’s term ‘legislating members’ is plural. Legisla-
tors work together to enact laws. To be effective, they must convince their 
colleagues of the acceptability of the legislation they propose. This requires 
that the basis for their recommendation be publicly articulable and justifi-
able to other legislators in light of the evolving commitments and goals 
that they share. The Kantian realm of ends is not, as some translations have 
it, a kingdom; it is a commonwealth. So is the realm of epistemic ends. 
The reasons for acceptable epistemic commitments must be specifiable and 
justifiable to the other members of the epistemic community. Moreover, 
since the realm of epistemic ends is supposed to be the arena within which 
epistemic agents live their cognitive lives,  those commitments must mesh. 
Not only must each be individually acceptable; all must be collectively 
acceptable. This means that  there are strong consistency and coherence 
constraints on what epistemic legislators can endorse.
It does not follow that all members of an epistemic community are 
expected to agree about every thing. Some commitments— for example,  those 
pertaining to consistency and coherence, are binding on every one.  Others 
set ranges of permissibility. Any commitment within a given range, if suit-
ably enmeshed with other permissible commitments, is worthy of reflective 
endorsement.  There are, for example, multiple acceptable interpretations 
of Hamlet. An epistemic agent need neither doubt her interpretation nor

--- Page 123 ---

110  Chapter 5
assume her compatriot is mistaken if their opinions diverge, so long as both 
fall within the range of acceptable interpretations.  Under some acceptable 
interpretations, Hamlet is about indecisiveness;  under  others it is about 
revenge. But even literary criticism’s tolerance for diversity is not inexhaust-
ible.  Under no acceptable interpretation is the play about the fall of the 
Roman Empire.
Such permissiveness is not restricted to the arts. Philip Kitcher (1990) 
argues that rather than setting a fixed threshold for epistemic ac cep tance, 
science rightly recognizes a range within which  either accepting a new theory 
or retaining one’s commitment to the old one is reasonable. This enables 
the discipline to balance inertia with creativity. Scientists taking oppos -
ing positions need not disagree about what the evidence is, or about how 
much evidence  there is. They may disagree about how to interpret the evi-
dence, about what evidence is relevant, and/or about how much evidence 
is needed for ac cep tance. This is why, rather than saying that a responsible 
epistemic agent should accept only considerations her compatriots would 
accept, we should follow Scanlon (1998) and say that she should accept 
only considerations her compatriots could not, by their collective lights, 
responsibly reject. It is open to them to endorse a consideration if it falls 
within the purview of an epistemic community and, given the commitments 
of that community, they could not reasonably reject it.
The epistemic imperative directly vindicates many familiar epistemic 
virtues. Open- mindedness is one. An epistemic agent cannot reflectively 
endorse a contention  unless she is in a position to think that other mem -
bers of the epistemic community could endorse it as well. And she is in 
no position to responsibly think that  unless she entertains the alternatives 
they might consider credible. So she must act open- mindedly in develop -
ing the contentions she advocates. Her open- mindedness is not boundless: 
it need not extend to entertaining hypotheses involving interventions by 
space aliens, since  those hypotheses are not ones that her intellectual com-
patriots would, or by their own lights should, take seriously. Rigor, respon-
siveness to evidence, and impartiality receive similar treatment: the scope 
of the demand a virtue places on the agent is delimited by the epistemic 
community. Each agent stands in a reciprocal relation to other members 
of the community. Besides venturing only hypotheses that she considers 
worthy of their reflective endorsement, she must be in a position to respon-
sibly reflectively endorse, reflectively suspend judgment on, or reflectively

--- Page 124 ---

Epistemic Normativity 111
repudiate their hypotheses. She needs to be able to think and act impar -
tially, fair- mindedly, and knowledgeably.
Other epistemic virtues are vindicated by what we have come to under-
stand about our epistemic situation. As we increase our understanding of a 
topic, we understand more about our understanding of that topic. Object- 
level advances in understanding thus pay metalevel dividends. We devise 
new methods and design new instruments. We discover hitherto unfore -
seen limitations and unacknowledged biases that cast doubt on results gen-
erated by old methods and instruments. We uncover  mistakes and diagnose 
their sources. Considerations that our pre de ces sors reflectively endorsed no 
longer merit reflective endorsement. Considerations they would responsi -
bly have rejected we are in a position to endorse. Two hundred years ago, 
physicists readily endorsed the contention that space is Euclidean and, had 
it been offered to them, would have adamantly refused to endorse the con-
tention that mass increases with acceleration. Now we know better.  Because 
the history of inquiry shows that advances in understanding often involve 
correcting the errors of our forebears, intellectual humility is a virtue; intel-
lectual arrogance, a vice. An epistemic agent, seeing that other agents who 
satisfied the standards of their communities of inquiry turned out to be 
wrong, should recognize that even though she satisfies the standards of her 
community she too might be wrong. She cannot claim that her conten -
tions are permanently acceptable, only that they are as reasonable as any 
available alternative in the current epistemic circumstances. In professing 
them and proffering them to the epistemic community, that is what she is 
willing to defend.
The Division of  Labor
Who belongs to a realm of epistemic ends? What qualifies someone for 
membership? Kant might say that the community of epistemic ends con -
sists of all rational agents throughout history. But  little is separately justifi-
able to or reflectively endorsable by all rational agents. What an epistemic 
agent is in a position to reflectively endorse depends heavi ly on her cogni-
tive milieu. The con temporary community of particle physicists reflectively 
endorses much that is counterintuitive or unintelligible to the rest of us. 
But it would be wrong to dismiss their epistemic achievements  because of 
our ignorance or incompetence.

--- Page 125 ---

112  Chapter 5
The resolution to this prob lem derives from the division of epistemic 
 labor. Earlier I said that compliance with the epistemic imperative does not 
require vetting each candidate for epistemic ac cep tance individually. We 
routinely endorse deliverances from creditable sources— memory, percep -
tion, and so on. One such source is testimony. On her own, each epistemic 
agent is in a position to know very  little. To compensate for our individual 
shortcomings, we rely on the testimony of  others.  There is a division of 
cognitive  labor both within and across the communities constituting the 
realm of epistemic ends. The relevant communities need not be scientific. 
We defer to the trained auto mechanic for an explanation of the ominous 
rattle in the engine, to the knowledgeable historian for an understanding 
of the influence of the cotton gin on American slavery, to the experienced 
parent for insights into how to soothe a teething baby.
Still,  there are communities and communities. We might be fairly san -
guine about saying that satisfying community standards suffices for epis -
temic responsibility in particle physics or auto mechanics. But what 
about the community of psychics? Are we forced to say that if they 
have managed to contrive, reflectively endorse, and by their own lights 
satisfy standards for contentions about the paranormal, we should credit 
their claims? We are not. For outsiders are in a position to assess their stan-
dards, methods, and claims, using coarse- grained mea sures that apply across 
realms.
One is predictive success. Not  every discipline makes predictions; but 
 those that do are subject to assessment on the basis of their track rec ords. For 
a predictive practice to be epistemically creditable, its predictions should be 
borne out considerably more often than chance, considerably more often 
than what one would expect if its distinctive causal commitments  were 
dropped, and should compare favorably with the track rec ords of its rivals.9 
The predictions must be definite enough that it is pos si ble to tell  whether 
they are borne out. And it must be determinate  whether their being borne 
out redounds to the credit of the putative predictor. Psychics make predic-
tions. If the standards of their community are satisfied by predictions that 
are too vague to be tested, are not borne out when tested, or simply replicate 
with what would other wise be expected, then satisfying their standards does 
not make for epistemic credibility. When Professor Trelawny divines that 
Harry Potter has a mortal  enemy, Hermione protests, “Every body knows

--- Page 126 ---

Epistemic Normativity 113
that!” (Rowling, 1999, 106). Coming up with that insight is no reason to 
credit divination. If we are to trust divination, Hermione rightly intimates, 
it should disclose  things that we would not other wise have known.
Similar points can be made about explanatory success, systematicity, fit 
with the commitments of neighboring areas of inquiry, and so forth. The 
familiar list of theoretical and empirical desiderata can be brought to bear 
to assess the claims of a putatively cognitive enterprise. Not only must the 
commitments be internally coherent and consistent, they must cohere with 
and be consistent with other  things we reflectively endorse. If the discipline 
is empirical, claims need to be backed by evidence. If the practice involves 
prediction, the predictions must (often enough) be borne out.  These are 
entirely familiar requirements. The commonwealth of epistemic ends is a 
federation. Local communities make fine- grained commitments that are 
answerable to coarse- grained commitments that are more widely shared. 
The failure of a local community’s fine- grained commitments to satisfy (or 
at least approximate) coarse- grained requirements,  unless backed by strong 
reasons to think that the fine- grained commitments need not satisfy them, 
is a reason to refuse to reflectively endorse their findings.
What justifies treating particle physics as a community in a federation of 
epistemic ends is that its commitments satisfy widely shared coarse- grained 
epistemic commitments. Particle physics re spects such requirements as 
that a scientific account be explanatory,  simple, perhaps predictive; that it 
be responsive to evidence that is judiciously and impartially gathered and 
assessed; that its results be intersubjectively observable and reproducible; 
that the account cohere, or at least not be incompatible, with accepted con-
stellations in neighboring disciplines; that its findings stand up  under peer 
review; and so on. Just how  these requirements are concretized in a given 
discipline or subdiscipline depends on local  factors; and it may be that only 
the members of a local community can tell  whether this has been done. But 
it is critical that merely meeting local standards is not enough. The constel-
lation of commitments that meets local standards is, as a  whole, answerable 
to more global standards.
This pattern is reminiscent of what we see in law. Local parking ordi -
nances are justified and binding in a community largely  because they  were 
duly enacted. But they are subject to broader constraints— those speci -
fied by state and federal laws, which in turn are subject to constitutional

--- Page 127 ---

114  Chapter 5
constraints. Regardless of what a par tic u lar city council enacted, a law spec-
ifying dif fer ent parking fines for members of dif fer ent races who commit 
the same infraction would be impermissible.
The Po liti cal Character of the Epistemic Community
To perform their function, legislating members of a realm of epistemic 
ends must be, in a suitable— political— sense,  free and equal. Agreement 
among  free and equal inquirers enhances the epistemic standing of a claim; 
coerced agreement does not. If inquirers are  free, they can adopt any per -
spective they like, and examine the issue from  there. If they are equal, all 
inquirers have an equal opportunity and an equal right to venture hypoth-
eses, to raise objections and counterhypotheses, and provide reasons for 
them. It is not enough that members be  free to venture their opinions. 
Their interlocutors must also be disposed to listen to them and take them 
seriously (Longino, 1990).
Members of a properly functioning epistemic community see  those who 
disagree with them not as rivals to be bested in argument, but as resources 
whose perspectives may provide valuable insights (Dewey, 1916). By appre-
ciating one another’s points of view, deliberators enrich their understand-
ing of an issue and the available initially tenable ways of thinking about 
it. Entertaining a new perspective may convince an agent to adopt it. She 
may see that her original assessment of the evidence or the options was 
limited or biased. Alternatively, such deliberation may lead to the adoption 
of a conclusion that no one initially envisioned. That the evidence admits 
of multiple interpretations may reveal that none by itself is adequate and 
point  toward a dif fer ent solution. By accessing the opinions of  others and 
the reasons for  those opinions, epistemic agents augment their data base. 
They gain new information about the situation and ways it might be fruit-
ful to think about it. So rather than seeing  those who disagree with us 
as opponents, we should see them as allies who, by envisioning  things dif-
ferently, extend our epistemic range. Diversity of opinion thus is not an 
impediment to deliberation but an asset to it.
On this conception, a community of inquiry provides a venue for fruit-
ful disagreement. Not  every disagreement is worth taking seriously.  There is 
 little to be gained by entertaining the economic views of someone convinced 
that extraterrestrial forces control the stock market. But when conscientious,

--- Page 128 ---

Epistemic Normativity 115
competent peers with a suitable level of expertise about a topic disagree, the 
situation is dif fer ent.
When parties disagree, it might seem obvious that at least one of them is 
mistaken.  Either he overlooked some relevant evidence or erred in his use of 
it.  These are typically identifiable and corrigible errors. Once the reasons are 
spelled out, it may be straightforward to see where the error lies. One party 
miscalculated or ignored base rates or overlooked data or what ever. Not all 
disagreements are like this. Sometimes the root of a disagreement is not an 
error; nor is it something that needs to be corrected. Parties to a disagree -
ment might assign dif fer ent (reasonable) weights to dif fer ent bits of evi-
dence. Fred might, for example, take a blood test to show that the patient’s 
hemoglobin count is dangerously low. George, placing greater emphasis on 
the trajectory, notes that this count is higher than the previous reading. 
Fred believes that the patient is unlikely to survive. George believes he is on 
the mend. Both agree about the facts. Their disagreement concerns which 
fact is more significant. A disagreement about a  matter of fact, then, can be 
rooted in a disagreement about how to weigh the evidence.
Disagreements can also arise when parties consider dif fer ent  factors 
salient. When an anorexic patient exhibits a dangerous tachycardia  after 
consuming high levels of caffeine, the emergency room physician judges 
that excessive caffeine consumption is the cause (Ankeny, 2014). He might 
overlook or downplay her anorexia, concentrating entirely on the fact that 
she has overdosed on caffeine. The expert in eating disorders judges that 
anorexia is the cause, since anorexia gives rise to tachycardia in the pres -
ence of a suitable stimulant. Each thinks something true. The difference of 
opinion lies in the link in the causal chain that they focus on. Their choice 
of focus stems from what each can do to alleviate the prob lem and prevent 
its recurrence.  Here the difference is within the field of medicine. But simi-
lar disagreements can cut across fields. On a rainy night, a car crashes into 
a tree. The police say that speed caused the crash; the auto engineer says 
that the unresponsiveness of the steering column was the cause; the high -
way architect places the blame on the way the road was banked. In such 
cases, no one is saying anything false or misleading. Given their dif fer ent 
interests and areas of expertise, they simply focus on dif fer ent aspects of the 
situation.
Jamesian veritists hold that our overarching goal is to believe as many 
truths as pos si ble and disbelieve as many falsehoods as pos si ble. I have

--- Page 129 ---

116  Chapter 5
argued that this  ought not be our overarching goal. Nevertheless, where we 
are concerned with what to believe, we face a trade- off between the value of 
believing truths and the disvalue of believing falsehoods. To a remarkable 
(and alarming) extent, advocates of Jamesianism ignore the trade- off and 
focus exclusively on believing truths. But the goal as stated involves a pro-
portion. To  settle on a criterion of justification requires weighing the values 
against each other (see Riggs, 2003).  There is no reason to think  there is 
a uniquely best way to assign weights. If the threshold for acceptability is a 
probability of 0.90 on the evidence, a few false hypotheses  will count as jus-
tified. If the probability has to be 0.95, even fewer  will count. On the other 
hand, when we raise the standard from 0.90 to 0.95, fewer truths  will count 
as justified. In moving from 0.90 to 0.95, we accept fewer falsehoods and 
reject more truths. Setting the threshold involves a trade- off. It is widely 
and rightly conceded that for a hypothesis to count as justified, it must be 
highly probable given the evidence. That, by itself, does not tell us where to 
draw the line. Nor does it commit us to the claim that  there is a single, opti-
mally correct line to be drawn. A disagreement among experts might be due 
to differences in their tolerance for epistemic risk. They could conceivably 
agree about what the evidence is, what weight to attach to the evidence, 
and which  factors are and should be salient, but still disagree  because one 
holds and the other denies that a probability of 0.92 is justification enough.
Where does this leave us? We’ve seen that the opinions of epistemically 
responsible agents can diverge along a variety of trajectories. Divergence 
in and of itself does not show that any of the parties to a dispute is mis -
taken. Disagreements among experts— those who are competent, conscien-
tious, and suitably sensitive to the level of confidence that their evidence 
supplies— provide information about the community’s current understand-
ing of an issue.
A community of inquiry may have resources to adjudicate some dis -
agreements among its members. It may currently lack resources to adju -
dicate  others. In that case, the disagreement reveals something about the 
lacunae in its understanding of its subject  matter. It may also be in a posi-
tion to recognize that some legitimate disagreements need no adjudica -
tion. Kitcher’s point is that the community may best serve its collective 
epistemic ends by, at any given time, countenancing a range of conflicting 
views. The reason is largely prudential. When  there is a significant chance 
that a currently disfavored view is true, or that a currently favored one is

--- Page 130 ---

Epistemic Normativity 117
false, if the members of the community want to believe what is true, they 
 ought not foreclose inquiry prematurely. Riggs’s point is that multiple ways 
of balancing the value of believing truths against the disvalue of believ -
ing falsehoods are permissible. This has two impor tant consequences. The 
first is that  there may be no general answer to the question what balance 
should be struck. For some issues, avoiding falsehood may be more impor-
tant; for  others, believing truth might dominate. How risk averse epistemic 
agents should be, then, depends on what they are risking. The risk in ques-
tion may be practical, as in risking an epidemic by accepting false views 
about contagion, or purely theoretical, as in risking an epistemically costly 
 mistake, such as one that is likely to prompt a cascade of false beliefs. More-
over, even in the long run,  there may be no objective resolution to some 
disputes.  There is no reason to think that  there is a single optimal balance.
The value of disagreement for a community of inquiry is that it can 
serve as a source of insight into the subject  under investigation and the 
available resources for understanding it. Socrates maintained that know -
ing that one does not know is epistemically valuable. What may be more 
valuable is recognizing what one does not know and understanding why 
one does not know it. Suitably expert disagreement can engender such 
understanding.
Deweyan Deliberation
If  free and equal members of an epistemic community engage in Deweyan 
deliberation,  there are no po liti cal impediments to understanding the phe-
nomena. But if consensus results from coercion, collusion, or credibility 
inflation or deflation, the situation is dif fer ent. If inquirers cannot investi-
gate an issue as they see fit, if they cannot raise objections or gain a hear -
ing for them, if their views are given undue weight or are deprived of the 
weight they are due, intersubjective agreement provides small reason to 
think that a conclusion is acceptable, or that it stands up to serious testing.
Arrangements that silence certain voices or deflate their credibility can 
undermine the epistemic standing of the commitments that are accepted 
(see M. Fricker, 2007; McGowan, 2009). By omitting or downplaying the 
significance of par tic u lar perspectives, or by unduly emphasizing other per-
spectives, prejudice and stubbornness can skew  matters so that intersubjec-
tive agreement does not supply corroboration. If naysayers are silenced, then

--- Page 131 ---

118  Chapter 5
the fact that  every speaker agrees is not a good reason to think that a con-
tention is acceptable or a method is sound. If the credibility of naysayers’ 
testimony is deflated, then the fact that the balance of what is taken as 
evidence weighs heavi ly in  favor of a hypothesis is at best a weak reason to 
accept it. The negative epistemic consequences do not just undermine the 
epistemic standing (and self- confidence) of  those who have been silenced. 
They affect the entire epistemic community. Without access to the dis -
credited opinions, community members do not know what they are miss -
ing. Moreover, the skewing of the evidence that results from credibility 
deflation undermines the trustworthiness of what evidence they have, for 
it artificially inflates the credibility of the voices that are heard. Such a situ-
ation is epistemically unjust.
An example brings this out. In the 1940s and early 1950s Barbara 
McClintock published a series of papers contending that she had discovered 
sequences of ge ne tic material that change position on the chromosome of 
corn. She was not taken seriously. As a result, she said, “I stopped publishing 
detailed reports  . . . when I realized, and acutely, the extent of disinterest 
and lack of confidence in the conclusions I was drawing from my studies” 
(McClintock, 1973). Historians of science disagree about  whether sexism 
figured in the scientific community’s disregard of McClintock’s findings. 
The other candidate is a prejudice against studies done on corn (see Keller, 
1983; Comfort, 2001). What ever the reason, she was effectively silenced. 
Her discovery was not taken up  until the 1960s when François Jacob and 
Jacques Monod discovered that the same transposition occurs in bacteria. 
Plainly the understanding of ge ne tics was retarded by the failure to give 
McClintock’s discoveries their due. Such epistemic injustice deprives the 
community of inquiry of data and skews the evidence.
‘ Free and equal,’  here, is a po liti cal characterization of a community of 
inquiry. That community may be located in a wider setting whose mem -
bers are po liti cally neither  free nor equal. A repressive society might, for 
example, accord greater freedom of thought to its scientists in the con -
text of their investigations than it generally accords to its citizens. If the 
constraints the society normally places on its citizens are not operative in 
the context of inquiry, the epistemic commitments inquirers reflectively 
endorse are legitimately normative for their inquiry, hence for the nonce 
binding on their practice.10

--- Page 132 ---

Epistemic Normativity 119
Even so, the idea that the members of communities of inquiry are  free 
and equal inquirers is an idealization. I do not claim that  actual communi-
ties fully accord with it. I do, however, claim that the closer  actual com -
munities come to satisfying  these requirements, the more epistemically 
acceptable their criteria are likely to be. This is  because we understand how 
inequalities of power and limitations on orientation can lead to error. By 
reflecting on the strengths and weaknesses in the ways the  actual commu-
nities of inquiry formulate their standards and construct their practices, we 
contrive a conception of what is epistemically acceptable. The requirement 
of freedom and equality thus emerges from the method of reflective equi -
librium. We draw on, correct, extend, and emend our current best theories 
and practices  until we arrive at a system we can on reflection endorse.
The  free and equal requirement is merely a po liti cal requirement. It is 
not a claim that all are equally knowledgeable or equally intelligent. Some 
hypotheses are plainly untenable; some perspectives are obviously skewed; 
some methods are demonstrably unsound. Once they are given a hearing, 
they are promptly and rightly dismissed. Nevertheless, the opportunity to 
venture a hypothesis and the right to have it assessed on its merits must 
be real.  There must be forums where criticisms can be offered, and where 
 there is an expectation that criticisms  will be answered (see Longino, 1990). 
As Mill insists, “The beliefs we have the most warrant for have no safe -
guard to rest on but a standing invitation to the  whole world to prove them 
unfounded” (1978, 20). The epistemic value of what Habermas (2001) calls 
uncoerced conversation lies, I suggest, not so much in the par tic u lar agree-
ments it generates as in its propensity to uncover and correct errors.
Since ‘ ought’ implies ‘can’, the standards the responsible epistemic agent 
must re spect are not  those of some idealized, timeless community of ratio-
nal agents. She could have no idea what  those standards are or what it 
would take to satisfy them. Rather, she must re spect the current or reason-
ably foreseeable standards of a realm of epistemic ends she inhabits. Just 
what  these standards are is not determined a priori. They emerge over the 
course of inquiry, as the community learns about the subject  matter, how 
to investigate the subject  matter, and what sort of understanding of the 
subject  matter is practically pos si ble in the epistemic circumstances, given 
the resources at hand, and the questions the community wants to answer. 
Respecting the standards is not the same as being obliged to comply with

--- Page 133 ---

120  Chapter 5
them. Rather, re spect requires that a responsible epistemic agent  either 
comply with the standards of her epistemic community or supply a cogent 
reason to revise them, reject them, or restrict their range of applicability.
Nevertheless, the extent to which we have to rely on one another might 
seem to undercut any claim to epistemic autonomy. Often, it seems, we 
amateurs are in no position to defend our own beliefs, as they depend on 
fine- grained epistemic commitments that we are not privy to and would 
prob ably not understand even if we  were. We defer to the community of 
particle physicists to specify what counts as evidence for the existence of the 
Higgs boson, what counts as sufficient evidence, and when such evidence 
is in hand. We have no choice. Nevertheless, epistemic commitments must 
be defensible. If my defense of the contention that the Higgs boson exists 
consists in saying, ‘They said so!’, it looks weak.
It is not. Although expertise is distributed across the epistemic commu -
nity, this does not undermine the responsibility of the individual epistemic 
agent. She confers epistemic authority on  those she counts as experts; and 
she retains both the right and the responsibility to revoke it if the circum -
stances warrant. She can and at some point should decide that the auto 
mechanic does not know what he is talking about (even though she does 
not know what a catalytic converter does), that the investment counselor’s 
advice is not credible (even though she is only dimly aware of what a hedge 
fund is), that the physician who links autism with vaccines is untrustworthy 
(even though she has no idea why the incidence of autism is rising). The 
requirement that autonomous epistemic agents think for themselves is not 
in tension with the recognition of the extent of our epistemic interdepen -
dence. Rather, it means that each agent is ultimately responsible for her 
choice of experts. As a legislating member of a realm of ends, she confers 
epistemic authority, thinking that other similarly situated epistemic agents 
would do the same; and she can and should retract that authority when 
she considers it no longer warranted. If a contention’s defense consists of 
‘They say so!’ backed by defensible reasons for thinking that their saying so 
is trustworthy, it is not a weak defense; it is a strong exercise of epistemic 
autonomy.
I have argued that epistemic norms are deontological. They are grounded 
in the epistemic imperative. An epistemic subject  ought to accept only what 
she could reflectively endorse as a legislating member of a realm of epis -
temic ends— that is, as a responsible citizen/legislator of a united federation

--- Page 134 ---

Epistemic Normativity 121
of autonomous epistemic agents. To abide by the imperative requires stand-
ing not just in a suitable relation to the phenomena she seeks to know or 
understand, but also in a suitable relation to other members of the epistemic 
community. On this view epistemic norms do not, nor do they purport to, 
ensure that epistemic agents  will arrive at the truth. Nor do they contend 
that failure to reach the truth is always a mark of epistemic inadequacy. But 
by acting in accord with the epistemic imperative, an agent makes the best 
use of available epistemic resources.
Epistemic standards owe their normative status to their satisfying the 
epistemic imperative: they are standards that would be framed and reflec -
tively endorsed by the legislating members of a realm of epistemic ends. 
Although a realm of epistemic ends is modeled on a scientific community, it 
obviously involves an ele ment of idealization. As the McClintock example 
illustrates, we should not assume that  actual communities of inquiry con-
sist of  free and equal inquirers. Rather than describing the norms accepted 
or acted upon by an  actual community, the ideal emerges from a pro cess of 
adjudication in which we elaborate, extend, and correct our relevant com-
mitments  until we arrive at a conception that is in reflective equilibrium 
with our other epistemic commitments.
The  actual communities we re spect serve as touchstones. We treat their 
policies and practices as initially tenable and attempt as far as is feasible to 
incorporate them into the constructed ideal. The scientific community is 
one we re spect. It regularly deploys felicitous falsehoods— models, idealiza-
tions, and thought experiments. The emendations we saw fit to introduce 
into our ideal correct for bias and prejudice. They do not undermine the 
permissibility of relying on felicitous falsehoods. So, absent in de pen dent 
reasons to consider reliance on such devices epistemically deleterious, we 
should recognize that scientific (and other disciplinary) communities are 
within their epistemic rights to deploy them.

--- Page 136 ---

Epistemic ac cep tance bridges the divide between the intellectual and the 
practical.1 It is practical in that it consists in a readiness to use a commit -
ment in inference or action— that is, a readiness to do something. It is intel-
lectual in that its range is restricted to contexts where the agent’s ends are 
cognitive. Although the practical realm is broader than the moral realm, my 
account raises the possibility that moral norms figure in epistemic accept -
ability. This suggestion is strengthened by my characterization of a realm 
of epistemic ends. Legislating members of such a realm have obligations to 
one another— obligations to treat one another as  free and equal members 
in a joint epistemic enterprise.  These obligations are at least po liti cal, if 
not moral. In this chapter I argue that moral requirements do not just con-
strain, but infuse responsible disciplinary practice. They not only promote 
the epistemic ends of a discipline, they are partially constitutive of  those 
ends. I begin with a sketch of what Williams calls ‘thick concepts’, con -
cepts like ‘disreputable’ and ‘courageous’, in which evaluative and descrip-
tive ele ments are fused. I argue that trustworthiness is such a concept. I 
then consider how it shapes inquiry. I look at familiar threats and explain 
how they undermine the epistemic enterprise. This sheds light on what the 
enterprise is and what it achieves.
Thick and Thin
The widespread conviction that the moral and the factual are disjoint seems 
to stem from focusing on moral predicates like ‘good’ and ‘bad’, ‘right’ and 
‘wrong’, which appear to have purely evaluative contents. But, as Williams 
shows, many predicates are si mul ta neously evaluative and descriptive. They 
are, in his terms, thick (Williams, 1985, 140–143). To say that a po liti cal 
6 Intellectual Integrity

--- Page 137 ---

124  Chapter 6
maneuver is sleazy is typically to both characterize and disparage it. Occa -
sionally, with a tinge of irony, ‘sleazy’ can express admiration. But, evidently, 
its use is never value neutral. ‘Good’ and ‘red’, on the other hand, are thin. 
That an item instantiates the predicate ‘good’ reveals nothing about what 
sort of  thing it is; that it instantiates ‘red’ reveals nothing about  whether it 
is any good.
To appreciate the difference, consider the newly coined predicate ‘gred’, 
which applies to all and only  things that are both good and red. Such a 
predicate, like ‘sleazy’, is both descriptive and evaluative. A child’s mitten 
satisfies the descriptive requirement by being red, and satisfies the evalua -
tive requirement by being good. But a gred item’s being red has no bearing 
on its being good; nor has its being good any bearing on its being red. The 
mitten qualifies as red  because of its color; it qualifies as good  because of its 
capacity to keep a small hand warm. The mitten just happens to instantiate 
the two predicates; it belongs to their intersection.  Because we can prize 
apart the descriptive and the evaluative components, ‘gred’ is not a genuinely 
thick term. It is simply a contraction.
The relation between the descriptive and the evaluative ele ments in 
thick terms like ‘sleazy’, ‘truthful’, and ‘trustworthy’ is tighter. Thick terms 
involve a fusion of descriptive and normative ele ments. They do not admit 
of the sort of  factor analy sis that ‘gred’ does. Although ‘sleazy’ is a descrip-
tive predicate whose instances we readily recognize, we have no evaluatively 
neutral way to delineate its extension. We have no way to identify the class 
of sleazy po liti cal maneuvers without intimating that they merit disap -
proval. If epistemic terms are similar, then we should have no way to iden-
tify their extensions without intimating that they are worthy of approval or 
of disapproval on cognitive grounds.
In Truth and Truthfulness, Williams (2002) discusses the ways the thick 
concept of truthfulness depends on and diverges from its thin descriptive 
precursor— the concept of uttering truths. I briefly review his discussion 
 because it illustrates how thick terms relate to their less corpulent relatives. 
He develops a fictional genealogy to show how the virtue of truthfulness 
could have emerged from the practice of uttering truths. As a first approxi-
mation, a truthful person is someone who utters or is disposed to utter 
truths. We can identify such  people without taking a stand on the value of 
uttering truths, just as we can identify terse  people without taking a stand 
on the value of brevity. The evaluative ele ment enters the picture  later,

--- Page 138 ---

Intellectual Integrity 125
when we deem uttering or being disposed to utter truths a good  thing. At 
the outset,  there is no fusion. The descriptive and evaluative ele ments can 
easily be separated. This does not last,  because the virtue of truthfulness 
does not consist exactly in uttering or being disposed to utter truths. It 
involves both more and less than that.
Obviously, we do not and  ought not expect a truthful speaker to utter 
or be disposed to utter only truths. Every one makes  mistakes. So if anyone 
is to count as truthful, truthfulness cannot require uttering only truths. It 
might, however, require saying only what one thinks is true. That would 
leave room for  mistakes but exclude lies. This is a step in the right direction, 
but it demands too  little, for at least two reasons.
First, misleading is as much a violation of truthfulness as lying is. It is 
pos si ble to utter only truths and, by exploiting implicatures, induce one’s 
audience to form a false belief. If Ben tells his editor, ‘I  can’t get the paper 
in before Tuesday’, he gives her to believe that he can get it in on Tuesday. 
If he knows full well that  there is no chance it  will be done before three 
weeks from Friday, he has not been truthful, even though the sentence he 
uttered was true.
Second, being a virtue, truthfulness involves responsibility. We would 
not consider a person truthful if she  were unduly careless or gullible in 
her belief formation. Suppose that, despite her excellent education, Joan 
believes every thing she reads in the tabloids and indiscriminately reports 
her beliefs. She believes with equal conviction that space aliens landed in 
Detroit and that Barry Bonds took ste roids. Although she uttered the true 
sentence ‘Barry Bonds took ste roids’, we would not consider her truthful. 
For she was equally prepared to utter the infelicitous falsehood, ‘Space 
aliens landed in Detroit’. Her utterances are not credible, since she does not 
adequately filter out infelicitously false claims. Although she says what she 
believes, she lacks the virtue of truthfulness.
Nor is it enough to impose a responsible belief requirement. Truthful -
ness does not require uttering  every truth one responsibly believes. Some 
truths are private. When asked about them, Williams maintains, evasions, 
obfuscations, and even lies are permissible. Your questioner may have no 
right to know whom you plan to vote for, what your salary is, or how much 
you weigh. If refusing to answer unduly intrusive questions is not feasible 
and ‘It’s none of your business!’ is too blunt, Williams contends, a truthful 
person need not tell the truth. Her interlocutor should recognize that in

--- Page 139 ---

126  Chapter 6
asking such questions, she oversteps the bounds within which truthfulness 
is required.
I would go further. Someone who utters and is interpreted as uttering 
a felicitous falsehood would normally count as truthful. A regular rider 
who says, ‘It  will take you twenty minutes to get to Park Street by subway’, 
would normally be considered truthful even if the transit authority lists the 
travel time as eigh teen minutes. At best, truthfulness requires being true 
enough in the context of utterance.
Truthfulness, as Williams characterizes it, is intimately related to, but 
does not supervene on, uttering truths. For the requirements on speaking 
truthfully diverge from  those on uttering truths. The reason for the diver-
gence is practical.  Because a more nuanced attitude  toward truths is more 
valuable than uttering all and only  things one believes to be true, that more 
nuanced attitude is the one we should admire and cultivate. Truthfulness 
does not admit of  factor analy sis  because, without appealing to evaluative 
considerations, we have no way to delineate the extension of the class of 
topics about which one should say only what is true enough.
If Williams is right about the relation of a thick concept to its thin 
descriptive precursor, thick concepts are not a mere con ve nience. Without 
such normatively loaded concepts, we could not partition the world as we 
do. So the idea that thick concepts are simply contractions like ‘gred’, the 
idea that that we could make do with morally thin concepts— good, bad, 
right, and wrong— plus our stock of purely descriptive concepts, is incorrect. 
Lacking the thick concepts, we would have no way to mark out extensions 
we are interested in. If  there are other thick epistemic concepts, we should 
expect them to display the same pattern. They should be anchored in, but 
not supervene on, a descriptive core. They should mark out extensions that 
we have no evaluatively neutral way to demarcate.
Trustworthiness
A critical consideration in fixing the contours of truthfulness is the idea 
that truthful  people are trustworthy. Within the realms where truthful -
ness is required, when a truthful speaker says that p, his audience can take 
his word for it. Trustworthiness too is a thick concept. While truthfulness 
pertains to linguistic be hav ior, the scope of trustworthiness is broader. We 
deem an auto mechanic or a pastry chef trustworthy primarily on the basis

--- Page 140 ---

Intellectual Integrity 127
of what she does, not on what she says. Trustworthiness is the genus of 
which truthfulness is a species.
Williams contends that truthfulness requires Competence and Sincerity 
(where the upper case indicates that  these are quasi- technical terms). Compe-
tence is a general requirement, applying to all trustworthy be hav ior. Sincerity, 
however, seems restricted to symbolic be hav ior. Utterances, inscriptions, 
exemplars, and gestures can be Sincere or Insincere. But Sincerity seems 
not to apply to other forms of be hav ior. The mechanic who purposely uses 
inferior parts has some sort of character defect, but it is not clear that his 
knowingly installing a faulty gasket can be considered Insincere. Sincerity 
is, I suggest, a species of the generic concept of being Well- Intentioned.2 In 
installing the faulty gasket, the auto mechanic is not Well- Intentioned. To 
be trustworthy, an agent needs to be both Competent and Well- Intentioned. 
A Competent but Ill- Intentioned auto mechanic has the ability but lacks 
the incentive to properly fix the car; an Incompetent but Well- Intentioned 
mechanic has the incentive but lacks the ability.
How does this bear on epistemology?  Because of the division of cognitive 
 labor, epistemic agents need to depend on one another. So epistemic agents 
should be trustworthy. This involves having and properly using appropriate 
background assumptions and know- how. Having them can perhaps be con-
strued purely cognitively, but being willing to properly use them is a  matter 
of volition. If agents work together, or depend on each other’s actions, utter-
ances, or products, they need to be in a position to trust one another. They 
need to be able take it for granted that  those they rely on are in relevant 
re spects both Competent and Well- Intentioned. I  will argue that it follows 
from the division of cognitive  labor that understanding has an ineluctably 
moral dimension. My main concern is not with individual concepts, but 
with norms and standards that are at once epistemic and moral. Again, for 
con ve nience, I focus on science, with an occasional aside to recognize paral-
lels in other disciplines.
Ethics in Inquiry
Section 7009 of the Amer i ca COMPETES Act (Federal Register, 2009) 
requires that all undergraduates, gradu ate students, and postdocs work -
ing on proj ects funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) be given 
‘appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct

--- Page 141 ---

128  Chapter 6
of research’. Prob ably no one denies that scientists should conduct their 
research ethically;3 and few would deny that young scientists need to learn 
how to do so. Nevertheless, many principal investigators apparently regard 
the requirement as an unfunded mandate— yet another demand on their 
already strained bud gets, time, and attention. Evidently they think that 
teaching their protégés to be moral scientists is something dif fer ent from 
teaching them to be scientists. As a result, generic handbooks and websites 
have arisen to instruct students how to recognize, avoid, and protect them-
selves from the more obvious forms of scientific misconduct. Such quick 
fixes treat moral requirements as addenda rather than as integral to sci -
entific inquiry. This is a  mistake. I  will argue that  there is an ineliminably 
moral moment in scientific inquiry. This feature of systematic inquiry is 
regularly overlooked. Ignoring it skews our understanding of the scientific 
enterprise and its products. If I am right, then although they may not have 
realized it, se nior scientists have been imbuing their ju niors with the rel -
evant moral values already. The point of the NSF mandate, then, is not to 
ask them to take on an additional onerous chore for which they are, or may 
think they are, unqualified, but to do explic itly and self- consciously what 
they had been  doing tacitly and unconsciously all along. Although the bulk 
of this chapter focuses on science, the moral dimension I discuss is integral 
to  every discipline. Insofar as inquirers have to depend on one another, they 
have moral/epistemic obligations to one another. The understanding that 
emerges is  shaped by the recognition of  those obligations.
An overarching epistemological objective of science is to develop a com-
prehensive, systematic, empirically grounded understanding of nature. 
Although it is not science’s only objective, I  will call such an understanding 
its epistemic goal. It is common to all the sciences: biology seeks to under -
stand living organisms; meteorology, to understand atmospheric conditions; 
physics, to understand  matter and energy; and so on. Two obstacles get in 
the way: (1) Nature is enormously complicated. (2) Findings are fallible; no 
 matter how well established a conclusion is, it still might be wrong. I  will 
argue that in order to pursue its goal in light of  these obstacles, science incor-
porates values that are si mul ta neously moral and epistemic.  These values, I 
 will urge, are not mere means; they are integral to the sort of understanding 
science provides and underwrite its epistemic standing.
Very roughly, the argument is this: Scientific inquiry requires collabo -
ration. That collaboration requires trust. Since trust is unreasonable in

--- Page 142 ---

Intellectual Integrity 129
the absence of trustworthiness, scientists need to be, and to consider one 
another, trustworthy. Since trustworthiness is a moral attribute, scientific 
inquiry has an inextricably moral dimension.
Scientific inquiry is a social undertaking. Experiments, models, findings, 
and theories may be fruits of individual efforts, but they are constructed 
and evaluated by reference to standards devised, endorsed, and enforced by 
a scientific community.  These standards, and therefore the items they sanc-
tion, are not arbitrary. They are grounded in a shared conception of the scien-
tific enterprise— its ends, means, liberties, and constraints. They are, that is, 
generated and reflectively endorsed by legislating members of a community 
of epistemic ends. Moral values are integral to science. They emerge from and 
contribute to the scientific community’s conception of its enterprise. The 
practices they engender, the constraints they impose, and the activities they 
promote figure in its success. Although the values in question may initially 
be merely instrumental, they become intrinsic when scientists recognize that 
realizing them not only promotes good science, but in part constitutes good 
science.
Epistemic Interdependence
Modern science accommodates itself to the complexity of nature through 
a division of cognitive  labor. Rather than starting from scratch, each sci -
entist builds on previously established findings, uses methods  others have 
devised and tested, employs mea sur ing instruments  others have designed, 
constructed, and calibrated, and analyzes data using mathematical and 
statistical techniques  others have validated. 4 Research teams rather than 
solitary investigators frequently generate results. Such teams can do more 
than any one of its members could do alone, not only  because they can 
cover more ground, but also  because team members typically have dif fer-
ent cognitive strengths and often have dif fer ent areas of expertise. Collec-
tively they bring to bear a broader range of talents and training than any 
individual scientist possesses. This is not to say (although it might well 
be true) that it would be impossible for an isolated individual to come up 
with an empirically adequate understanding of some aspect of nature.5 My 
claim is only that the sort of understanding modern science supplies is 
rooted in epistemic interdependence. Science as we know it is a coopera -
tive endeavor.

--- Page 143 ---

130  Chapter 6
 Because it depends on a division of cognitive  labor, scientific collabora-
tion occurs in a particularly harsh epistemic climate. Collaborators need not 
know each other well or understand each other’s contributions. The paper 
reporting the sequencing of the  human genome had over 250 authors, 
working in institutions on four continents (Venter et al., 2001). Most of 
the authors  were in no position to vouch for one another’s intellectual 
character or monitor one another’s work.  Whether or not they  were in 
the same venue, many  were prob ably at best dimly aware of what some of 
their coauthors contributed. Although few scientific papers have so many 
authors, such a lack of proximity and close personal ties among members 
of a research team is common. Moreover, all scientists build on the findings 
of, and deploy methods developed by, pre de ces sors they do not personally 
know. And even when they work in close physical proximity, the intel -
lectual distance between collaborators who differ in expertise can be vast. 
Statisticians often have no clear idea how bench scientists generated the 
raw data they are expected to analyze. Nor do the bench scientists know 
precisely how or why the statisticians analyze the raw data as they do. A 
scientist does not always know the reasons  behind a conclusion a collabo-
rator drew; and if she  were told, she might not fully appreciate their force 
(Hardwig, 1991).
Such epistemic interdependence yields significant benefits. It extends 
epistemic reach: More data can be gathered, more experiments run, more 
 matters investigated, more  factors considered, more perspectives accom -
modated than would be pos si ble for a single researcher working alone. It 
stabilizes findings: Individuals are subject to bias, inattention, carelessness, 
and wishful thinking, as well as to limitations in background knowledge 
and scientific imagination. If the result of an investigation is the product 
of many minds, individual foibles can cancel out. What one team member 
overlooks, another may notice; what one slights, another may focus on; 
what one never learned, another may have studied in depth. It solidifies 
results:  because of team members’ differences in expertise, the quality of 
evidence and range of interpretations available through teamwork is apt to 
be better than the quality and range available to an individual (Hardwig, 
1991). Collectively they can advance understanding more than any one of 
them could do alone.
But epistemic interdependence creates vulnerability. To accept a conclu-
sion is to be prepared to use it as a basis for cognitively serious inference and

--- Page 144 ---

Intellectual Integrity 131
action, and to be prepared to give  others to accept it as well. To the extent that 
one scientist does not know or understand what another did, she is in danger 
of accepting and basing her own investigations on unwarranted results. If she 
does, she may pursue fruitless lines of inquiry and overlook promising ones. If 
she coauthors a paper contaminated by a collaborator’s scientific misconduct, 
her professional reputation and livelihood are at risk. Epistemic interdepen-
dence thus requires trust. Scientists can reasonably depend on one another’s 
contributions only if they can be confident that  those contributions are sci-
entifically acceptable. Perhaps personal acquaintance grounds trust among 
a small number of investigators who work closely together. But the requisite 
epistemic interdependence extends across the scientific community, so per-
sonal ties are insufficient. Trust in one’s fellow scientists must be impersonal. 
A major function of the infrastructure of science is to secure the bases of 
impersonal trust. Scientific misconduct betrays that trust.
Misconduct
The most flagrant forms of scientific misconduct are fabrication of data, 
falsification of findings, suppression of results, and plagiarism. Fabrication 
and falsification misrepresent what was done; plagiarism misrepresents 
by whom it was done; suppression conceals what was found. The obvious 
moral objection to all such conduct is that it is dishonest. But what, if any-
thing, does this have to do with its being bad science?
To fabricate data is to issue a report of an investigation that was not 
conducted (or not conducted for the cases reported). To falsify a finding 
is to report that an investigation had a result that it did not actually have. 
Both fabrication and falsification are lies. Thus, one might think that they 
subvert the epistemic goal by introducing infelicitous falsehoods into sci -
ence, representing them as true. That would obviously be bad science. This 
explanation assumes that a contention grounded in falsification or fabrica-
tion is infelicitously false. That need not be so. Fabrication and falsification 
misrepresent the epistemic status of a claim; they purport that it has back-
ing that it does not have. Such misrepre sen ta tions lack justification. But a 
statement that lacks justification may nevertheless be true or true enough. 
Fabricated data may be just what would have been found had the appro -
priate experiment been run; a falsified finding may be true or true enough 
even though no (or unacceptably  little) evidence confirms it.

--- Page 145 ---

132  Chapter 6
In fact, scientists who falsify or fabricate rarely intend to introduce infe-
licitous falsehoods into science.  Because science is self- correcting, they 
could not reasonably expect to succeed, at least not in the long run. Rather, 
they seek to incorporate into science what they take to be a truth, but one for 
which they do not have, or do not yet have, evidence. This makes the prob-
lem trickier. If the conclusion they purport to have established is true, one 
might argue, our understanding of the phenomena  under investigation is 
enriched rather than degraded by its ac cep tance. And if the perpetrator has 
good instincts about where the truth lies, his falsified or fabricated conclu-
sion might well be true. If it is, what is the prob lem?
If truth is the end, and scientific research a mere means to it, falsifi -
ers and fabricators with good instincts or good luck simply take shortcuts. 
They arrive at the end without deploying the standard means. They skip 
the intermediate steps of acquiring and evaluating empirical evidence. If 
all that  matters is truth, how a truth was arrived at should make no differ-
ence. But mere truth is not what science is  after. A science is not just a 
compilation of discrete bits of information about a topic that happens to 
be accurate; it is a comprehensive, systematic understanding of a range of 
phenomena, based on carefully acquired, scrupulously recorded, empirical 
evidence. The tie to evidence is crucial; for evidence supplies the ground -
ing that underwrites epistemic standing. Conclusions backed by evidential 
support are conclusions scientists have reason to accept; conclusions, even 
true conclusions, without such support are conclusions they lack reason to 
accept.
This explains what makes the falsified or fabricated ‘finding’ scientifi -
cally objectionable. Although the alleged finding may be true, in the absence 
of adequate evidence one would be unwise to depend on it. It is not trust -
worthy. To accept a conclusion that lacks adequate backing is to take an 
epistemic risk. And to put other members of the community in a position 
where they are taking such a risk unawares is to fail in one’s obligations to 
them. That is what proffering a falsified or fabricated finding does. It con -
stitutes a betrayal of science  because scientists have undertaken a commit-
ment to proffer only results that members of the realm of epistemic ends 
can, by their own collective lights, trust.
The counterpart to publishing reports of research that was not done 
is refraining from publishing reports of work that was done. Suppression 
of results  thwarts science’s goal in much the way that falsification and

--- Page 146 ---

Intellectual Integrity 133
fabrication do. Obviously a scientist is not obliged to publish the results of 
 every failed experiment or  every fruitless or frivolous line of thought.  Doing 
so would create an information glut of no use to anyone. But if a well- 
designed, scrupulously conducted investigation was carried out to establish 
the truth of a scientifically significant hypothesis, the fact that it failed is 
something the scientific community deserves to know. Suppressing such a 
finding is in effect a lie of omission. 6 It misleads the community,  because 
suppressing the result unjustifiably implicates that the question it investi -
gated is still open, that a par tic u lar approach to the question is still  viable, 
or that a previously accepted finding has not been discredited. It implicitly 
invites investigators to pursue what is now known to be an unproductive 
line of inquiry or to rest their research on what has been found to be an 
untenable base.7 This suggests that the standard journal practice of refus -
ing to publish null results is more problematic than it appears. The failure 
to disclose that a promising line of inquiry went nowhere can impede sci -
entific pro gress. Had the null result of the Michelson–Morley experiment 
been suppressed, physics would have suffered.
Even the best science affords no guarantees. However scrupulously per -
formed an experiment is, its result may be false.  There is always some risk 
in accepting any finding. The standards of a scientific community constitute 
its consensus about what risks are worth taking. But what ever the standards, 
the goal would be subverted if science  were permanently saddled with the 
errors of its forebears. Science therefore incorporates methods for rooting 
out received errors. One is that results that cannot be reproduced or that do 
not stand up  under further testing and elaboration must be excised from 
science. But it is not enough to simply declare a previously accepted finding 
to be false or unwarranted. To learn as much as pos si ble from their  mistakes, 
scientists want to know what went wrong. Rather than simply deleting an 
erroneous conclusion, it is desirable to backtrack to the source of the error. 
This is central to the objectionability of plagiarism.
The content of a plagiarized report may be, and I suspect typically is, 
beyond reproach. The prob lem is that it is not the product of the scientist 
who purports to have produced it. Again, this is clearly dishonest. But what 
makes it bad science? The acceptability of a finding is in de pen dent of the 
identity of the scientist who generated it. Indeed, if the work is beyond 
reproach, any competent scientist could have done the research and written 
it up. This almost makes it look as though science should have no objection

--- Page 147 ---

134  Chapter 6
to plagiarism. Why should scientists care who did the research, so long as 
it satisfies their standards?
Giving credit where credit is due encourages good work. So an obvious 
objection to plagiarism is that failing to credit productive scientists while 
crediting unproductive ones threatens to drive the wrong scientists from 
the field and to direct research funding to lazy, inept, unscrupulous, or 
unproductive investigators. Plagiarism, then, is objectionable for the practi-
cal reason that it interferes with an effective incentive system by making it 
difficult to identify and reward  those who are  doing good work. This might 
be called the department of  human resources objection to plagiarism.
Is  there any epistemic reason to credit the individuals who actually did 
the research and to object when  others try to steal their credit? That is, 
does the misappropriation of other  people’s work itself damage the pursuit 
of science’s epistemic goal? An affirmative answer stems from fallibilism. 
No conclusion is certain. However scrupulous scientists are, however well 
tested their methods, and however well- honed their standards, conclusions 
still might be, and sometimes are, wrong. That being so, science incorpo -
rates mechanisms for detecting and correcting errors. The overwhelming 
majority of such errors are honest  mistakes. When a  mistake is discovered, 
one might think, the remedy is simply to excise it. Withdraw the paper and 
admit that  there is currently no good reason to accept its conclusion. But if 
the research was responsibly done and satisfies current scientific standards, 
a question remains: what went wrong? Rather than merely deleting the 
error, it is desirable to track down its source. Was it due to sloppiness, bad 
luck, a mistaken assumption, or an unreliable method? Are the science’s 
standards too lax or their applications uneven? To maximally profit from 
 mistakes that have previously passed muster, it is advisable go back and 
look at the raw data, the interpretations, and the analyses to find out where 
the misstep occurred. The aim is not only to excise the error but to correct 
the assumptions, methods, practices, or standards that led to it. Scientists 
do not want to keep making the same sort of  mistake.
Plagiarism stymies backtracking to the source of an error. The scientist 
who purports to have done the research did not do it. So he cannot provide 
information about what was done and what went wrong. Fallibilism gives 
rise to a demand for corrigibility. Plagiarism unduly limits corrigibility; it 
undermines the self- correcting character of science.

--- Page 148 ---

Intellectual Integrity 135
The discussion so far has shown that the dishonesty embodied in fal -
sification, fabrication, plagiarism, and suppression of impor tant findings 
is not an accidental feature of practices whose scientific objectionabil -
ity lies elsewhere. Such dishonesty thwarts science’s epistemic goal. The 
practices in question are bad science, then, precisely  because they are dis -
honest. And their being dishonest makes them untrustworthy. An obliga -
tion to be trustworthy thus lies at the heart of science.
Disciplines differ in the sort of epistemic interdependence they display. 
Historians often work alone. Their books and scholarly papers are apt to 
be single authored. Even so, they depend on archivists, cartographers, and 
archeologists; and they build on what other historians have established. 
And history, like  every discipline, is a realm of epistemic ends, whose com-
mitments are jointly crafted and collectively endorsed  because they foster 
the community’s ends. So historians, like scientists, are beholden to the 
norms and practices of their intellectual community and can engage in 
conduct that betrays their obligations to that community.
Plagiarism can occur in any discipline, and regardless of field, can impede 
backtracking to discover the source of errors. Falsification and fabrication 
exhibit dif fer ent profiles in dif fer ent disciplines. In history and archeology, 
for example, fabrication often takes the form of forgery. A document or arti-
fact is represented as having a provenance it is known not to have; and on 
the basis of that provenance, is claimed to be an exemplar of a period, source, 
or region to which it does not belong. Falsification occurs when, for exam-
ple, archeologists seed a site, planting au then tic artifacts in locations where 
they  were not in fact found. Since archeological understanding involves 
an appreciation not just of what is found, but also of where it is found, 
the arrangement of artifacts in the seeded site yields potentially misleading 
information about the civilization  under study.
History  faces prob lems of se lection. To generate an understanding of an 
era, a historian has to decide what events to include and what descriptions 
of  those events to provide. Although  there is considerable latitude, such 
choices are not unbounded. Epistemic irresponsibility can consist in lying 
about, omitting mention of, or over-  or underemphasizing specific aspects 
of events. Holocaust- denying histories of World War II are irresponsible 
 because they intentionally misrepresent history. Other intellectually irre -
sponsible histories of the period are more circumspect. They issue no denials

--- Page 149 ---

136  Chapter 6
but simply neglect to mention the Holocaust. Yet other histories distort 
through their choice of grain or terminology. A history that acknowledged 
the Holocaust and accurately reported the number of victims would still be 
misleading if it neglected to mention that the victims  were victims of geno-
cide. So would one that acknowledged the genocide but failed to identify 
its targets. Conceivably, highly specialized histories, for example, histories 
of the naval war in the Pacific, could justify such an omission on grounds 
of irrelevance, but any general history, and any history that purports to 
do justice to the war in Eu rope, could not justifiably omit mention of or 
downplay the importance of the ‘final solution’.  Because the Holocaust is 
so impor tant, omitting it would inevitably skew the understanding of any 
history of the period that failed to give it its due.
The issue of omissions, like the issue of suppression of results, is tricky. 
I picked an egregious omission to make the prob lem vivid. But historians 
face delicate decisions about what to include and how to describe it. Typi -
cally  there is a range of acceptable solutions. My point is not to provide a 
rule for settling such questions, but to emphasize that scholars face obli -
gations not just to tell the truth, but also not to mislead. Omissions and 
terminological sleights of hand can mislead. How and when they do so is 
not always obvious. The developing norms that govern a realm of epistemic 
ends delineate where the lines are drawn.
As in the case of the hard sciences, in the humanities and social sciences, 
moral and epistemic obligations fuse. What is wrong with forging a docu -
ment or seeding a site or omitting or sanitizing an impor tant fact is not 
only that it is in effect a lie, but that it subverts the ends of the discipline, 
leading its members to accept and purvey unwarranted claims. It thus betrays 
the trust of the other members of the community. Insofar as the miscreant 
accepts the norms of the community, it also constitutes a sort of self- sabotage.
Even scrupulously done, properly documented research that exhibits 
no hint of overt misconduct is suspect if the investigators have a conflict 
of interest (Lo & Fields, 2009). Where such conflicts occur, agents have an 
extradisciplinary interest that threatens to deflect them from the discipline’s 
goal. If, for example, a scientist has a financial stake in the outcome of a 
study or an ideological commitment to  things turning out a certain way, he 
may be apt to weigh the evidence differently than an unbiased investigator 
would. Conflicts of interest arise at the institutional level as well. Since the 
phar ma ceu ti cal industry has a strong financial interest in the outcomes of

--- Page 150 ---

Intellectual Integrity 137
clinical  trials,  there is a legitimate concern that the  trials it conducts or the 
reports it generates might be biased in  favor of finding new drugs effec -
tive.8 Commercial research in any area has a higher- order conflict of inter-
est. The epistemic imperative requires that all members of a community of 
inquiry have  free and equal access to the evidence for a claim. Any member 
of the community should be able to challenge a finding. But commercial 
enterprises have trade secrets. To protect  those secrets, they do not make the 
details of their research publicly available.  Whether the claims they make 
about their products are epistemically acceptable is open to question. Priva-
tization of inquiry comes at considerable epistemic cost.
A conflict of interest exists whenever  there is a danger of undue influence 
from an extradisciplinary interest. It does not require that anyone actually 
be unduly influenced. So the existence of a conflict of interest is compat -
ible with complete absence of wrongdoing on anyone’s part. An investiga-
tor with a conflict of interest may in fact weigh the evidence exactly as an 
unbiased investigator would. Even so, the possibility of bias undermines his 
credibility.
This raises the question of why conflicts of interest are objectionable. 
One might think that it would be enough to bar the existence of undue 
influence. Why should the mere risk of undue influence be a prob lem?  Here 
again the answer turns on trustworthiness. Undue influence by extradisci -
plinary interests corrupts the discipline and deflects it from its epistemic 
goal. If a scientist does not know  whether another scientist was unduly 
influenced, she does not know  whether his result is trustworthy. And if 
she harbors doubts about its trustworthiness, she  will not and should not 
trust it. The risk that a scientist’s or institution’s extrascientific interest 
deflects from the goal provides grounds for doubt. Consciously or uncon -
sciously, investigators may be influenced by  factors that do not withstand 
scientific scrutiny. Given that risk,  others  ought not be confident that their 
results satisfy the standards of the scientific community. The mere risk of 
undue influence by extrascientific  factors thus undermines confidence. It 
is enough to disincline  others to accept assurances that the work is sound.
Epistemic Responsibility
Scientific misconduct thwarts the epistemic goal  because it undermines 
collaboration or corrigibility. This suggests that besides abiding by the

--- Page 151 ---

138  Chapter 6
prohibition against specific forms of misconduct, members of a commu -
nity of inquiry bear additional obligations to one another. Overt miscon -
duct of the sort examined above is not the only threat to collaboration and 
corrigibility.
Science is subject to epistemic requirements that constrain experimen -
tal design, data gathering, analy sis and assessment. Hypotheses should 
be formulated sharply enough to admit of empirical testing. Experiments 
should be designed to yield data capable of confirming or disconfirming 
the hypothesis  under investigation. Irrelevant and obviously misleading 
evidence should be discredited. Data should be painstakingly gathered and 
carefully recorded in a timely fashion. They should be displayed in such 
a way that their significance and their limitations are manifest. Analyses 
should be rigorous, relevant, complete, and apt. Assessments should be 
judicious. Research reports should be grounded in a comprehensive, fair- 
minded, current understanding of the topic and the methods for investigat-
ing it. They should acknowledge the assumptions made, the limitations of 
the approach being used, and the potential threats to validity. Previously 
published relevant work should be cited. Such requirements are familiar; 
their satisfaction yields conclusions  there is reason to accept.
So far, however,  there is nothing overtly moral about the requirements 
or the benefits of satisfying them. The items on my list seem to be purely 
epistemological requirements. The moral ele ment enters when we realize 
that in publishing a result, a scientist issues an open invitation to the com-
munity to rely on it and assures its members that they can do so with con-
fidence. Results that justifiably inspire confidence must be epistemically 
responsible. In addition to intellectual honesty, competence and conscien-
tiousness are mandatory. In publishing a result, a scientist implicates not 
only that it was arrived at honestly, but also that it satisfies the epistemic 
standards of the community. That is, she implicates that the work is compe-
tently done.  Because scientists must depend on one another, the epistemic 
requirements are moral requirements; if scientists fail to satisfy  these epis-
temic requirements, they fail in their moral obligations to the community.
Carelessness, fickleness, obtuseness, and bias, then, are not just episte -
mological failings; in the context of inquiry, they are also moral failings. 
Results infected by such faults are honest  mistakes. Confirmation bias 
leads an investigator to overlook or underrate evidence that tells against 
a hypothesis she  favors. She is not being dishonest; she genuinely believes

--- Page 152 ---

Intellectual Integrity 139
that her evidence supports her conclusion. But inasmuch as she can, by being 
more rigorous, avoid confirmation bias, her  mistake is a culpable error. The 
same holds for carelessly taking or recording data, overstating one’s results 
or understating their limitations, and so on. By inviting her colleagues to 
accept a conclusion that by their own lights they  ought not accept, a scien-
tist does them wrong.
Fickleness is dif fer ent. An intellectually fickle investigator flits from one 
set of commitments to another without due regard for the under lying issues. 
One day she is a gradualist about evolution; the next day she accepts punc-
tuated equilibrium. Her flaw is not that she changes her mind; it is that she 
does so cavalierly. She changes her mind too easily. Her pronouncements 
are unstable. Since they are so easily abandoned, her compatriots would be 
unwise to accept them on her say-so. The gullible investigator has a similar 
flaw. He believes what ever he hears, at least so long as the information is 
remotely credible. Perhaps he would not go so far as to believe that space 
aliens landed in Detroit, but he might accept the contention that  because 
the gene for blondness is recessive, blondes are  going extinct. If he spreads 
the word about the imminent extinction of blondes, he is intellectually 
irresponsible. For the information about how recessiveness operates is read-
ily available and  ought not in this context be ignored. Insofar as  these flaws 
could be avoided by being more scrupulous in gathering evidence and justi-
fying inferences, the agents are culpable. They are willfully ignorant. If they 
pres ent their claims as scientifically backed, they do their fellows wrong.
In agreeing to work together,  people engender obligations to one another— 
obligations whose content is determined by the objective they are jointly 
pursuing. Ceteris paribus, they owe it to one another to discharge  those 
obligations. In inquiry, the goal is understanding. So the obligations are in 
the first instance epistemic; they pertain to generating and sustaining the 
understanding that inquiry seeks. But  because inquiry is a joint epistemic 
venture, the epistemic obligations are also moral obligations. Investigators 
owe it to one another to satisfy the epistemic requirements, and to make it 
manifest that they do so.
This pattern is not peculiar to science, or even to inquiry. Members of 
other collectives, such as athletic teams and orchestras, are  under similar 
obligations to one another. In the first instance, the obligations of a quar -
terback are athletic;  those of a bassoonist, aesthetic. But the quarterback 
owes it to his teammates to discharge his athletic obligations well; he is

--- Page 153 ---

140  Chapter 6
something worse than a poor athlete if he carelessly or negligently lets 
down his side. And the bassoonist owes it to her fellow musicians to per -
form well; she is something worse than a poor musician if she neglects to 
learn her part or is cavalier about playing in tune. The commitments team 
members make to one another are akin to implicit promises;  because the 
common knowledge of  those commitments creates a basis for legitimate 
expectations, one does the  others wrong if one does not abide by them.
Arguably, in inquiry  there is a significant difference in scope. The mem-
bers of a research team, like the members of a football team or an orchestra, 
consist of a limited number of identifiable individuals who have well- defined 
obligations to other  people they know. But in publishing findings, a sci -
entist effectively invites the entire scientific community to join her team; 
since she provides assurance that her findings satisfy their epistemic stan -
dards, she is  under an obligation to proffer findings that they all can be 
confident of. Indeed, to the extent that the rest of the population depends 
on the findings of science, in publishing her results, a scientist offers her 
assurance that every one can have confidence in them. The same holds for 
scholars in other disciplines. To publish a conclusion is to make that con -
clusion public. It is to invite readers or auditors to accept the conclusion 
with the assurance that it meets the relevant standards of acceptability.
A scientific community consists of prac ti tion ers who share a discipline. 
They are bound together, and think of themselves as bound together, by a 
network of commitments that govern their professional lives. They are joint 
legislating members of a realm of epistemic ends. They justify par tic u lar 
verdicts by reference to the rules and standards of their practices, and justify 
 those practices by reference to the ends of their science. In performing this 
dual justificatory function, a scientific community is largely self- legislating. 
As I argued above, it makes the rules, constitutes the norms, and sets the 
standards that constrain and guide its activities. It determines what counts 
as an experiment, a confirming instance, a statistically significant result, a 
representative sample. Its norms and standards are not arbitrary. They are 
designed, and continually redesigned, with an end in view— namely devel-
oping and confirming a systematic, explanatory account of the phenom -
ena, an account that is grounded in empirical evidence and that underwrites 
nontrivial inferences, arguments, and perhaps actions regarding  those phe-
nomena. Acceptability derives from satisfying the interlocking network of 
standards science sets for itself, standards that are grounded in an evolving,

--- Page 154 ---

Intellectual Integrity 141
collective understanding of the scientific enterprise and of the difficulties 
to be encountered in pursuing its goals.
Although the standards apply throughout scientific practice, their gen -
eral, impersonal character comes to the fore with publication. In publish -
ing, a scientist undertakes an obligation to be worthy of her community’s 
trust. A critical question is what standards a work has to meet to vindicate 
the open invitation. Ideally, perhaps, we’d like to demand that the research 
report’s content be accurate: the claims that purport to be true are in fact 
true;  those that purport to be felicitous falsehoods are in fact felicitous. 
But this is both too much and too  little to ask. Science is fallible; it has no 
way to guarantee that findings are accurate. Moreover, as we have seen, 
mere accuracy is not enough. The scientist needs to convey her assurance 
that her research,  whether the result is accurate or not, satisfies current, 
reflectively endorsed standards.  Because  those standards embody the best 
way the discipline has devised to generate and validate understanding in its 
field, results that satisfy  those standards are currently acceptable.9
Assurance
To understand what a scientist proffers in publishing a paper, we need to 
distinguish between warrant and the assurance of warrant. Warrant is a first- 
order relation between evidence and conclusion. A conclusion is warranted 
when the evidence renders it sufficiently probable (as always, mea sured by 
current standards). A conclusion could be warranted even if  there was rea-
son to doubt that it was. This might, for example, be the case if the connec-
tion between the evidence and the conclusion obtains but is not obvious. 
An assurance of warrant is a second- order assessment of the strength of the 
connection between the evidence and the conclusion. Warrant, then, is a 
function of the force of evidence; the assurance of warrant, a function of 
the weight of evidence. The assurance of warrant is what grounds confi -
dence in first- order assessments (Adler, 2002, 251–252).
To appreciate the difference, consider the following example. Bob takes 
a quarter from his pocket, looks it over and sees nothing odd about it. Con-
cluding that it is a fair coin, he judges that the probability of its coming up 
heads when flipped is 0.5. In light of the prior probability that an arbitrarily 
chosen coin is fair and his cursory inspection of the coin, his conclusion 
is warranted. Now suppose he flips the coin 1,000 times and rec ords the

--- Page 155 ---

142  Chapter 6
result of each flip. Not surprisingly, the coin comes up heads just about half 
the time. So he again concludes that the probability of its coming up heads 
is 0.5. Should we consider his epistemic situation unchanged? Should we 
think that he is epistemically no better off for having run the test? The test 
supplied no reason to alter his original probability assignment. That assign-
ment was already warranted.  There is  little, if any, evident epistemic gain in 
his first- order assessment. Still, he is plainly better off. What he gains is not 
warrant, but a right to be confident.  After the test, he is in a position to be 
more confident in the probability he assigns (Adler, 2002). The test result 
provides assurance that his first- order assignment is correct.
It is a princi ple of jurisprudence that justice not only must be done, it 
must be seen to be done. Something similar holds in science. Results not 
only must be warranted, they must be seen to be warranted. That requires 
that they be shown to be warranted. For scientists to be in a position to con-
fidently rely on an investigator’s work, it must be manifest that the work 
satisfies community standards of acceptability. So rather than just issuing a 
press release announcing their findings, scientists publish a peer- reviewed 
paper that spells out (admittedly, rather tersely) their background assump-
tions, research design, mea sure ments, analy sis, and results. Such papers 
must be public and transparent. Publicity demands that results be available 
to the entire community; transparency demands that the reports provide 
sufficient detail that other members of the community can recognize why 
they  ought to be accepted. They exemplify that the work they report satis-
fies the relevant standards.
I have been speaking as though the reason for making it manifest that 
the standards have been met is entirely other- directed. An individual sci -
entist owes it to her colleagues to proffer only results that satisfy the stan -
dards they reflectively endorse. This is part of the story. But the satisfaction 
of  those standards also gives the scientist herself reason for confidence in 
her findings.  Because the standards function as a stay against carelessness, 
bias, and wishful thinking, they provide her with assurance that her work 
is worthy of her own reflective endorsement.
The scientific community sets standards whose satisfaction not only war-
rants conclusions, but exemplifies that they are warranted. Some require -
ments on acceptability— such as  those concerning the size and constitution 
of the evidence class, the standards of statistical significance and power, 
the proper sort of analy sis— bear directly on warrant.  These are first- order

--- Page 156 ---

Intellectual Integrity 143
requirements.  Others, by making it manifest that results hold regardless 
of who generated them or why, pertain to the assurance of warrant. They 
mandate that findings be intersubjectively observable; experiments, repro-
ducible; data, unambiguous; research reports, peer reviewed. If an item is 
intersubjectively observable, it does not  matter who in par tic u lar observed 
it; any competent scientist could have done so.10 If an experiment is repro-
ducible, the acceptability of its result does not turn on the character or 
intellectual endowments of the scientist who performed it; had any compe-
tent scientist done it, the result would have been the same. And if data are 
unambiguous, the identity of the interpreter is immaterial; all competent 
scientists would interpret the data in the same way.
One might think that  these requirements bear only on warrant, not on 
assurances of warrant. If so, the fact that an experiment is reproducible 
affords only first- order evidence that its result is correct. Granted, if you 
ran the experiment a second time, you would get more first- order evidence 
for its conclusion. Rather than 64 data points, you would have 128. So the 
probability that the conclusion is correct would increase, at least slightly. 
But if the original experiment yielded a publishable result, it already pro -
vided enough evidence to warrant its conclusion. The additional evidence 
provided by the second run, although not unwelcome, would by no means 
be mandatory. It would not do much to increase the warrant of the already 
warranted conclusion. And if the original experiment can yield enough evi-
dence to warrant the result, no more first- order evidence is needed. What 
does the reproducibility add?
Reproducibility obviates the need to take  matters on faith. Doubters can 
go back and run the experiment for themselves. Similar points hold for the 
requirements that data be unambiguous and that phenomena be intersub-
jectively observable. When it makes no difference who generated a result, 
when any competent scientist could have done so, the personal foibles or 
intellectual idiosyncrasies of the investigator are irrelevant to the result’s 
acceptability. This indifference makes science impartial.
One might worry that by rejecting deliverances that are not intersub -
jectively observable, experiments that are not reproducible, and inter -
pretations that are idiosyncratic, science throws out potentially valuable 
information. No doubt it does. But even though an irreproducible result, a 
quirky interpretation, or idiosyncratic observation may in fact be correct, 
one would be unwise to count on it and irresponsible to give  others to

--- Page 157 ---

144  Chapter 6
count on it. Similarly for findings shrouded in secrecy. If a scientist cannot 
or  will not publicly document what she did to achieve her result, she can-
not responsibly invite  others to accept her assurance that they can count 
on it. Without such documentation, they have no reason to believe that it 
satisfies standards they collectively endorse.
Peer Review
I have claimed that  because of their interdependence, members of the sci-
entific community have moral obligations to one another. One might agree 
that they are accountable to one another but still doubt that  there is any -
thing especially moral about that accountability. Given that their work is 
subject to peer review, it might seem that an individual scientist’s motiva-
tion for conforming to community standards is like a student’s motivation 
for not cheating when a proctor is looking over her shoulder or a driver’s for 
not speeding when a traffic cop is pointing a radar gun his way. The chances 
of getting caught are high enough and the disutility of getting caught  great 
enough that enlightened self- interest provides sufficient reason to obey the 
rules. If so,  there is no need to invoke distinctively moral obligations. But 
science is not Big  Brother. It does not monitor  every experiment to ensure 
that its standards are met. Although the scientific community collectively 
sets standards for how investigations are to be carried out, how evidence 
should be gathered, presented, and analyzed, and how research should be 
reported, peer review can do relatively  little to enforce the standards.
To be sure, peer review provides a mea sure of quality control; but its scope 
and therefore its powers are limited. Its immediate objects are documents— 
research reports and grant proposals.  Because reviewers are knowledgeable 
about their field, peer review is a good way to assess the originality, impor-
tance, and epistemic adequacy of the research  those documents describe. It 
can reveal that, for example, an experiment did not adequately control for 
 factors it  ought to have controlled for or mea sure magnitudes it  ought to 
have mea sured, since the authors spell out what is, or is to be, controlled 
for and mea sured. It can pinpoint gaps in presuppositions, or weaknesses in 
experimental design, since the authors describe their presuppositions and 
experimental design. It can reveal that the paper overstates or understates 
its findings, since the authors state exactly what they take the findings to 
be. It can tell  whether the authors have taken appropriate note of previous

--- Page 158 ---

Intellectual Integrity 145
relevant work. 11 In  doing all  these  things, peer review assumes that the 
research is accurately reflected in the documents. But peer review is typically 
ill- equipped to ensure that the research reported was actually done, that 
the results listed  were actually found, or that the alleged authors actually 
wrote the paper. The most it can do to uncover fabrication or falsification 
is to assess plausibility,  either of a single paper or of a body of work.12 The 
most it can do to uncover plagiarism is to rely on reviewers who know the 
lit er a ture well enough to recognize the original source. For obvious reasons, 
peer review is in no position to assess suppressed results. My point is not 
to disparage peer review. It is to note that the function of peer review is 
neither to check for nor to preempt the need for scientific integrity; it is 
rather to assess the quality of scientific work in a context that presupposes 
scientific integrity.
Fostering Integrity
If the requirements of science  were mandates imposed from without, the 
limitations on peer review would open the door to a  free rider prob lem. A 
scientist might recognize that although the moral/epistemic requirements 
should generally be satisfied, science would not totter if a few investiga -
tors cut corners, any more than the subway system is jeopardized if a 
few riders fail to pay their fares. So, she might think, in neither case does 
the threat to the institution provide a reason why she in par tic u lar should 
conform to the rules, provided that most  people do. This would leave room 
for it to be rational to defect. But the situation is dif fer ent for members of a 
realm of epistemic ends.  Because they make the rules that bind them, they 
cannot violate  those rules without violating their own princi ples. The prob-
lem is not just that a miscreant scientist could not justify her be hav ior to 
other members of the community. It is that, having reflectively endorsed 
the rules she is flouting, she could not justify her be hav ior to herself. This 
does not ensure that  there  will be no  free riders, but it does ensure that  free 
riding by legislating members of a realm of ends is not rational. In a realm 
of ends, a  free rider’s be hav ior is inconsistent with her own princi ples.
Publicity and transparency foster scientific integrity.  Because it is com-
mon knowledge that only work that at least ostensibly satisfies the scientific 
community’s requirements  will be accorded scientific standing, prac ti tion-
ers have a strong incentive to do only work that at least ostensibly satisfies

--- Page 159 ---

146  Chapter 6
the requirements. Typically the easiest and most straightforward way to at 
least ostensibly satisfy the requirements is to actually satisfy them. So scien-
tists have an incentive to produce work that satisfies the requirements. This 
hardly  handles  every case. But it may go some way  toward explaining why 
scientific misconduct is not rampant.
Another incentive is this: Scientists recognize that the requirements are 
not arbitrary. They are instrumentally valuable  because their satisfaction is 
conducive to realizing the epistemic goal. Inasmuch as scientists want to 
realize the goal, they have reason to employ the requisite means. As Williams 
notes, Watson and Crick wanted to discover the structure of DNA; they did 
not want merely to be credited with the discovery. No doubt they  were per-
sonally ambitious. But “their goal [was] fame, above all fame and prestige 
in the scientific community, and that [would] come from the recognition 
that they have done good science” (Williams, 2002, 142). To realize their 
ambition, they had to satisfy biology’s standards.
An even deeper incentive lies in the recognition that satisfying the 
requirements is not merely conducive of the goal; it is at least partially 
constitutive of the goal. Being comprehensive, impartial, evidentially 
grounded, and reflectively endorsed are properties of the sort of understand-
ing that science seeks. Such an understanding is subject to, and holds up 
 under, critical scrutiny, where the grounds for criticism and bases for assess-
ment have been tempered through a succession of increasingly refined and 
rigorous pro cesses of self- correction. Moreover, since that understanding 
is open to extension, correction, and refinement, a reflectively endorsed 
finding is not considered fixed or final, but is an acceptable springboard 
for further inquiry. Scientists have an incentive to satisfy the requirements, 
then,  because the satisfaction of  those standards is built into scientific 
understanding. That is, in Kantian terms, they have an incentive to con -
duct their research in ways that re spect, rather than merely conform to, the 
requirements.
Nevertheless, the mutual trust that I have argued sustains the scientific 
community may seem fragile, and relying on it may seem naive. Even if, 
qua scientists, they have reason to uphold the standards, scientists wear 
other hats as well. They may be entrepreneurs with a financial stake in the 
outcome of their experiments; they may be parents who need to feed their 
families; they may be ambitious neurotics whose sense of self depends on 
the (earned or unearned) re spect of their peers. One might won der, then,

--- Page 160 ---

Intellectual Integrity 147
 whether the incentives to cut corners outweigh incentives to behave with 
integrity.
If talented, amoral scientists emerged full- grown from the head of Zeus, 
with all the factual knowledge and skill needed to ply their trade, the 
incentives I identified might well be too weak. Normally, scientists do not 
attempt to replicate one another’s results; and when they do, an irrepli -
cable result is apt to be construed as an honest  mistake. So although  there 
is enormous disutility in being found guilty of scientific misconduct, if his 
research reports are plausible, a culpable scientist can reasonably doubt that 
he  will get caught. The worst he need realistically fear is that he  will be found 
to be mistaken. An adroit, amoral scientist might readily recognize this and, 
being devoid of scruples, consider the risk worth taking.
Even if such a scientist granted that in general the best means to achiev-
ing the goal is to satisfy the requirements, this would not obviously provide 
him with an incentive to do so if he thought highly enough of his own 
intuitions. He might rationalize his falsifying or fabricating on the ground 
that although in most cases the requirements should be satisfied, his par tic-
u lar case constituted an exception. He has a good enough feel for the sub-
ject that he can just tell how the experiments would come out. I conceded 
earlier that if truth is the end and the scientific method a mere means, it 
may well be that a scientist with good intuitions (or luck) could achieve 
the end without employing the standard means. An amoral scientist may 
believe that the only disincentive to cutting corners is the possibility that 
his conclusion  will be found to be false. But, he might think, his conclu -
sion prob ably is true, and if it is found to be false, it is apt to be consigned 
to the realm of honest  mistakes. Again, it might seem, the personal risk he 
takes is slight.
Science Education
Luckily scientists do not emerge full- grown from the head of Zeus.  People 
become scientists by studying science. And the moral values I have discussed 
are instilled in the course of their education. Even if a brilliant, amoral 
se nior scientist could readily contrive a plausible, fraudulent result,  doing 
so is not easy. For a beginning student, the best way— very likely the only 
way—to ostensibly satisfy the requirements is to actually satisfy them. A 
novice is apt to get caught if he fakes, fabricates or plagiarizes his work. He

--- Page 161 ---

148  Chapter 6
is also apt to get caught if he is careless, inattentive, or lax. Learning to do 
scientific research is learning to do honest, truthful, careful research. It is 
not learning to do research, with honesty, truthfulness, and conscientious-
ness tacked on as afterthoughts. So, even if he starts out as amoral as his 
Zeus- born se nior counterpart, the novice has a strong, purely self- interested 
incentive to conform his be hav ior to the requirements. He is simply unable 
to cut corners and produce plausible results. What he learns in learning 
to be a scientist is to satisfy the requirements. He does not learn that it is 
normally a good idea to conduct the experiments one purports to have 
conducted. He learns that scientific research consists in conducting  those 
experiments.
As his education progresses he develops the habit of conforming to the 
requirements;  doing so becomes second nature to him. In this re spect, his 
moral education as a scientist is Aristotelian. He develops scientific integ -
rity by behaving with integrity, what ever his initial motives for  doing so. 
As he learns more about the subject he is studying, he gains re spect for 
the requirements. He comes to recognize that their satisfaction is condu -
cive to the epistemic goal, and eventually, that it is in part constitutive of 
the epistemic goal. That is, he learns what scientific understanding is. So the 
reason that the trustworthiness required of scientists is not excessively frag-
ile and that the expectation that scientists  will be on the  whole trustworthy 
is not naive, is that the grounds for it are so deeply embedded in science 
that they cannot help but be inculcated in scientific education.
This suggests that the education  future scientists standardly receive 
already fosters scientific integrity. It invites the idea that nothing more need 
be done. Sadly, that is too optimistic. Some scientists are guilty of miscon-
duct. Some students have no clear sense of where the bound aries are drawn. 
How can science education foster integrity?
When something has become second nature, the agent automatically 
and unthinkingly does it. So most scientists prob ably do not even consider 
flouting the requirements. This is both good and bad. It is good in that 
they simply do the right  thing; it is bad in that they may fail ever to con -
sider why it is the right  thing to do. If they do not know, for example, why 
data must be recorded in a timely fashion, or what exactly is problematic 
about conflicts of interest, they may be ill equipped to withstand tempta -
tion, to adjudicate competing claims when all the desiderata cannot be

--- Page 162 ---

Intellectual Integrity 149
si mul ta neously satisfied, or to recognize what their obligations are when 
they detect misconduct. By highlighting aspects of a practice that had 
been tacit, scientists put themselves in a position to articulate the relevant 
 factors, discover their basis and their strength, subject them to scrutiny, 
and consider  whether they are worthy of reflective endorsement. And they 
put themselves in a position to deepen science education by sensitizing stu-
dents to often unrecognized aspects of scientific practice that are critical to 
its success. So, in addition to forestalling explicit scientific misconduct, the 
NSF requirement may prompt a re orientation to the practice of scientific 
inquiry that can augment prac ti tion ers’ understanding of the discipline 
and its results.
Conclusion
Throughout this chapter, I have emphasized the obligations that members 
of the scientific community bear to one another, and emphasized the ways 
 these obligations infuse the epistemic goals of science.  Because scientists 
need to trust one another, they have devised institutional arrangements to 
secure the bases of trust. In publishing a paper, a scientist issues an open 
invitation to the community to accept her findings and use them as a 
springboard for further investigation. She gives her colleagues her assur -
ance that the standards they collectively endorse have been satisfied.
My discussion may suggest that science is insular. But the fruits of sci -
ence are used for more than further research, and they are used by non -
scientists as well as scientists. We take medicines, drive cars, eat genet ically 
engineered vegetables. We sit on panels and juries where we hear scientists 
testify as expert witnesses (see Brewer, 1998). In  doing so, we rely on the 
deliverances of science. The open invitation the scientist issues thus is wide 
open; it is issued to the world at large, not just to the scientific community. 
In publishing a finding, speaking at a conference, or testifying in court, she 
conveys her assurance that anyone— layperson or expert— can rely on her 
results. The point is a delicate one. She does not assure that the results are 
true, only that they are scientifically well founded.
As I have indicated,  these points generalize. Intellectual integrity is 
required in  every discipline. Investigators are expected to be scrupulous and 
conscientious. They should adhere to the methods, canons of evidence,

--- Page 163 ---

150  Chapter 6
and norms of acceptability reflectively endorsed by their discipline; or they 
should publicly articulate and justify the reasons for challenging them. The 
methods, canons, norms, and epistemically acceptable reasons for chal -
lenging them can vary from one discipline to another. But their role in 
the disciplines is constant. Although the standards to be satisfied are set by 
the community of inquiry, the moral obligation to behave with integrity is 
utterly general.

--- Page 164 ---

Despite what I’ve said thus far, worries about objectivity might remain. 1 
To address  these worries, we need to consider what objectivity is and why 
it is valuable. On one interpretation, objective judgments are nonper -
spectival repre sen ta tions that carve the mind- independent world at its 
mind- independent joints. Clearly the epistemological position I have been 
developing cannot claim that the commitments it countenances display 
that sort of objectivity. This is just as well. I consider that sort of objectiv -
ity a chimera. It is not something we can achieve (or, I suspect, even make 
sense of). Nor is it something we need to achieve to serve our epistemic 
purposes. But it does not follow that objectivity is a chimera. I  will argue 
that my position countenances a robust form of objectivity that is proce -
dural, perspectival, and  either impersonal or impartial.
Utter Objectivity
Some think that for a contention to be objective is for it to express, reflect, 
or represent what is  there, regardless of what anyone or any group thinks or 
does. That is, it is to reflect what Williams (1978) calls the absolute concep-
tion of real ity. Such objectivity is, Nagel (1986) maintains, what the view 
from nowhere delivers. Let us call contentions that satisfy this standard 
utterly objective.  Products of and statements about attitudes, institutions, 
and artifacts reflect  human interests and goals. They involve views from 
somewhere. They are excluded from the utterly objective realm, regardless 
of their truth- value or warrant. But, Williams, Nagel, and their followers 
maintain, natu ral science is dif fer ent. It discovers and explains what is, in 
Williams’s term,  there anyway, most of which would have been  there even if 
7 Objectivity: A Bulwark against Bias

--- Page 165 ---

152  Chapter 7
rational organisms had never evolved. It and its findings are utterly objective. 
Utter objectivity is a consequentialist notion. What makes a procedure utterly 
objective is that its products represent aspects of the way the world is anyway.
Science has been stunningly effective at providing an understanding 
of nature. No other approach even comes close. Much of nature is as it is 
regardless of what, if anything, anyone thinks about it. Perhaps, then, it is 
reasonable to think that science represents the way the world is anyway, 
that at least in the ideal end of inquiry it  will (would?) do so completely 
and without bias or distortion, and that current science approximates the 
ideal. If so, scientific repre sen ta tions are utterly objective: what they say 
or other wise represent does not depend essentially on users or potential 
users with distinctive interests and points of view. The semantics of such a 
repre sen ta tion is thus in de pen dent of and logically prior to its pragmatics.
A repre sen ta tion is a putatively denoting symbol. Among the familiar 
sorts of repre sen ta tion are verbal descriptions, mathematical equations, 
pictures, diagrams, and maps. Such symbols need not actually denote; their 
semantic character is determined by their being the sort of symbol that 
would, if the world obliged, denote. ‘Phlogiston’ is as much a denoting 
symbol as ‘oxygen’ is. In one sense, any repre sen ta tion depends on users 
or potential users with distinctive interests and points of view. Something 
would not be a repre sen ta tion  unless it was used or could be used to rep-
resent, and it would not be a repre sen ta tion of a par tic u lar  thing  unless it 
was used or could be used to represent that very  thing.  There would be no 
repre sen ta tion of a par tic u lar item if no one had interests that would be 
served by producing one. The sentence ‘Tibet is mountainous’ would not 
represent the topography of a par tic u lar geo graph i cal region if speakers did 
not call a par tic u lar land area ‘Tibet’ and did not call a par tic u lar sort of 
terrain ‘mountainous’. But the choice to correlate par tic u lar labels with par-
tic u lar referents is effectively arbitrary. The very same information would 
have been conveyed by the sentence ‘Murble is morbish’ if ‘Murble’ had 
been the En glish word for Tibet and ‘morbish’ the En glish word for moun-
tainous. The user- independence required for utter objectivity is in de pen-
dence except for the making of such arbitrary choices. The contention that 
scientific repre sen ta tions are utterly objective is a contention that, beyond 
arbitrary choices, they exhibit no dependence on users or potential users.
Van Fraassen (2008) poses a challenge to this picture: if scientific 
representations— models, equations, maps, graphs, and the like— are to

--- Page 166 ---

Objectivity 153
perform their scientific functions, they cannot be utterly objective. Cart -
wright (1983) makes similar arguments about par tic u lar scientific models. 
Like van Fraassen, she regards this feature not as a defect of models but as 
an insight into the sort of epistemic access they supply. Van Fraassen’s argu-
ment runs deeper. It is not just that this or that model, or models in this or 
that science, cannot be utterly objective. Rather, in order to afford the sort 
of understanding of nature that it does, science cannot consist exclusively 
or predominantly of utterly objective repre sen ta tions. Science as we know 
it must deploy perspectival repre sen ta tions. It ineliminably involves views 
from somewhere. For science is an epistemic practice. To make this out, we 
need to consider the nature of perspective.
Getting Perspective
Linear perspective is a miracle of Western art. First described by Alberti 
(2011), it is a method for representing spatial depth on a flat surface. Lines 
orthogonal to the picture plane converge at the vanishing point, and the 
depicted sizes of objects are proportional to their  actual size and to their 
ostensible distance from the viewer. The pictorial effectiveness of linear 
perspective in works like Raphael’s School of Athens  is obviously of  great 
aesthetic interest. Van Fraassen maintains that linear perspective should be 
of equally  great interest to philosophy of science. With the development of 
projective geometry, it became pos si ble to prove that properly drawn lin-
ear perspective repre sen ta tions are rigorous geometric projections.  Because 
cross- ratios are invariant across changes in orientation and origin, draw -
ings in perspective convey objective information about constancies in 
the appearances items pres ent from dif fer ent points of view. They are not 
utterly objective, though, for they still depend on points of view. Perspec -
tive drawings are indexical: they represent how  things look from  here (for 
some value of ‘ here’). Their indexicality does not, however, make them sub-
jective. Cross- ratios are determinate  matters of fact about projective rela -
tions, not mere  matters of opinion. Van Fraassen concludes that a linear 
perspective drawing of an  actual scene is a mea sure ment, a mapping.
 There are inherent limitations on what any single repre sen ta tion can 
represent.  Every repre sen ta tion is a product of se lection. The representer 
has to choose what to represent, what aspects of the represented item 
to capture in the repre sen ta tion, and what level of detail to represent.

--- Page 167 ---

154  Chapter 7
Despite the fact that  these are  matters of choice, when it comes to sci -
entific repre sen ta tions, it is pos si ble to make  mistakes. Simpson’s paradox 
arises  because fine- grained statistical regularities are obscured at a coarser 
grain. Although the pattern of gradu ate admissions across the university 
suggested that Berkeley discriminates against  women, the admissions pat-
terns of each gradu ate department indicated the contrary. Settling the issue 
requires knowing which statistics to use (Cartwright, 1983, 37). To use a 
coarse- grained repre sen ta tion to answer questions that require a finer grain 
is to make a  mistake, even if all the features displayed in the coarse- grained 
repre sen ta tion actually obtain. Likewise, it is an error to use a fine grain when 
a coarse grain is needed.
 Because they depend on a specific origin and orientation, perspective 
drawings have further limitations. From a given vantage point, one object 
may occlude another. If the  horse is  behind the barn from the picture’s point 
of view, then the picture’s representing the barn precludes its representing 
the  horse. Nor is this always a  matter of big  things occluding  little ones. 
If the mouse is close to the picture plane and the barn is far from it, the 
perspectival repre sen ta tion of the mouse may occlude the barn. A repre sen-
ta tion is implicitly noncommittal with re spect to a property if it makes no 
commitment as to  whether the represented object has that property. A stick 
figure is implicitly noncommittal with re spect to its subject’s girth. It sim-
ply does not go into the  matter. A repre sen ta tion is explic itly noncommittal 
with re spect to a given property if its representing the having of one feature 
precludes its taking a stand on the having or lacking of another. A repre-
sen ta tion of a man wearing a hat is explic itly noncommittal with re spect to 
 whether he is bald,  because representing him as hatted makes it impossible 
for the picture to commit itself on the question of his baldness. To be sure, 
the  horse, the girth, and the hairline could be represented in a perspective 
drawing. But to represent the  horse requires removing the barn or changing 
the perspective. To represent the girth requires a more rounded figure. To 
be committal with re spect to the man’s baldness requires omitting the hat.
Indexicality, occlusion, and noncommitment do not  either severally 
or jointly entail that  there are  things that cannot in princi ple be repre -
sented perspectivally. They entail limitations on what a single perspectival 
repre sen ta tion can represent. But  because of  these limitations,  there can-
not be a single, comprehensive perspectival repre sen ta tion that represents

--- Page 168 ---

Objectivity 155
every thing from a single point of view. The ‘God’s eye view’ cannot be a 
point of view.
The pictures painted by Re nais sance artists are, of course, of (putatively) 
vis i ble objects, and the space they (purport to) represent is (putatively) 
physical space.2  These restrictions are philosophically incidental. Early per-
spective drawings had only one vanishing point. But it is straightforward 
to create works with multiple vanishing points. Le Déjuner sur l’Herbe , for 
example, is in two- point perspective. Thus the number of vanishing points 
is optional. Features at higher levels of abstraction than size, shape, and dis-
tance can be represented perspectivally, if the requisite structural relations 
are preserved. So the restriction to vis i ble features is optional as well. The 
space need not even be physical.
A logical space is a multidimensional array of possibilities open to the 
items that occupy the space. To locate an item in a logical space is to deter-
mine which of the possibilities defined by that space it realizes. To rep -
resent an item in a logical space is to represent it as having a par tic u lar 
position in the array of possibilities the space marks out. Repre sen ta tions in 
a logical space, like repre sen ta tions in a physical space, can be perspectival. 
They can show how occupants of that space appear from a certain vantage 
point. And they can do so with no loss of rigor. In what follows, I take the 
term ‘perspectival’ to refer to any repre sen ta tion that represents how  things 
appear from a par tic u lar point of view.
With the restrictions to physical space and vis i ble features lifted, it is evi-
dent that science could avail itself of perspectival repre sen ta tions. It could 
generate and deploy a host of perspectival drawings, diagrams, scale mod -
els, and maps.  There is plenty of evidence that it does so. Still, one might 
think, only overtly pictorial or diagrammatic representations— the sketch 
of a harmonic oscillator, the diagram of the double helix, the tinker- toy 
model of the protein— could be perspectival. Many scientific repre sen ta-
tions are mathematical models— systems of equations. It may be hard to 
imagine how any extrapolation from linear perspective could characterize 
to them. This may suggest that the visual models that admit of a perspec -
tival interpretation are mere heuristics. They are visual aids that help us 
imagine the phenomena, but not essential ele ments of science. The math-
ematical laws and models— the equations— are the true scientific repre sen-
ta tions, and they are utterly objective.

--- Page 169 ---

156  Chapter 7
 Things are not so  simple. Analytic geometry provides the resources to 
interpret geometry algebraically. Geometric truths are provably equivalent to 
algebraic ones. Con temporary Cartesian geometry demonstrates that equiva-
lence goes both ways (van Fraassen, 2008, 41). Algebraic truths are math -
ematically equivalent to geometric ones. If we define an appropriate space, 
pretty much every thing we can characterize mathematically can be spatial-
ized. Indeed, we do not even need to do the reduction. The equivalence 
shows that the equations themselves, what ever their ostensible form, are 
construable as spatial repre sen ta tions. To be sure, the space need not be 
three- dimensional physical space. All that is needed is that  there be an 
n- dimensional space of alternatives that embeds the mathematical model. 
Nor, of course, does this show that the spatialized repre sen ta tions are per-
spectival. But the mere fact that they are presented as equations provides 
no reason construe mathematical models as nonperspectival. In princi ple, 
then, equations are as capable as pictures and diagrams of bearing a per -
spectival interpretation.
The View from Nowhere
Plainly, not all pictorial or diagrammatic repre sen ta tions are perspectival, 
even in the extended sense in which I am using the term. The Cartesian 
coordinate system provides a familiar and elegant framework for non-
perspectival repre sen ta tions. Cartesian repre sen ta tions have no vanishing 
points; parallel lines in  every dimension remain parallel. Although Carte -
sian repre sen ta tions locate represented objects by reference to an origin and 
a direction, the choice of origin and direction are arbitrary. “The chosen 
frames of reference, the co- ordinate systems, are inessential to the geometry 
taken in and by itself” (van Fraassen, 2008, 69). Such repre sen ta tions are not 
indexical. One need not locate oneself in the space of the repre sen ta tion to 
understand what and how it represents. Nor are the repre sen ta tional pow-
ers of Cartesian systems limited by occlusion or explicit noncommitment. 
Rousseau’s picture of a tiger “is explic itly non- committal about the [number 
of the] tiger’s stripes,  because it represents the tiger as obscured by leaves, 
and this precludes it from representing all the tiger’s stripes” (Lopes, 1996, 
118–119). A Cartesian repre sen ta tion, though it would not look like a tiger, 
could easily circumvent the difficulty. Let the x- axis represent stripes, and 
the y- axis represent leaves in the environment. The only available positions

--- Page 170 ---

Objectivity 157
are integer values along  either axis. Then where a stripe is not obscured by 
leaves, y = 0; where it is overlapped by leaves y > 0, with the value of y indi-
cating the number of leaves overlapping a par tic u lar stripe. Where  there are 
leaves but no stripes, x = 0. Such a graph represents the overlap of stripes by 
leaves, but nothing is occluded. It is expressly committed to the number of 
stripes on the tiger, regardless of their relation to leaves.
Why  shouldn’t we think of the logical spaces of scientific repre sen ta tions 
as Cartesian spaces? Then, aside from the few scientific repre sen ta tions that 
are expressly perspectival, we could construe scientific repre sen ta tions as 
utterly objective. The mathematical models could be spatialized—we could 
represent them in a Cartesian coordinate system— but the results would still 
be utterly objective.  There would be no reason to deny that they represent 
the way the world is anyway.
It is undeniable that science can generate Cartesian repre sen ta tions. It 
is undeniable that such repre sen ta tions are as likely to be accurate and 
adequate to their subject  matters as any other repre sen ta tions we might pro-
duce. So perhaps we should consider them utterly objective. In the limit, if 
not now, they  will embody aperspectival information about the way the 
world is anyway. If science’s function is merely to mirror nature, the claims 
of ideal science could bear an interpretation  under which they reveal how 
 things are anyway. But the fact that science could generate aperspectival 
repre sen ta tions gives us no reason to think that it does or that it should. As 
van Fraassen argues, such a construal does not do justice to science. Indeed, 
 under such a construal we have no reason to trust the findings of science. 
Accuracy and adequacy to the subject  matter are not enough.
A View from Somewhere
Science is not something that just happens to us; it is something we do. To 
do it, we need to use scientific repre sen ta tions. Use is a pragmatic  matter; 
and to make use of anything an agent needs to properly locate herself with 
re spect to it. This is evident in the relation between science and technol -
ogy. To develop an alloy that resists metal fatigue, a metallurgist has to be 
able to recognize signs of metal fatigue. To do that, she must adopt a per -
spective from which she can discern metal fatigue if it is pres ent. This  will 
not, of course, be a  matter of merely looking at distressed samples. It  will 
involve mea sure ments, many of them made with technologically complex

--- Page 171 ---

158  Chapter 7
mea sur ing devices. It  will involve subjecting samples to stress tests, many 
of them technologically mediated. The mea sure ments and test results  will 
exemplify features that put her in a position to say, ‘This is how metal 
fatigue (or its absence) looks from  here’. Assuming she is scrupulous, she 
 will run series of tests that yield dif fer ent perspectives on the phenomena. 
She  will check one appearance against another, drawing her conclusion 
from what she observes from a variety of points of view. She does not, 
 because she cannot, solve her prob lem using the view from nowhere. For 
she has to know how metal fatigue is manifested.
This point must be conceded; but maybe it is just a point about technol-
ogy, not about pure science. It is to be expected that when we put some -
thing to use we need to adopt a perspective. But, one might think, science is 
not technology. Pure science may be utterly objective even though deliver-
ances of technology cannot be.
As van Fraassen points out, however, scientific results are established 
by testing and experimentation, and they are in princi ple always open 
to further testing. Testing is as indexical and perspectival as technologi -
cal deliverances. If a scientist wants to ascertain  whether semiconductors 
operate in a magnetic field, she must run a series of experiments and take 
mea sure ments. To design the proper experiments and take the proper mea-
sure ments, she must adopt a perspective on the phenomena— she must 
figure out how the phenomena would pres ent themselves  under vari ous 
circumstances, how they would look from vari ous points of view. Indeed, 
the distinction between testing and technology is spurious, since the test -
ing devices are products of technology, and  every technological application 
is in princi ple a test. Even as  simple a mea sur ing device as a tape mea sure 
owes its status to considered judgments about the appearances  things 
pres ent— for example, that the items a tape mea sure mea sures are not 
affected by the fact that they are being mea sured. Hence the fact that some-
thing that mea sures 32 cm is a reliable indication that it is ≈32 cm long.
Van Fraassen’s argument, then, is this: science affords epistemic access 
to nature. That access is achieved through experimentation and mea sure-
ment. The only way for an observer to perform the experiments or make the 
mea sure ments is to locate herself in the logical space of the phenomena. 
Thus, her stance is indexical and perspectival. She has to think, ‘If φ is  going 
on,  these are the appearances it  will pres ent  under  these test conditions’. 
That is, if φ is  going on, this is how it  will look from  here. This locates the

--- Page 172 ---

Objectivity 159
observer in the logical space she is evaluating; it affords a perspective on 
how  things should look from  here (for some value of ‘ here’).
Although we could take the repre sen ta tions produced by science to be 
utterly objective,  doing so would divorce them from the empirical methods 
that generate and confirm them. In that case, however, science would pro-
vide no reason to believe or accept them. To interpret the repre sen ta tions 
as utterly objective is to cease to consider them scientific. For science to do 
its epistemic job, it requires mea sure ment. Mea sure ment is always indexical 
and perspectival. Hence for science to do its epistemic job, it must involve 
indexical, perspectival repre sen ta tions.
To be testable, science must use perspectival repre sen ta tions.  Those repre-
sen ta tions are objective in that they contain information that is invariant 
across repre sen ta tions of the same object. They are testable in that mul -
tiple repre sen ta tions of the same objects from the same perspective yield 
equivalent information, and in that that information can be accessed from 
multiple perspectives. But they cannot plausibly be construed as embody -
ing the view from nowhere or the way the world is anyway. They are not 
utterly objective.
Procedural Objectivity
Still, it is clear that in some sense scientific claims are objective. Following 
Arthur Fine (1998) and Heather Douglas (2004), I suggest that the sort of 
objectivity we seek is procedural. In the first instance, then, it is procedures 
that are objective. Findings are objective  because they result from or are 
confirmed by objective procedures. Objective procedures are epistemically 
valuable  because they promote trustworthiness. They are devised, tested, 
and certified by epistemic communities, who understand their domains, 
their disciplines, and the available and appropriate means for investigating 
the phenomena. Objectivity emerges from the self- reflective activities of 
epistemic communities. It is neither mere correlation of an opinion with 
mind- independent facts nor a  matter of pure consensus. Procedural objec-
tivity is nonconsequentialist. The objectivity of procedures is logically prior 
to the objectivity of their objects. What justifies calling a par tic u lar result 
objective is that it is the product of an objective procedure.
Trustworthiness might seem to derive from a source. Being someone of 
 great moral and intellectual integrity, Bill would neither lie nor intentionally

--- Page 173 ---

160  Chapter 7
mislead nor convey epistemically dubious information about an impor tant 
topic. He would not assert that p  unless he was and took himself to be in 
a position to back up his claim. Nevertheless, his integrity is not enough 
to make him worthy of confidence. For Joan to responsibly take his word 
that p, she needs to know or reasonably believe that he is a man of integ -
rity. But we live in a world populated by strangers. We do not personally 
know every one whose opinions we might— indeed, must— draw on. Some 
are trustworthy; some are dishonest; some are unduly cavalier in forming 
their views; some are careless in conveying them. Often we do not know 
whom to trust.
To alleviate this prob lem, we devise and deploy procedures whose out-
puts are worthy of confidence. If such procedures are properly carried out, 
their results are trustworthy, regardless of the moral and/or intellectual 
character of the performer. A postage scale affords excellent reason to think 
that the envelope weighs 0.5 oz. no  matter who is  doing the weighing. The 
results of Marsh’s test afford excellent reason to think that a substance con-
tains arsenic so long as a competent chemist performs the test. Such pro -
cedures, rather than the par tic u lar individuals who perform them, are the 
sources of trustworthiness (Fine, 1998; Douglas, 2004). The point is not that 
the procedures are reliable; it is that we have good reason to trust them. 
They have been devised, calibrated, and validated to satisfy the standards of 
a realm of epistemic ends.
Objectivity, so understood, is not equivalent to and does not ensure 
truth. Hal’s jingoistic conviction that his American car gets better mile -
age than his neighbor’s foreign car may in fact be true; but his opinion is 
not objective, since his reasons are po liti cal rather than automotive. Nor is 
Fred’s true belief that his investments lost value  today, since his conviction 
is grounded in his horoscope rather than up- to- date economic informa -
tion. Nor is Maria’s belief that  there are more Muslims than Christians, 
based as it is on a coin flip. In none of  these cases does the procedure used 
properly align with the conclusion drawn. Procedural objectivity neither 
assures nor is assured by utter objectivity.  There are objective procedures 
for determining  whether Fred’s investments are down even though money 
is a  human institution;  whether Joe’s car gets better gas mileage than his 
neighbor’s, even though cars are  human artifacts;  whether  there are more 
Muslims than Christians, even though religions are institutions, religious 
beliefs are attitudes, and religious observances are practices. Moreover, a

--- Page 174 ---

Objectivity 161
conclusion arrived at objectively may nevertheless be false. A titer test for 
Lyme disease yields false positives in the relatively few cases where the 
patient’s blood contains antibodies that the test cannot distinguish from 
 those standardly produced by the bacterium Borrelia burdorferi. The test has 
a margin of error. Still, since the margin of error is small, such a test is objec-
tive. Although it yields a few false positives, it aligns well enough with the 
phenomenon in question.
It might seem that trustworthiness is a  matter of reliability. What vali -
dates the titer test and invalidates the coin flip is that the titer test is, and the 
coin flip is not, highly reliable.  There are at least two difficulties with this 
position. The first is brought out by a variant on BonJour’s (1985, 38–40) 
example. Suppose Marie has ESP. She is subject to reliable extrasensory 
deliverances. In 96.2  percent of the cases where she has such a deliverance, 
it is accurate. She is also subject to the normal range of hunches and inti -
mations, and her track rec ord with  these is no better than anyone  else’s. 
Moreover,  there is no phenomenologically salient difference between her 
deliverances of ESP and her hunches. Nothing in her experience enables her 
to tell them apart. Nevertheless, the etiology is dif fer ent. The deliverances 
of ESP result from a reliable perceptual mechanism; the hunches result 
from unreliable mechanisms. (Possibly an fMRI could reveal the difference 
if only we knew where to look.) Marie is aware that scientists believe that 
ESP does not exist. So although her genuine extrasensory perceptions are 
reliable, she has no reason to trust them. She has no way to distinguish 
them from her unreliable hunches, and has good reason to suspect that 
 there is no such  thing as ESP. She does not and should not consider her 
ESP deliverances trustworthy. Given our available procedures, it is not 
procedurally objective. Evidently, mere reliability is not enough. Mini -
mally, for the pro cess to be trustworthy, the subject should have reason to 
think it is reliable.
Even that seems inadequate. A second worry brings this out. An alarm -
ing number of therapeutic regimens work for no known reason. An effective 
treatment for bladder cancer, for example, involves flooding tumors with 
live bacteria. Somehow this kills the cancer cells. The statistical evidence 
is strong; the therapy is effective. But, not unreasonably, patients feel epis-
temically insecure about trusting their lives to a course of treatment that 
sounds unsanitary and whose effectiveness cannot currently be explained. 
This suggests that knowing that a pro cess is reliable is not enough. We want

--- Page 175 ---

162  Chapter 7
to understand (at least roughly) why and how it works. Other wise any con-
fidence we place in it is precarious.
Evidently, what we seek from objectivity is a stay against bias, idiosyn -
crasy, and chance. Objective procedures eliminate or control for the personal 
ele ment and for randomness.  Those that eliminate the personal ele ment 
are impersonal;  those that control for it are impartial. The assumption driv-
ing the quest for objectivity is that bias, idiosyncrasy, and chance are likely 
to skew results. That being so, they are untrustworthy.
My discussion does not purport to be a comprehensive account of the 
 factors that can underwrite procedural objectivity. My goal is simply to 
describe aspects of practices we consider objective to show how communi-
ties of inquiry devise and validate them, and why the role of such commu-
nities does not impugn their claim to being objective.
Impersonality
Impersonal procedures and devices are, or can be made to be, automatic. 
They deliver what Porter (1995, 7) calls ‘mechanical objectivity’. A motion 
detector turns on the lights without anyone having to fumble for the 
switch. It could become a mea sur ing device if a  counter  were attached to 
rec ord the frequency with which it does so. A thermometer reflects changes 
in temperature  whether or not anyone notices the changes. The imperson-
ality of such devices and procedures is an achievement, not just a fact of 
nature. It pays to see how it comes about.
One area where mechanical objectivity is rampant is mea sure ment. We 
time reactions, weigh objects, calculate areas, and so on. To do this, we 
require magnitudes— numbers that can be used as bases for comparison of 
members of a set. So we need to define a magnitude. This is largely a prag-
matic  matter; it depends on what we want to do with the information we 
glean.  There is plenty of room for choice. But the choice is not completely 
arbitrary. A  viable magnitude must be suitably invariant  under the condi-
tions of interest. No one would be happy with the definition of the inch as 
the length mea sured by an elastic tape mea sure. Its readings would be too 
variable to be worthwhile. But absolute invariance is not required  either. 
Weight is a function of mass and gravity. An object whose mass is constant 
varies in weight depending on the force of gravity it is subject to. For inter-
planetary assessments, comparisons of weight are apt to be confusing or

--- Page 176 ---

Objectivity 163
misleading; mass would be a preferable magnitude to use. Still, weight is a 
fine magnitude so long as we limit ourselves to a single gravitational field, 
and do not seek too much precision. Although  there are small differences in 
the force of gravity across the Earth, for many purposes they are negligible. 
For mundane terrestrial uses and most scientific uses, weight is an acceptable 
magnitude. It is invariant enough.
Once we have a magnitude, we need a way to mea sure it. The units may 
be arbitrary. Perhaps the length we call an inch was originally chosen  because 
it was the distance around a man’s thumb. That, if true, is a historical curi-
osity that in no way affects the acceptability of the unit. What  matters is 
that it equips us to make acceptable mea sure ments. An acceptable mea sure-
ment procedure should insure sufficient interrater agreement, sufficient 
test– retest agreement, and its results should accord with other acceptable 
ways of mea sur ing the same magnitude. That is, so long as the item being 
mea sured does not change, dif fer ent competent measurers should obtain 
pretty much the same result, dif fer ent mea sure ment procedures should 
yield pretty much the same result, and a single measurer, making multiple 
mea sure ments should obtain pretty much the same result. ‘Pretty much’, 
 because mea sur ing devices are never exact.  There is always a small margin 
of error.
It might seem that once we have defined a magnitude, the procedures 
for mea sur ing that magnitude are fixed, at least in cases that do not involve 
proxies. But that is not so. It is one  thing to specify what magnitude is to be 
mea sured and another  thing to specify how it is to be mea sured.
Town halls in eigh teenth  century Eu rope  were likely to display a bushel vessel, valid 
for the region. If anybody questioned the accuracy of any par tic u lar bushel, its con-
tents could be poured into the official one to see if they  were equal. But this was by 
no means the end of the  matter. Every body knew that grain could be packed more 
densely by pouring it from a greater height, and for certain purposes the method of 
filling might be specified in contracts or by law. (Porter, 1995, 24)
Even where we have the magnitude, we need to specify how to properly 
perform the mea sure ment.
Nor need the magnitude be defined prior to the development of the 
mea sur ing procedure. Temperature as a magnitude emerged with the devel-
opment of the thermometer. The pro cess of development was iterative. It 
involved a series of steps, each refining and correcting previous ones. A crude 
thermoscope enabled scientists to improve on everyday sense impressions

--- Page 177 ---

164  Chapter 7
as of colder and hotter, yielding an ordinal scale. This enabled them to make 
further investigations and refinements, eventually concluding that  water’s 
be hav ior was invariant enough that its freezing and boiling points could 
anchor the scale. They had a choice. They could have, and for a while some 
of them did, attempt to use other substances— such as alcohol—to anchor 
the temperature scale. The early ‘fixed points’  were only relatively fixed. It 
is not the case that  water boils at the same temperature come what may. 
But the chosen points  were relatively fixed, giving scientists a more stable 
platform to build on (Chang, 2004). The pro cess of devising an adequate 
mea sure ment device and a magnitude to be mea sured went hand in hand. 
They  were informed both by what the community sought to do and by the 
opportunities and obstacles that the world presented. What resulted was a 
reflective equilibrium that balances, among other  things, a magnitude, a 
mea sure ment practice, a device, and an epistemic goal.
 Things are even more complicated when proxies are involved. When 
it is impossible or impracticable to mea sure a variable of interest directly, 
investigators may resort to proxies: variables that correlate with the vari -
ables of interest. Climatologists cannot go back in time and mea sure earlier 
conditions directly. So they study such  things as tree rings and ice cores, 
investigating preserved phenomena that, they believe, correlate with earlier 
climate conditions. A core sample of glacial ice, amassed over centuries of 
snowfalls, contains dif fer ent isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen at dif fer ent 
levels. Since  these correlate with differences in the temperature when the 
snow originally fell, trends in the distribution of isotopes are indicative of 
changes in ambient temperature. Such proxies are only as good as the cor-
relations they depend on. So the results of investigations that rely on proxies 
are only as objective as the procedures for establishing the correlations. And 
 these in turn depend on the background theories of the communities devis-
ing and deploying the proxies.
The calibration of mea sur ing instruments is similar. In some cases, to 
be sure, the pro cess is  simple, in theory at least. Two seemingly identical 
mea sur ing devices should be tweaked  until their readings are brought into 
accord. Since what ever the one mea sures, the other does too, and in exactly 
the same way, calibration is a  matter of minor adjustments. But when it 
comes to the cross- calibration of instruments,  things are dif fer ent. A bal-
ance scale should yield (to a close approximation) the same weight for a 
given object as a spring scale. To bring this about requires considerable

--- Page 178 ---

Objectivity 165
ingenuity, grounded in an understanding of how each of the devices is 
sensitive to the weight of an object.
Even the most mechanical of experimental results are not as impersonal 
as they might appear. A result may simply register on a mea sur ing instru-
ment. But for this to happen, someone had to devise an instrument capa -
ble of capturing such a result (see Chang, 2004). A scientist had to devise 
an experiment that would produce the result. This may have involved a 
good deal of configuring and calibrating apparatuses. Someone had to 
set the threshold of mea sure ment, ensuring that the result is not statisti -
cal noise. None of  these scientists works in epistemic isolation. All of their 
efforts must be justifiable to the community of inquiry, hence must satisfy 
community standards. Other wise  there would be no reason to think that 
the read- out registers anything, that the course of events that occurred in 
and around the apparatus constituted a test, that the result is worth taking 
seriously.
Once we have the raw data, we are apt to subject it to statistical analy-
sis. Statistics is the science that controls for chance. It appeals to infinite 
populations to bracket potentially misleading peculiarities in  actual (finite) 
distributions. It ignores outliers on the grounds that they are not represen-
tative of the phenomena of interest. It sets standards for significance and 
power to rein in the dangers posed by false positives and false negatives. It 
develops a variety of regressions to disclose subtle patterns in the data.
The impersonality of mechanical objectivity is an achievement. It is the 
fruit of considerable epistemic  labor concerning the phenomena, the proper 
ways to investigate it, and the available resources for conducting investiga-
tions. Methods have to be validated, mea sures defined, proxies identified, 
instruments in ven ted and calibrated, thresholds set. Each of  these steps 
is answerable to the standards of a community of inquiry. When and only 
when this is satisfactorily done can the mechanical procedure yield an 
objective result.
We should not think, however, that mechanical objective is a mere prod-
uct of consensus. The world has to oblige. Only some items display the sort 
of invariance required for mea sur ing devices. Only some materials can be 
manipulated so as to make instruments that can take and hold their cali -
bration. Only in some areas are  there suitable proxies available for variables 
we cannot access directly. And so on. The products of mechanical proce -
dures are not ‘out  there’ to be read off nature. Nor are they just products

--- Page 179 ---

166  Chapter 7
of agreement. They are fruits of careful deliberation and manipulation, 
grounded in an understanding of the object of inquiry and the available 
resources for investigating it. (See, among  others, Cartwright, 1983; Hacking, 
1983; Douglas, 2004.) This is a familiar point, but it is worth emphasizing to 
make clear that even the most mechanical or impersonal of objective proce-
dures is not a mere  matter of mirroring nature.
Impartiality
Impersonality is achieved by off- loading judgment to rules, standards, and 
techniques whose proper application ensures the acceptability of results. 
That requires setting limits on precision and on the number of dimensions 
and fineness of distinctions to be considered. This means, of course, that the 
community of inquiry had to exercise a good deal of judgment in setting 
the standards, formulating the rules, and devising the techniques that pro-
duced the results.  There remain areas where we are unwilling or unable to 
off- load judgment completely. We want or need to preserve the possibility 
of more complicated, fine- grained, nuanced descriptions and assessments 
than available mechanical procedures afford. At the same time, though, we 
do not want to open the floodgates to idiosyncrasy, bias, and chance.
We thus devise methods that are impartial but not impersonal. When a 
method is impartial but not impersonal,  people— qualified  people— apply 
it and generate results. What makes the method impartial is that it does not 
 matter who in par tic u lar  those qualified  people are. Such methods ground 
their findings in interrater agreement, where the criterion for acceptability 
is agreement among members of the community rather than answering to 
some external standard.
An example of an impartial procedure is the judging of competitive div-
ing. Each dive is to be assessed along multiple dimensions that are spelled 
out in advance. In each of  these dimensions a dive can be done well or 
badly. And what it is to do well or badly in a given dimension is also spelled 
out in advance.  These specifications remove a good deal of room for idio -
syncrasy and bias. The judge is not permitted to ignore the extension of 
the diver’s legs. Nor is she permitted to give or take away points for the 
grace with which the diver climbs the ladder. But further, more nuanced 
assessments need to be made within the domains set out by the explicit 
standards. For example, the rules specify that entry to the  water should be

--- Page 180 ---

Objectivity 167
vertical, with the diver’s body straight and her toes pointed. When  these 
conditions are not met, judges are instructed to deduct points. How many 
points is left to each judge’s discretion.  There the judge is instructed to use 
her own judgment (USA Diving, 2013: 14). That discretion is needed is no 
surprise. Individual judges have to decide just how far from the specified 
ideal a dive was in each of several re spects. Although the rules tell them 
what dimensions to attend to, they cannot and do not try to tell judges 
exactly how to assess each divergence from the ideal.
The judge is a trained judge. She is not someone randomly recruited 
off the street. The way she was trained involves having her initial verdicts 
calibrated against  those of  others who are already expert judges.3 The newly 
appointed diving judge acquires the tacit knowledge that guides more 
experienced judges. This is not the end of the story, though. A diving com-
petition has multiple judges— typically seven or nine— and to obtain the 
overall rating for a dive, the officials drop the highest and lowest scores and 
average the rest. So a judge’s personal assessment has a role to play, but it is 
not an overriding role. If her assessment is out of sync with the assessments 
of her peers, it  will simply be dropped.
 Whether the results of diving competitions are objective may seem epis-
temically insignificant. But what goes on in judging such competitions is 
similar to what goes on in scientific coding— the pro cess of classifying some 
observational outcomes as alike,  others as unlike. This is often the first step in 
assessing evidence. Suppose an investigator wants to know  whether infants 
recognize their  fathers’ voices. A plausible experiment would expose infants 
to a variety of men’s voices, filming and coding their reactions. Multiple 
trained investigators would look at the films and code what they observe. A 
critical issue is to decide what sort of reaction indicates recognition.  There 
 will presumably be clear cases— ones where any trained observer would rec-
ognize that the infant plainly did or plainly did not react differentially to 
her  father’s voice. For such cases, interrater agreement and test– retest agree-
ment are easily achieved. But  there are apt to be borderline cases. Should 
the baby’s turning slightly in the direction of her  father’s voice count as a 
positive response or not? This is a judgment call in much the same way that 
the diving judge’s assessment of  whether the diver’s toes  were sufficiently 
pointed is a judgment call.
As in diving, what is impor tant is that all assessors use the same standard. 
It would muddle the experiment if some assessors treated the borderline

--- Page 181 ---

168  Chapter 7
cases as positive and  others treated the same cases as negative. Coders have 
to calibrate their judgments against each other. Every one coding the same 
data should deliver the same verdicts on at least most of the cases. And a 
single coder should deliver the same verdicts when she looks at the film a 
second time. The procedure for classifying cases is impartial. Although epis-
temic agents are ineliminably involved in the assessment, we have devised 
methods to control for bias and idiosyncrasy.
The standards may take the form of rules. If so, assessors need criteria to 
determine how to tell  whether the rules have been followed, and what mar-
gin of error  there is for following the rules. They may also take the form of 
exemplars. Rather than an articulate or articulable rule, we may rely on cases 
that exemplify the features we seek to match. The novice diving judge and 
the novice infant- behavior coder might be better served by being shown 
clear cases. They would see what a perfect dive or a recognitional response 
is supposed to look like. They might be presented with foil exemplars to 
see what should count as a definite mismatch. This would enable them 
to figure out how far an instance can deviate from the exemplar without 
being defective. (Arguably, this is what Kuhn’s normal science exemplars 
do [Kuhn, 1970]. They show rather than say what is to count as acceptable 
normal science.)
The Value of Objectivity
Objectivity as I have construed it depends on the availability and the applica-
bility of public standards of assessment. Despite my talk of magnitudes, mea-
sures, and the like, objectivity allows for loose and flexible standards. That 
students are to turn their papers in on time is an objective requirement, and 
one that can be objectively mea sured, even though ‘on time’ is less than 
precise.  Whether half an hour late counts as being on time may be unde -
cidable without stipulation. But three weeks late definitely does not satisfy 
the standard. Moreover, the standard may have an implicit ceteris paribus 
clause that allows for exceptions in the case of unforeseeable emergencies. 
If so, it would be an impartial but not an impersonal standard. But if  there 
was widespread agreement about what did and did not count as an unfore-
seeable emergency, objectivity would not be compromised. We could, of 
course, be more precise if we wished. How precise should we be: on time 
to the minute? the second? the nanosecond? This way madness lies. For

--- Page 182 ---

Objectivity 169
the more precise standards would be harder to apply but no more useful. 
In setting objective standards, we need to consider what they are supposed 
to accomplish. Insisting that they be objective goes but a  little way  toward 
answering that question.
Following van Fraassen, I have argued that epistemically useful standards 
need to be answerable to evidence. We should expand this slightly to allow 
for answerability to reasons more generally. This is necessary if we want a 
conception of objectivity that comprehends mathe matics as well as empiri-
cal inquiry. The satisfaction of procedurally objective standards cannot pur-
port to reflect the absolute conception of real ity. They are always products 
of a view from somewhere. But they are products that stand up to scrutiny 
when viewed from somewhere  else, so they are not purely subjective.
It might seem, then, that we should conclude that objective procedures 
are designed to secure consensus in a community of inquiry. Since every-
one in the community has the requisite level of expertise, it might seem, 
they  will all agree on what the result of an objective procedure is and what 
it portends. This is plausible, but even for science, it is not quite right. As we 
saw in chapter 5, science has reason to promote a mea sure of disagreement 
(Kitcher, 1990). Within limits, some scientists can responsibly accept a risky 
new theory while  others are more conservative and stick to the old one. 
Objective procedures leave room for responsible agents to disagree. Rather 
than fostering agreement per se, I suggest, procedural objectivity constitutes 
a venue in which both agreement and disagreement are pos si ble.

--- Page 184 ---

Felicitous falsehoods admit of objectivity in art as well as in science.  Because 
aesthetics is often considered the province of subjectivity, in this chapter 
I take up the role of reasons in aesthetics. I argue that aesthetic judgments 
are procedurally objective. This procedural objectivity does not ensure con-
sensus, even in the long run. This raises the question  whether, or to what 
extent, consensus should in general be an epistemic desideratum.
The Role of Reasons
Jim likes caramel ice cream; Kim dislikes it. Jim might try to talk Kim into 
trying it again, but he can offer her no reason to think that caramel ice 
cream tastes good. He can, of course, say that he likes it. He can add that 
lots of other  people do too.  These are so cio log i cal facts, and Kim, we may 
assume, has no quarrel with them. She may recognize that she is in a gus -
tatory minority. But such facts do not get anywhere near the heart of the 
 matter. They give her no reason to think that caramel ice cream tastes good. 
 There is no such reason. Some  people like it; some  people do not. That’s the 
end of it.  There is no room for argument  because  there is nothing to argue 
about. For a divergence in attitudes to be a genuine disagreement, it seems, 
 there must be some  matter of fact about which parties hold opposing views. 
What ever their differences with re spect to caramel ice cream, Kim and 
Jim do not disagree. Reasons have no purchase. What we call tasting good is 
entirely subjective.
 Things are dif fer ent in factual realms.  There are genuine disagreements 
about how many Olympic medals Jesse Owens won,  whether Neander -
thals buried their dead,  whether electrons have exact locations,  whether 
8 Irreconcilable Differences

--- Page 185 ---

172  Chapter 8
 there is milk in the fridge. Opinions may diverge; evidence may be sparse or 
inaccessible; but in genuine disputes, opinions are supposed to be respon -
sive to reasons.
As we have seen, reasons are not mere expressions of personal convic -
tion; they are considerations that should weigh with  others (Korsgaard, 
1996b). Ordinarily, a speaker can responsibly adduce as reasons only con -
siderations that she accepts. 1  These are her reasons. Her goal in adducing 
them is to convince or persuade her auditors of something she is com -
mitted to. Reasons thus provide answers to an audience’s (often implicit) 
question: why should we think that? In effect, a provider of reasons is 
saying:  these are the  factors that weigh with me; they should also weigh 
with you. A wholly satisfactory resolution to a disagreement consists of con-
clusive reasons.
A speaker’s considering her reasons conclusive is, of course, not enough. 
Her audience may find (and be right to find) her reasons too weak to be 
convincing. The audience may have defeaters in their doxastic systems that 
undermine the significance, relevance, or adequacy of the considerations 
she adduces. She may have overestimated their strength or bearing on the 
case. Moreover, not all reasons even purport to be conclusive. A speaker 
may adduce reasons that are, and are mutually acknowledged to be, rela -
tively weak. They are at best indicative.  There is, she says, some reason to 
believe that the butler stole the spoons or that the bacterium is resistant to 
antibiotics, but we need more evidence or better reasons before we consider 
the case closed.
In paradigmatically factual cases,  there tends to be widespread agree -
ment about what counts as a reason and, skeptical worries aside, about 
what would count as a compelling reason, if not a conclusive one.2 Maybe 
the evidence about Neanderthals is too sparse; maybe it always  will be. 
Maybe the models, methods, or mechanisms needed to determine  whether 
an electron is a sharp- edged particle or a cloud have not been developed; 
maybe they never  will be. Still, what it would take to resolve paradigmati-
cally factual disagreements generally is clear, or can be made clear. Where 
 there is a genuine disagreement, reasons have a purchase. On this picture, 
the point of adducing reasons is to resolve a dispute by establishing once 
and for all which side is right. That reasons function to  settle factual dis -
putes is plain. A critical question  will turn out to be  whether this is their 
sole or primary function.

--- Page 186 ---

Irreconcilable Differences 173
So far,  we’ve surveyed purely subjective cases that are unresponsive 
to reasons, where  there are differences in taste but no real disagreements, 
and factual cases where differences of opinion are genuine disagreements 
that are in princi ple resolvable by appeal to public, intersubjectively shared 
reasons. Discussions about art seem to want to have it both ways. Aesthetic 
responses are grounded in personal sensory and emotional experience. They 
seem clearly to be  matters of taste. That being so, it might seem, what holds 
for ice cream should hold for art. Some  people like serial  music;  others 
loathe it. Some are revolted by disturbational art;  others are intrigued. 
 These are so cio log i cal truths about subjective responses. We can dispute 
the sociology if we like, but not the responses. The difficulty is that when it 
comes to the arts, we do not exercise the open- minded tolerance we show 
to  those with dif fer ent tastes in ice cream. As Hume (2007) recognizes, 
we think some  people are better judges of art than  others. As Kant (1987) 
insists, judgments about art make a claim to universality. ‘I like caramel ice 
cream’ carries no implication that you should like it too. ‘The Nightwatch is 
masterful’ carries the implication that you should think so too. Of course, 
you might not. It seems then that with re spect to the arts,  there is some -
thing to disagree about. Kant and Hume focus on aesthetic assessment—in 
par tic u lar on judgments about  whether an item is beautiful or sublime. 
But the same blend of subjectivity and putative universality is charac -
teristic of interpretations  of works of art. So I take their points to apply to 
interpretation as well.
Although  there is something right about Kant’s claim, its scope has to 
be restricted. If a critic says that a work is beautiful or banal or original or 
inept; that it is an expression of the moral bankruptcy of bourgeois society 
or a commentary on the plight of the working class or a reaction against the 
stultifying restrictions of the diatonic scale, she implicates that other suit -
ably sensitive, suitably knowledgeable audiences should find it so. In saying 
that Schönberg’s  music is beautiful, or that it is a limiting case of tonality, 
she does not implicate that even deaf  people should agree. Nor does she 
implicate that teen agers who listen only to heavy metal  music should share 
her assessment. Rather, she implicates that all suitably experienced, suitably 
sensitive listeners to classical  music should agree with her. She is in effect 
appealing to the other members of her specific realm of epistemic ends.
The critic’s implicature invites a question: why should we, the members 
of her realm of ends, think that? The critic obligingly supplies reasons to

--- Page 187 ---

174  Chapter 8
support her assessment or interpretation of the work. The prob lem is that 
another equally knowledgeable and sensitive critic takes and defends a 
diverging view of the work. He too claims restricted universality for his 
judgments, appeals to the same restricted audience, and supplies reasons 
to support his judgment. A dearth of reasons is not the prob lem. What 
makes controversies about the arts philosophically curious is that they 
seem intractable and interminable. Each party can supply reasons, but the 
reasons are and seem fated to be inconclusive.
To be sure, paradigmatically factual disputes may be irresolvable. But 
typically we can say what it would take to resolve them. Or if we cannot, 
we at least consider our failure to be an outstanding prob lem for the field. 
When Joe disagrees with Flo about  whether  there is milk in the fridge, it 
is perfectly clear what would  settle the issue: open the fridge and look. 
Being in the grocery store, they are in no position to do that, which is why 
the issue remains unsettled. Nevertheless, they know exactly what would 
resolve their disagreement. When paleontologists argue about  whether 
Neanderthals buried their dead, they know what it would take to  settle the 
issue positively, at least. Find something that is incontrovertibly an undis-
turbed grave that contains remains that are incontrovertibly Neanderthal. 
Then find another one at a second site, thereby indicating that the original 
discovery was not a fluke. Negative facts are harder to establish. But indirect 
evidence about Neanderthal cultural practices and comparisons with other 
hominid cultures might strongly indicate that they did or that they did 
not bury their dead. A balance of indirect evidence pertaining to cultural 
development might  settle the  matter. Maybe it  wouldn’t. We may never 
know. The evidence required to answer the question might not be available. 
Still, parties on both sides can agree about what direct or indirect evidence 
would resolve the dispute.
Aesthetic Disputes
Not so in aesthetics. 3  There, disputes seem to be interminable. Roger Fry 
(1952, 13) maintains that the key to understanding Le Compotier is to appre-
ciate how Cézanne constitutes mass and volume out of subtle gradations of 
color. Clement Greenberg insists that the key is to recognize how, by dis -
torting shape, Cézanne emphasizes “the ineluctable flatness of the picture 
plane” (1966, 103). 4 Each goes on to explain how and why the features he

--- Page 188 ---

Irreconcilable Differences 175
points to make sense of the work. In so  doing, each marginalizes features the 
other points to. And each does so by the  simple expedient of showing that 
good sense can be made of the work without adverting to  those features. 
We have no idea what would carry the day. What sort of reason, if it could 
be found, would  settle the issue between them?
Both Hume (2007) and Goodman (1978) provide resources for explain -
ing the apparent intractability of aesthetic controversies. Hume believes that 
aesthetic judgments are procedurally objective. But making an aesthetic judg-
ment is an extraordinarily delicate  matter. The requisite procedure is hard to 
perform. It requires high levels of discrimination, good sense, and imagina-
tive acuity. The judgment must be made in propitious circumstances, where 
the observation of the item being judged is unimpeded and the observer 
is sufficiently experienced, and is currently  free of prejudice and sen -
sory impairment. Making an accurate aesthetic judgment is on this view 
rather like  doing an extraordinarily delicate scientific experiment, such as 
 those conducted deep underground to block the myriad, barely detectable 
surface- level vibrations that would interfere with accurate mea sure ment. 
In short, although  there is a fact of the  matter as to  whether a work of 
art is beautiful, Hume believes, making an accurate aesthetic judgment 
is exceedingly difficult. The judgment itself is highly refined, and it is 
hard to tell in any given case  whether the conditions for making it cor -
rectly have been satisfied. It is, therefore, not surprising that even sensi -
tive, knowledgeable critics disagree. Still,  there is an objectively right or 
wrong answer; and (skeptical worries aside) in princi ple a suitably situated, 
suitably sensitive critic could supply conclusive reasons for her judgment. 
Where  there is disagreement, at least one of the critics is impaired.
Goodman intimates other wise. Given the symptoms of the aesthetic, 
divergences in interpretation and assessment are to be expected. “Where 
we can never determine precisely just which symbol of a system we have 
or  whether we have the same one on a dif fer ent occasion, where the refer-
ent is so elusive that properly fitting a symbol to it requires endless care, 
where more rather than fewer features of the symbol count, where the sym-
bol is an instance of properties it symbolizes, and may perform many inter-
related  simple and complex referential functions” (Goodman, 1978, 69), 
even viewers who satisfy Hume’s exacting standards for being competent, 
impartial judges who are judging in propitious circumstances, are apt to 
diverge in their interpretations and assessments of a work.

--- Page 189 ---

176  Chapter 8
Critical discussions bear this out. Fry and Greenberg discuss the indi -
vidual dabs of paint that make up Le Compotier. Fry notes that they are parallel 
to one another; that they are nearly rectangular; that  there is no attempt 
to blend one into the next; that they slant from right to left; and that they 
do so regardless of the contours of the shape being depicted (1952, 45). As 
he interprets the work,  these are significant features of the dabs of paint. 
Greenberg ignores the specifics, but takes the dabs to constitute “a mosaic 
of brush strokes that  . . . call attention to the picture plane” (1961, 52). On 
Greenberg’s reading, the fact that the dabs are discrete units like mosaic 
tiles is syntactically significant. But the shape and direction of the dabs, 
and the indifference of their shape and direction to the shape of the con -
tours they figure in, are secondary at best. Fry takes the direction of the brush 
strokes to function aesthetically; Greenberg evidently does not. Greenberg 
takes the exemplification of the flatness of the picture plane to function 
aesthetically. Fry apparently does not.
An interpretation of a work is a constellation of considerations that bear 
on the work and seek to illuminate or make sense of it.  These consider -
ations,  either individually or collectively, supply reasons that constitute a 
par tic u lar reading and perhaps assessment of the work. So, for example, 
Greenberg’s claim that the paint dabs are like mosaic tiles supports his point 
about the centrality of the flatness of the picture plane,  because mosaic tiles 
not only are flat but achieve their effects at least in part by means of their 
flatness.
The diverging interpretations are both  viable. Each makes sense of the 
work it pertains to and highlights features that, once identified, strike us as 
significant.  There is no plausible way to say that any of them is obviously in 
error. According to Goodman (1968), we should expect divergence of criti-
cal opinions not (or not just)  because interpreting and assessing a work of 
art is hard, but  because a certain indeterminacy of interpretation follows 
from the structure of the symbols that constitute a work of art and the sym-
bol systems they belong to. On his account, the works themselves admit of 
multiple, divergent, but equally tenable interpretations.
It might seem that this analy sis consigns aesthetic differences to the ice 
cream realm.5 I said that parties to a genuine disagreement have to be talk-
ing about the same  thing. If Goodman is right, a single work of art can be 
construed as any of several symbols, and bears an interpretation  because of 
the symbol it is.  There seems then to be nothing—no  thing—to disagree

--- Page 190 ---

Irreconcilable Differences 177
about. Construed as one symbol, it has property p. Construed as another 
symbol, it lacks property p. Attempting to disagree would be like trying to 
argue with a Frenchman about  whether ‘chat’ refers to a conversation or 
to a cat.
 Things are not so  simple. For works of art are, or are realized in, 
objects, inscriptions, and/or events— objects, inscriptions, and/or events 
that symbolize, to be sure, but still objects, inscriptions, and/or events. 
An object, inscription, or event is something about which we can disagree. 
So it is pos si ble to disagree about how best to interpret the object that is a 
painting by Cézanne, or the inscription that is a play by Shakespeare, or the 
motion of a body in space that is a dance by Martha Graham. It is even in 
princi ple pos si ble to disagree with a Frenchman about  whether an inscrip-
tion of ‘chat’ refers to a conversation or to a cat. The question is: what is to 
be gained by  doing so? Why bother?
If such controversies can be settled by adjudication, the answer is obvi -
ous. We seek an objective answer to a specific question. To get one, we need 
to determine which interpretation is best supported by reasons. This is how 
Stadler reads the dispute between Fry and Greenberg. Assuming that if one 
is right the other is wrong, she finds for Greenberg, saying that his inter -
pretation enables her to appreciate “the gawky ellipse of the compotier’s 
opening, flatter below, arched above”; Fry’s does not (Stadler, 1982, 202). 
Her approach reflects a familiar view of the point of argument. As Nozick 
puts it, “The terminology . . . is coercive: arguments are power ful, and best 
when they are knockdown, arguments force you to a conclusion. . . .  Perhaps 
phi los o phers need arguments so power ful that they set up reverberations 
in the brain: if a person refuses to accept a conclusion he dies” (1981, 4). 
Nozick acknowledges not only that arguments are never that strong, but 
also that  there is something ridicu lous about the aspiration, even if we set 
aside the macabre idea that the goal of argument is to kill the opposition. 
If someone  doesn’t mind being (or being called) irrational, he can disregard 
the force of argument entirely. Still, the idea that reasons should compel is 
familiar, and many think it right.
It is implausible in aesthetics. Even if we concede that Greenberg’s inter-
pretation makes better sense of the odd geometry of the compotier, he has 
not given anything like a knockdown argument for his interpretation of 
the painting.  There are aspects of the painting— the massiness of the apples, 
for example, for which Fry seems to give a better account. To adjudicate

--- Page 191 ---

178  Chapter 8
between the two would seem to require delineating and justifying the 
delineation of all the aesthetically impor tant aspects of the work, establish-
ing a grading scale to evaluate their relative importance, then grading the 
two interpretations of the work on that scale. That, of course, would require 
a third interpretation that identified the impor tant properties, and justified 
the weighting of their relative importance. Its adequacy would have to be 
judged in turn.
Reason Giving
We seem embarked on a regress, with no end in sight. Do we have to take 
the first step? That depends on the purpose of reason giving. Why do we 
go in for it? If our goal is to convince  others of the truth of p by the deploy-
ment of epistemically sound means, then both the point of reason giving 
and its value are plain. Reason giving transmits the grounds for epistemic 
entitlement across the community. It transfers justification for a belief. In 
discussions about art, however, such a goal seems spurious. We expect seri-
ous aesthetic debates to be irresolvable. But if  there is no reasonable expec-
tation of defeating the relevant alternatives, which would be required to 
convey epistemic entitlement to one’s claim,  isn’t the enterprise idle? Is aes-
thetic interpretation akin to the proj ect of squaring the circle? Why should 
we even start if we recognize that  we’ll never succeed?
It might seem that we can evade this conundrum by shifting the terms of 
the debate. Rather than the disagreement between Fry and Greenberg being 
a disagreement about  whether the key to Le Compotier is the way Cézanne 
constitutes mass out of color or the way he emphasizes the flatness of the 
picture plane, it is a disagreement about  whether the work is best seen as 
one where mass is composed out of color, or one where the emphasis lies 
in the flatness of the picture plane. In that case  there is, arguably at least, a 
fact at the heart of the dispute: how is the picture best seen? Then reasons 
perform their standard function of supporting or undermining a statement 
of fact. If this is so, then our  mistake was that we mistook what the debate 
was about.
 There is something attractive about this move. We need a basis for dis-
missing unacceptable interpretations. Some, we want to insist, are simply 
false.  Under no remotely plausible interpretation is Le Compotier a portrait 
of the Pope.  Because such an interpretation simply does not engage with its

--- Page 192 ---

Irreconcilable Differences 179
object, it is easily discredited. The prob lem comes with interpretations that 
contain no falsehoods, but are inappropriate or inadequate. They may be 
uninformative or unenlightening. They may focus on unimportant features 
or fail to account for impor tant ones. An interpretation of Le Compotier that 
said only that it is a picture of a bowl of fruit is inadequate. It sheds virtually 
no light on the work. An interpretation that faults the work for failing to 
address the destruction of the rain forests is misguided.  There is no reason 
to think that it  ought to address that issue. If we insist that a correct inter-
pretation says how the work is best seen, we have grounds for dismissing 
such interpretations. They simply fall short of the mark.
But we go too fast in assuming that the choice is between saying that 
 there is a unique best interpretation and saying that all interpretations are 
on a par. The omitted alternative is to say that  there may be— and indeed 
often are— multiple equally acceptable interpretations and a vast number 
of unacceptable ones. It might seem that this points to an easy way out 
of our conundrum. If multiple interpretations of a work are acceptable, it 
is plausible to consider them all true. Then we can simply conjoin them. If 
p is true and q is true, then p & q is true. So if ‘Le Compotier underscores the 
ineluctable flatness of the picture plane’ is true and ‘Le Compotier manifests 
the constitution of pictorial mass out of color’ is true, then ‘ Le Compotier 
underscores the ineluctable flatness of the picture plane and Le Compo -
tier manifests the constitution of pictorial mass out of color’ is true.  There’s 
no disagreement. The two critics are just stating dif fer ent, but mutually con-
sistent truths.
Although logically impeccable, this is unhelpful. For even if the result of 
conjoining Fry’s and Greenberg’s interpretations is a truth about the paint-
ing, it is not a good interpretation of the work. The two interpretations pull 
in dif fer ent directions. An interpretation contends that its object exempli-
fies certain features. It draws attention to  those features and highlights their 
significance. The reasons it advances make the case that we should find it 
worthwhile to see the work as exemplifying them. Dif fer ent interpretations 
highlight dif fer ent aspects of the work, drawing attention to them. They 
provide a way to read the work as exemplifying  those features.
Exemplification is selective. Exemplifying some features of an item 
requires marginalizing or downplaying  others. In interpreting Le Compo-
tier, Greenberg downplays the significance of features of the work that do 
not bear on the flatness of the picture plane. In so  doing, he takes a risk. If

--- Page 193 ---

180  Chapter 8
features he overlooks are too significant to be ignored, his omissions  will 
tell against the adequacy of his interpretation.  Under his interpretation, 
Cézanne’s creating volume and mass out of color is relatively insignificant, 
if not off the  table entirely. Has he omitted something too significant to 
ignore? Any given interpretation involves a balancing act. What is gained 
and what is lost by choosing to highlight or omit certain features?
If  there is exactly one correct interpretation, the stakes are high. But they 
are nonnegligible in any case. The goal of an interpretation is to make sense 
of a work; if something salient is omitted or marginalized, the goal may not 
be met. Still, the idea that a single interpretation should do justice to  every 
significant aspect of a work is unduly ambitious. Just as no literal point of 
view can disclose  every vis i ble aspect of an object, no single interpretation 
can accommodate  every seemingly significant aspect of a work. Features 
that one interpretation marginalizes may be highlighted by another. Fry’s 
interpretation pres ents a dif fer ent perspective from Greenberg’s, taking the 
flatness of the picture plane to be relatively insignificant and the role of gra-
dations in color in constituting pictorial mass and volume to be central. We 
should doubt that  there is a uniquely best interpretation of a work  because 
 every interpretation perforce omits or downplays aspects of the work that 
another interpretation may show to be significant.
Something similar occurs in science. Dif fer ent models make manifest 
dif fer ent features of the target. Diverging models afford dif fer ent perspec-
tives on the same real ity. And it is no surprise that dif fer ent perspectives 
reveal dif fer ent aspects of that real ity.  There is no optimal model for the same 
reason that  there is no optimal perspective.  Every perspective, in revealing 
some  things, inevitably occludes  others. Science and art are not so far apart 
as they might seem.
The role of reasons in aesthetics is not primarily to convince one’s audi-
ence that the interpretation they constitute is the one true interpretation 
of the work or that it is the single best way to read the work. Nor is the role 
of reasons in justifying a scientific model to convince one’s audience that 
the model provides the single best way of representing the phenomenon. 
It is to highlight features and display their significance. In neither case 
 ought the reasons purport to exclude alternative  viable perspectives. Fry 
and Greenberg articulate reasons that lead us to discern dif fer ent features 
of Le Compotier and enable us to discern dif fer ent aspects of real ity via our 
engagement with the work. In proffering reasons, each in effect invites us

--- Page 194 ---

Irreconcilable Differences 181
to read the work in a par tic u lar way. Each intimates that  doing so  will prove 
rewarding. Their intimations are tested by our responses. Do we find the 
interpretations enlightening? Do they illuminate aspects of the work, its 
connections to other works, its connections to the world beyond the work 
that we other wise find bewildering or obscure? Do they enable us to make 
sense of the work? As I see it, an interpretation is closer to an invitation than 
to a thesis.
Our reflections on aesthetic disagreements show that differences of 
opinion should not automatically be construed as adversarial. In adduc -
ing reasons to support her opinion, the critic should not be thought of as 
seeking to best her rivals in a winner- take- all competition. Rather, as Dewey 
(1916) urges, we should treat  those whose interpretations diverge from ours 
as resources for extending our epistemic range. They evidently see some -
thing in the work that we as yet do not. If we seriously entertain their point 
of view, we may come to discern something of value. This is not to say 
that  every perspective  will be rewarding. Some, like that of the Holocaust 
denier’s, can be quickly dismissed. But by accessing the opinions of  others 
and the reasons for  those opinions, epistemic agents gain access to insights 
and perspectives that they would other wise miss.
In the last few pages, I have focused on aesthetics,  because aesthetics is a 
realm where reason giving and disagreement coexist. It is therefore a good 
place to look for a role for reason giving other than to win an argument. 
We have found one. Opposing opinions can make dif fer ent aspects of their 
shared object salient. When  these are backed by publicly available, publicly 
assessable reasons, they can make a case for the epistemic value of con -
sidering  those features impor tant. Opposing opinions backed by reasons 
can thus enhance our understanding of their object.  There is no reason to 
think that the arts are the only venue where this occurs. Indeed, the high-
lighting of relevant features is the way resolvable disagreements often get 
resolved. And it is why we find advancement in understanding in fields 
like paleontology where in princi ple resolvable disagreements may never 
be resolved. We understand more about the Neanderthals and about our 
understanding of them when we appreciate the force of the arguments for 
and against the claim that they buried their dead.
Practices that involve the giving and accepting of reasons, I suggest, are 
procedurally objective. A conclusion that emerges from a chain of reasons 
gains its epistemic status from the pro cess that led to it. It is credible to

--- Page 195 ---

182  Chapter 8
the extent that  those reasons in that epistemic environment back it up. It 
might seem that this notion of objectivity sets the bar too low. If even art 
criticism qualifies as objective, then, one might think, objectivity  doesn’t 
count for much. I think this is wrong. A good interpretation shows us how 
to look at a work and how to look at the world through a lens that the work 
provides. It thereby has the potential to enhance our understanding. The 
interpretation itself is subject to dispute. Reasons can be adduced for and 
against it. Perhaps the reasons are not Nozick’s knockdown reasons. But it 
is not obvious that the mea sure of an argument’s objectivity should be the 
power of its punch. If we are  going to take the admissibility of incompatible 
alternatives to discredit the claim to objectivity of criticism, we seem forced 
to discredit the claim to objectivity of the sciences that admit alternative 
incompatible models. It seems preferable to recognize that any field that 
admits of reason giving and sets standards for the appropriateness, accept-
ability, and weight of reasons is one that admits of objectivity. Only then 
can questions arise about how strong the reasons are or need to be.

--- Page 196 ---

The epistemological position I have been developing does not privilege 
truth.1 This leaves room for symbols whose contribution to understand -
ing is in de pen dent of truth- aptness.  Here I argue that understanding is rife 
with such symbols. Rather than representing, they exemplify. Although 
I have mentioned exemplification in previous chapters, it needs more 
explicit treatment.  After explicating exemplification, I pres ent case studies 
to illustrate some of the ways exemplars figure in ethical and mathematical 
understanding.
Examples are ubiquitous. Phi los o phers adduce examples to support their 
theories. Students learn from examples and display their learning by pro -
viding examples. Where standards (for, e.g., intonation, proper stance, or 
poise) are inarticulable, perhaps the only effective way to learn is to take as 
an example someone who does the  thing well. If a student purports to under-
stand a theory—be it Darwinism, socialism, consequentialism, or whatever— 
but can provide no examples of how the theory applies, her claim is at least 
suspect. Why are examples impor tant? A single example is,  after all, statis-
tically insignificant. So, it might seem, the ability to provide an example 
should count for virtually nothing. But often it counts for a lot. The reason, 
I suggest, is that the example displays an understanding of the topic. It is not 
just an instance, it is a telling instance.
Earlier I argued that my position is not a pure coherence theory, since 
tenability requires that a system answer to something outside itself— our 
antecedent commitments about the topic, the methods for finding out about 
the topic, and the standards for justifying our conclusions about the topic. 
Nevertheless, my position might seem too close to a coherence theory to 
be palatable. Plato (1997) maintained that the difference between doxa and 
episteme is that, unlike doxa, episteme has a tether. The tether I focused on 
9 Exemplification in Understanding

--- Page 197 ---

184  Chapter 9
in Considered Judgment connects the ele ments of a system to antecedently 
held epistemic commitments. The community’s understanding must be, in 
a suitable but flexible sense, sustained by what its members  were already 
committed to. This ensures that they are not making up their accounts out 
of  whole cloth, but it may seem to provide no strong reason to think that 
their conclusions answer to the facts. I continue to consider the tie to ante-
cedent commitments impor tant. But we also need a tether that connects 
the system to the facts it pertains to. Ever since Plato, epistemologists have 
assumed that the tether must somehow link the justification for a belief to 
its truth maker. As Gettier cases show, such a link is elusive.  Here I focus on 
a dif fer ent tether— exemplification. This is the connection between a sam-
ple or example and what ever it is a sample or example of. I  will argue that 
it plays a central role in epistemology, accounts for the epistemic functions 
of models and idealizations, and enables us to appreciate the epistemic con-
tributions of symbols that are not truth apt.
The Nature of Exemplification
When an item serves as a sample or example, it exemplifies: it functions 
as a symbol that makes reference to some of the properties, patterns, or 
relations it instantiates (Goodman, 1968; Elgin, 1996). In spelling this out, 
let us take a tolerant approach to properties, recognizing a property corre -
sponding to each extension an item belongs to, regardless of  whether that 
extension is semantically marked or metaphysically privileged.2 A property, 
then, is that which all members of a par tic u lar extension share. Patterns 
and relations receive analogously tolerant treatment. Let us call anything 
that exemplifies an exemplar and all of an item’s properties and all of the 
patterns and relations it figures in its features.
Such tolerance is metaphysically innocuous.  There is no denying that 
 every item belongs to in def initely many extensions. The members of any 
given extension have something in common— namely, membership in that 
extension. Some extensions strike us as homogeneous. The members of the 
class of trombones have in common that they are all trombones. That is a 
class worth marking out, so we introduce a label for the feature that they 
share. Other classes seem more motley.  There is an extension consisting of 
the Washington Monument, the atomic number of lead, and my calico cat. 
Unsurprisingly, we have no label for their common feature. Nevertheless,

--- Page 198 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 185
my cat shares something with the Washington Monument and the atomic 
number of lead. Their joint membership in that extension is the feature 
that they share.
Exemplified features may be static or dynamic, monadic or relational, 
and may be at any level of generality or abstraction.  Because each item has 
a plethora of features, its capacity to exemplify is broad. It is not bound -
less, however, for exemplification requires instantiation. Only a bit of Swiss 
choco late can be a sample of Swiss choco late; a bit of Belgian choco late, 
however similar in flavor or constitution, is disqualified. Moreover, instan-
tiation alone is not enough. The au then tic Swiss choco late that Jon ate 
yesterday did not exemplify Swiss choco late or any other feature. It merely 
satisfied his sweet tooth. To exemplify, an item must refer to the feature in 
question, and must do so via its instantiation of that feature.
An exemplar can si mul ta neously exemplify multiple features. The candy 
might exemplify being Swiss choco late, rich in flavor, and an expensive 
indulgence. But an exemplar cannot si mul ta neously exemplify all its fea-
tures. It can point up, make manifest, display, or convey some of its features 
only by marginalizing, downplaying, bracketing, or overshadowing  others. 
Even if a sample prob lem in a logic text is the only prob lem in the book 
that mentions a dog, it does not (at least  under its standard interpretation) 
exemplify the property of being the only prob lem that mentions a dog. In 
a context designed to exemplify a logical form, the prob lem downplays its 
being the sole mention of a dog. Exemplification is selective.
 Because an item can in princi ple exemplify any feature it instantiates, 
the range of features it has the capacity to exemplify is vast and hetero -
geneous. Remei Capdev ila’s (2009) discussion of Alighiero Boetti’s Rosso 
Gilera, Rosso Guzzi brings this out:
Boetti’s piece consists of two square, nearly identical panels, one next to the other, 
whose meager distinction from each other is a slight variation in their red paint, and 
the raised names and code numbers that identify the dif fer ent paints, which are in-
scribed on the panel. Like a color palette, Boetti’s piece juxtaposes two dif fer ent kinds 
of reds, and in that way it is pos si ble to distinguish between them. In a certain sense, 
then, the work functions as a paint sample; they exemplify two dif fer ent synthetic 
reds, with their commercial codes (60 1232 and 60 1305) and names (“Rosso Guzzi” 
and “Rosso Gilera”). However the work does not only function as a  simple color 
sample, but exemplifies other properties that a chip of paint in a color palette does 
not exemplify. “Rosso Guzzi” is the red used to paint Guzzi motorcycles, and “Rosso 
Gilera” is the one used for Gilera motorcycles, the two rival Italian motorcycle

--- Page 199 ---

186  Chapter 9
manufacturers. Put side by side, the two panels not only exemplify a slight differ -
ence in color but stand for the divide between passionate advocates of each brand. 
That is to say, since each kind of red possesses the property of being used to paint a 
specific kind of motorcycle, they can further exemplify the two dif fer ent brands, and 
via a chain of reference, the rivalry between the companies. In addition, since the 
difference in reds is barely noticeable, the piece can further symbolize the negligible 
distinction that sustains this rivalry. (130–131)
She could have gone on in this vein. Building on the exemplification of 
the rivalry between the two groups of motorcycle aficionados, perhaps the 
work exemplifies features of rivalry in general, including how, for  there 
to be a genuine rivalry, rivals must be very much alike. Although  there is 
plenty of rivalry between professional baseball teams, and between  Little 
League teams,  there is no rivalry between the Boston Red Sox and the Lex-
ington T- Ball Tigers. She might have interpreted the work as exemplifying 
that, objectively speaking,  there is  little basis for choice among the rivals. 
Perhaps it exemplifies that in the end all rivalry is sibling rivalry.
Capdev ila continues:
The illusion of difference is also exemplified by the fact that both paints come from 
the same manufacturer, as the serial numbers indicate. And the work’s symboliza -
tion is not exhausted yet. Boetti’s piece is made out of synthetic commercial paint 
intended to lacquer vehicles instead of common fine arts materials, and in that way, 
the artistic properties of this paint— glossiness, brightness, viscosity, or the dripping 
left when applying it on the panel— are exemplified. This can also symbolize the 
introduction of mass production and consumer goods into the art world. (2009, 
130–131)
 Here she moves to a dif fer ent domain. That the paint is ordinary com -
mercial paint used to paint vehicles exemplifies an intimate connection 
between art and commerce, and the vanishing line between the aesthetic 
and the commercial. It connects art to the market (and not just—or even 
mainly— the art market). That features like the brightness, glossiness, and 
viscosity of vehicular paint are exemplified in a work of art highlights fea -
tures we might find it worthwhile to attend to when we encounter them in 
their standard use.
A further interpretation is available, which moves from the economic 
to the po liti cal realm. The paint is not an esoteric substance encountered 
only in ateliers; it is the sort of stuff you might find in a garage. This exem-
plifies a democ ratization of the arts. The material for making art is readily 
available to pretty much anyone. If the paint on the canvas is mundane

--- Page 200 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 187
and readily available, and an interpretation of the work draws on a rivalry 
between motorcycle aficionados, then art need not be the province of an 
elite. It is open to all. Evidently a single item can, in the right context, 
exemplify any and many of its features, enabling the interpreter to forge a 
variety of epistemically valuable connections across a variety of domains.
Exemplification is not just a device for underscoring salient features or 
supplying emphasis. It often highlights and affords epistemic access to fea-
tures that  were previously disregarded, even to features that are semanti -
cally unmarked. It points up a feature, enabling us to mark out its contours 
and appreciate its significance. It equips us to recognize that feature when 
we encounter it in other contexts. Exemplification, then, is not just a vehi-
cle for conveying salience; it is a source of salience. Moreover, the features 
an exemplar highlights may be difficult to discern. An effective exemplar 
can marginalize con spic u ous features in order to exemplify elusive ones. 
The most con spic u ous feature of a manufacturing pro cess may be its deaf-
ening din, while in the context of a safety inspection what the pro cess 
exemplifies is a barely detectable vulnerability to sabotage. The vulnerabil-
ity then stands out, while the noise, although still deafening, fades into the 
cognitive background of  things to be ignored.
Being symbols, exemplars require interpretation. In the context of the 
inspection, does the manufacturing pro cess exemplify vulnerability to sab-
otage, susceptibility to unscheduled downtime, the prospect of prompting 
a major insurance claim? The very same security flaw might instantiate all 
of  these. In treating that flaw as an exemplar, the question is: an exemplar 
of what? Some exemplars belong to regimented systems, where the struc -
ture of the system supplies or highly circumscribes the answer.  Others are 
ad hoc. Then interpretation depends on the context within which they 
function and the way they function in that context.
Even apparently straightforward, highly regimented cases are not so 
 simple as they seem. A customer peering at a commercial paint sample card 
might seem thereby to know exactly what color Benjamin Moore jonquil 
yellow paint is. It’s the shade on the card. Such cards constitute a regi -
mented system if anything does. Still, knowledgeable consumers recognize 
that the colors on the sample cards symbolize not an exact shade but a 
range of colors around the shade appearing on the card. (That is why paint 
companies recommend that you buy all the paint you  will need for a job 
at once. The paint from dif fer ent batches that satisfy the  recipe for being

--- Page 201 ---

188  Chapter 9
Benjamin Moore jonquil yellow  will rarely be visually indistinguishable.) In 
interpreting the card, consumers need to determine what range of discrim-
inable shades qualifies as jonquil yellow. The cards often provide resources 
for answering this question as well. Typically a sample card does not just 
exemplify a single color. Nor does it provide exemplars of an arbitrary col-
lection of colors. Such a card usually consists of a sequence of exemplars of 
closely related shades. In figuring out the range of the exemplar of jonquil 
yellow, consumers rightly reason that it includes all the Benjamin Moore 
yellows that are closer to the exemplar of jonquil yellow than they are to 
the exemplars of the closest alternatives— perhaps goldenrod, sunflower, 
and saffron. Although some vagueness remains, relevant contrasts help to 
fix the reference of an exemplar.
Ordinarily, folks do not wander into paint stores out of idle curiosity 
about available paint colors; they want to choose paint for a job— maybe to 
paint the  house. So they need to proj ect from the sample to a larger exten-
sion it represents. Let us say that a sample that exemplifies a par tic u lar fea-
ture typifies the extension comprised of all and only  things that instantiate 
that feature. Such items match the exemplar. The paint sample then typifies 
all and only  those  things whose color falls within the range of Benjamin 
Moore jonquil yellow. By exemplifying a feature—by highlighting or dis -
playing that feature—an exemplar affords epistemic access to it. Someone 
who properly interprets the exemplar is in a position to recognize the fea -
ture in question.
 Because paint samples belong to regimented systems, knowledgeable 
consumers have  little difficulty determining what features they exemplify 
and what extensions they typify. But not all exemplars are so readily inter-
preted, for not all exemplars belong to regimented systems. One of the 
powers of exemplification as a referential device is that we can impro -
vise exemplars at  will. Simply adducing something as an example typically 
makes it one. Cycling to work can exemplify concern for the environment; 
a can of gourmet cat food can exemplify the propensity to unduly pamper 
pets; a slipshod student paper can exemplify indifference to the course, and 
so forth. Treating something as an example normally makes it one.
Interpretation can be tricky, particularly in the absence of a regimented 
system. An ornithologist identifies a bird as an example of a junco. He may 
do nothing more than point to it, expecting his audience to figure out 
what extension it typifies— that is, what other birds are juncos. Or he may

--- Page 202 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 189
underscore its size, coloration, markings, and the shape of its beak. Had he 
ignored the bird, it still would have had all  these features; but it would not 
have symbolized them. By pointing it out, he exploits features the bird 
had anyway, bringing the bird to exemplify them. Perhaps he tells his audi-
ence which features to fixate on; perhaps not. If all goes well, they can now 
recognize a junco when they see one. But despite his tutelage, they may be 
uncertain how to interpret the exemplar. How closely do other birds have 
to match the exemplar to belong to the typified extension? Do the eye 
markings  matter? Does the plumage vary with season or age? Do juncos 
exhibit sexual dimorphism? To complicate  matters further, the same item 
can exemplify dif fer ent features in dif fer ent contexts. A  free sample of laun-
dry detergent that exemplifies its cleaning power in a marketing campaign 
exemplifies banality in an assessment of that campaign. A bird that exem -
plifies being a junco in one context exemplifies being a nonmigratory bird 
in another.
When exemplars are products of improvisation, interpreters have no 
regimented system to rely on. They draw on context, background assump-
tions, and, where available, collateral information instead. In communica-
tive settings like the one above, their interpretive stance is Gricean (see 
Grice, 1989). They assume that the cooperative princi ple is in effect, hence 
that they have the resources needed to interpret the exemplar correctly. If 
so, the feature exemplified is relevant to the communicative exchange; it 
is capable of becoming salient to the audience via that exchange, and its 
being made salient  will promote the objectives of the exchange, or  will be 
sufficiently impor tant to justify abruptly changing the subject.
In investigative settings, interpretation relies on an analogue of the 
cooperative princi ple that involves confidence in the study’s design. In 
effect, interpreters assume that nature is cooperative. Assuming the study 
is well designed, the result— whatever it turns out to be— will exemplify 
something informative, accurate, unambiguous, and relevant.  Needless to 
say, such confidence can be misplaced. Some results exemplify not hith -
erto unknown features of the phenomena, but inadequacies in the study’s 
design. Results that  were expected to fall within a given range fall outside 
it, or they are ambiguous, or they fail to achieve statistical significance. This 
is disappointing. But it should be no surprise that the assumptions that 
guide interpretation are sometimes unfounded. Exemplars are not always 
effective or properly interpreted, but when they are effective and properly

--- Page 203 ---

190  Chapter 9
interpreted, the reasons are similar to  those that explain the effectiveness 
and proper interpretation of other symbolic exchanges.
Focus on pedagogical and commercial samples may suggest that exem -
plification is a conduit for what is already known or understood, rather 
than a source of knowledge or understanding. This is incorrect. A mining 
inspector extracts air samples from a mineshaft to find out something no 
one yet knows about the distribution of gases in the mine. If the samples are 
properly taken, he has reason to believe that the gases his samples exem -
plify are typical of the gases in the mine. A pollster questions potential voters 
about their attitudes  toward immigration. If the sample is suitably chosen 
and the questions well framed, she acquires new information about public 
opinion on the topic.  There are, of course, no guarantees. Both cases involve 
projection from a limited sample. It is a brute fact of inductive life that 
even well- chosen, well- taken samples are sometimes misleading. But if the 
samples are well taken and the background theory is well founded,  there is 
epistemically good reason to proj ect to a wider class of cases.
An appreciation of the feature and its instantiations can be woven into 
our developing understanding, stabilizing or enhancing its equilibrium. 
Alternatively, an exemplar may threaten equilibrium, making manifest that 
 things are more problematic than we previously thought.  Either way,  there 
is an epistemic gain. A well- chosen sample or example can  either strengthen 
an account or disclose an unanticipated weakness.
Given what I’ve said, accurate projection might seem assured. The sam-
pler need only proj ect to the extension the sample typifies. The prob lem is 
to figure out which extension that is. The mine inspector’s air sample typi-
fies all the air in the mine that shares the chemical features exemplified by 
the sample. That’s trivial and unhelpful. The critical question is which air 
is that? Is it the air throughout the mine? Or is it the air at a given level in 
the mine? Or is it the air where the mine crosses a par tic u lar seam of ore? 
Or is the sample a statistical fluke, exemplifying features it alone possesses? 
 These are standard and often hard questions about how to characterize 
evidence in order to make valid projections from it.
One might won der  whether the air sample or the poll’s results are evi-
dence at all. A plausible criterion of evidence is that evidence pertaining to 
p consists of what ever bears on  whether p is the case. If so, epistemically 
inaccessible items qualify as evidence. So do items no one has any reason to 
consider evidence. Suppose 83  percent of the cases of absolute pitch have a

--- Page 204 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 191
ge ne tic basis. No one knows what the ge ne tic basis is or even suspects that 
 there is a gene for absolute pitch. Obviously, ge ne tic screening would be 
useless in attempting early identification of  children with absolute pitch, 
since investigators would not know what to look for. Still, on the above 
criterion, the presence of the gene would qualify as evidence. Although 
such unknown  factors bear on  whether p, they are epistemically inert. They 
provide no reason to believe, accept, or even suspect that p. We might con-
clude that this discredits the criterion. Alternatively, we might distinguish 
between being evidence and functioning as evidence.  Then we can concede 
that the gene was evidence all along, even though  there was no feasible way 
to access that evidence. Not much hangs on the choice between  these alter-
natives.  Either some items that are in fact evidence do not function as such, 
or to qualify as evidence, an item must, in the epistemic circumstances, be 
capable of functioning as such. The critical point is that for something to 
function as evidence for p, it should provide a reason to believe, accept, or 
at least suspect that p. For something to function as evidence against p, it 
should provide a reason to disbelieve, reject, or doubt that p. This, I suggest, 
requires that to function as evidence, an item must exemplify its connec -
tion to the hypothesis it bears on. Once investigators know enough about 
DNA, a strand of hair found at the crime scene can function as evidence 
linking the suspect to the crime. The hair exemplifies a ge ne tic pattern 
instantiated by the subject and few, if any,  others.
Making an Example Of
Goodman (1968) maintains that anything that instantiates a feature can 
exemplify it. In princi ple this may be so, but in practice  things are not 
so  simple. For not all instances of a feature can constitute good or effective 
exemplars. A feature may be camouflaged: a tiger who blends into the sur-
rounding jungle instantiates being striped, but would in that circumstance 
be unlikely to exemplify stripedness. (It might, however, exemplify how 
stripes— even orange stripes— can camouflage in a jungle of green.) A fea -
ture may be occluded: a bald man wearing a hat is ill positioned to exem -
plify his baldness. A feature may be overshadowed: the fearsome timbre of 
a lion’s roar may block its effectively exemplifying its pitch. An instance 
may be a borderline case. Even though a chartreuse fire hydrant is a vivid 
instance of greenness, its color is too close to yellow to be a good exemplar

--- Page 205 ---

192  Chapter 9
of greenness. An interpreter would likely take it to typify the members of 
a class consisting of some greens and some yellows rather than all of the 
greens and none of the yellows. It would not be a good tool for teaching a 
young child colors.3
What converts an instance into an exemplar? Sometimes conversion 
requires no more than pointing. What is a junco? That’s one! So long as it 
is clear that we are concerned to identify a normal member of a species, no 
more may be required. Sometimes we need to exclude distractors. The roof 
of a crocodile’s mouth is a distinctive shade of coral; but a paint com pany 
would be ill advised to recommend that potential customers peer into a 
crocodile’s mouth to see that color. Crocodiles are so rare and so danger -
ous that any glimpse of the roof of one’s mouth is unlikely to make the 
color manifest. We could not see it long enough or well enough, and would 
be unlikely to attend to it carefully enough (or, if we did, to survive long 
enough) to decide  whether it is the color we want to paint the den. It is far 
better to create a lasting, readily available, easily interpretable sample of the 
color— one whose function is precisely to make the color manifest. Such 
a sample should be stable, accessible, and have no properties that distract 
attention from the color.
Considerable stage setting is often required to generate an effective exem-
plar. Since shape is always accompanied by color (Plato, 1997), we cannot 
hope to provide a completely colorless exemplar of a dodecagon. We might, 
however, tell our interlocutors to ignore the color and focus on the shape 
of our exemplar. Or we might provide several, differently colored dodeca -
gons, and induce them to focus on the salient common property.  Either way, 
we set the stage to orient the audience to the feature of interest. In yet other 
cases, we need to tamper with the substance being sampled. An experiment 
designed to discover  whether  water is compressible would not use ordinary 
rainwater or tap  water. Such liquids contain impurities.  Were we to effect 
compression of such a liquid, we would not be able to tell  whether the 
 water or the impurities accounted for the solution’s compressibility. Rather, 
the experiment would begin with distilled  water— water from which, as far 
as we can tell, all impurities have been removed.
Before we can remove irrelevant  factors, we need to do some analy sis: we 
need to conceptualize the item in question as comprised of components— 
those we seek to exemplify, and  those we do well to set aside. Analy sis is 
often straightforward. Our prior understanding of the domain frequently

--- Page 206 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 193
enables us to identify the relevant  factors. Rainwater = H2O + impurities. But 
 things are not always so  simple. For a dif fer ent experiment we might want to 
distinguish between the components of rainwater that are due to pollution 
and  those that are not. In that case, pollen would be a component of rain-
water rather than an impurity. In yet other cases we might take rainwater to 
consist of what ever liquid falls from the sky. Then even sulfuric acid would 
be a component of rainwater. As our interests and purposes change, we may 
need to reconceptualize the phenomena to devise an effective exemplar.
The proper way to analyze depends on what we are trying to do. Lin -
guists  factor verbal be hav ior into competence and per for mance. Compe-
tence is stable; per for mance fluctuates. Given this factorization, they can 
investigate a variety of verbal phenomena effectively. They can, for exam -
ple, bracket per for mance errors to exemplify features that remain invariant 
across language use. Or they can bracket under lying competence to identify 
patterns of per for mance errors common in a given speech community or 
at a given stage of linguistic development. In assessing fluency, however, 
they might consider the competence– performance distinction idle. They 
might do better to partition the domain so as to exemplify the frequency 
and distribution of surface errors, being indifferent to under lying linguistic 
structures.
Differentiating between signal and noise is commonplace. It is a  matter 
of distilling meaningful information out of the total available information 
on a topic. But what is signal in one context is noise in another. Ordinarily, 
a questioner wants to know the answer to her question, and a teacher wants 
to know  whether her student knows the answer. In  these cases, the content 
of the answer is the signal. How quickly the respondent replies counts as 
noise. But psychologists often focus on reaction times. For their purposes, it 
 doesn’t  matter what the respondent answers. The content of her answer is 
noise. The signal is how long it takes her to answer. To distinguish between 
signal and noise requires a criterion for what makes information meaning-
ful. The criterion is keyed to the question at hand. If the question is a new 
one, inquirers may need to reconceptualize the phenomena or repartition 
the domain to devise an appropriate criterion.
Such reconceptualization can highlight features that obtain but are 
obscured  under more standard characterizations. Rather than calling an 
enclosed curve an ellipse, it might be fruitful to consider it a perturbed cir-
cle. The curve is an ellipse, just as the raindrop contains both sulfuric acid

--- Page 207 ---

194  Chapter 9
and pollen, and Boetti’s painting contains two rectangles. But the items 
admit of other descriptions that may, in a given context, be more illumi -
nating. The critical question is what features of the item we want to be in a 
position to focus on. Since exemplification is selective, to treat an item as 
an exemplar is to selectively disregard some of its features.
The novice who emulates the per for mance of an expert treats that expert 
as an exemplar. She identifies the features of his be hav ior that she thinks 
account for his success. That is, she  factors his complex be hav ior into 
ele ments, selectively disregards  those she considers irrelevant to his effec-
tiveness, and sets herself to reproduce the rest. It is neither necessary nor 
pos si ble to reproduce his per for mance in its entirety. Some of the features of 
that per for mance are irreproducible— the fact that it was done on Tuesday 
the fifth of June, or done by someone born in Detroit, for example.  Others 
are simply irrelevant.  There is no reason to think that someone’s tennis 
game would improve  were she to change the color of her bedroom cur -
tains or to reor ga nize her library to match his. Yet  others are at the wrong 
grain. Possibly revising how far she stands from the baseline would make 
some difference to her serve, and it would not be surprising if copying the 
expert in this re spect is a good idea. But it is prob ably not beneficial to insist 
on emulating his position to the nearest millimeter. Instead of attempting 
to slavishly reproduce every thing she discerns, she interprets the expert’s 
be hav ior as exemplifying the features she takes to constitute, underwrite, 
or contribute to his excellence. If she is successful in identifying and repro-
ducing enough of the features that figure in his success, her per for mance is 
apt to improve.
Berkeley’s criticism of Locke’s discussion of abstract general ideas brings 
out the power of selectivity. According to Locke, “The general idea of a 
triangle . . . must be neither oblique nor rectangle, neither equilateral, 
equicrural, nor scalene, but all and none  of  these at once” (Locke, 1984, 
Book IV , ch. 7, sect. 9, quoted in Berkeley, 1957, §13). Berkeley balks. He 
can, he insists, frame no such idea. Nor does he think that anyone  else 
can. The definition of the abstract triangle is, as Locke admits, inconsistent. 
How are we supposed to frame an idea of such a  thing? How can it figure 
in proofs? But if we cannot frame such an idea, how is it pos si ble to prove 
theorems that hold of triangles in general? Berkeley’s answer is this:
Though the idea I have in view whilst I make the demonstration be, for instance, 
that of an isosceles rectangular triangle whose sides are of a determinate length, I

--- Page 208 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 195
may nevertheless be certain that [my proof] extends to all other rectilinear triangles 
of what sort or bigness soever. And that is  because neither the right  angle, nor the 
equality, nor the determinate length of the sides are at all concerned in the demon-
stration. It is true the diagram I have in view includes all  these particulars, but then 
 there is not the least mention made of them in the proof of the proposition. It is not 
said the three  angles are equal to two right ones,  because one of them is a right  angle, 
or  because the sides comprehending it are the same length. Which sufficiently shows 
that the right  angle might have been oblique, and the sides unequal, and for all that 
the demonstration would have held good. (Berkeley, 1957, §16)
By selectively disregarding the rightness of the  angle, the equality of the 
sides, and the exact length of the sides, Berkeley brings the par tic u lar tri-
angle he is working with to exemplify features it shares with all other Euclid-
ean triangles. It affords epistemic access to geometrical features of Euclidean 
triangles in general.
One might think that exemplification is not necessary to achieve this 
goal: it suffices that the precise mea sures of the sides and the  angles are 
ignored. This is not so. The isosceles right triangle is capable of symbolizing 
generally  because  these particulars can be selectively disregarded. But to be 
capable of symbolizing generally is not enough. A picture of my cat does 
not become a picture of cats in general merely  because in discussing it I 
omit mention of the distinctive color of her eyes and the markings on her 
fur. Rather, Berkeley insists, “An idea which, considered by itself, is par tic u-
lar, becomes general by being made to represent or stand for all other par tic u-
lar ideas of the same sort” (Berkeley, 1957, §12, italics mine). The mode of 
repre sen ta tion is exemplification. The isosceles triangle in his proof not 
only is an enclosed three sided figure on a Euclidean plane; his proof is 
an effective general proof  because the triangle refers to its being such a fig -
ure. By so  doing, it stands for other such figures, and discloses properties 
they share.
Exemplars need not be propositional. Boetti’s painting and Berkeley’s 
triangle, as well as the multitude of samples and examples we encounter 
 every day, lack truth- values. Still, it is worth emphasizing that the mode 
of symbolization can be crucial to the exemplification of a par tic u lar fea-
ture, and that propositional modes do not always have the edge. In 1854, 
a cholera epidemic broke out in a London neighborhood. John Snow, now 
recognized as one of the  fathers of epidemiology, traced the epidemic to its 
source by plotting cholera deaths on a city map that included the locations 
of  water pumps and major buildings. His plot demonstrated that the deaths

--- Page 209 ---

196  Chapter 9
 were centered around the Broad Street pump. To be sure, the denizens of 
the neighborhood shared more than a  water pump. They breathed the same 
air, bought food at the same markets,  were likely bitten by the same fleas, 
and so forth. So the proximity of the pump would hardly seem to  favor the 
hypothesis that cholera is  water borne. Snow’s map displayed the signifi -
cance of the pump,  because it also disclosed that  people associated with two 
local institutions did not contract cholera. Workers in the local brewery, 
who drank beer rather than  water,  were unaffected; so  were denizens of the 
nearby work house, who drew  water from a dif fer ent pump. The two institu-
tions supplied a natu ral control for testing the hypothesis that  water from 
the Broad Street pump was the source of the epidemic (Tufte, 1997). Snow’s 
map exemplifies the connection between the cholera deaths and the pump. 
It shows that the pump is at the center of the epidemic. A comprehensive 
list of the addresses of the victims, the locations of London  water pumps, 
breweries, and work houses, and the admission that brewery workers pre -
fer to drink beer would not have made anything like so clear a case, for it 
would not have made the proximity to the pump perspicuous.
Case Studies
What I’ve said so far has perhaps made it plausible that exemplification is 
epistemically impor tant. It highlights features we might other wise over -
look. This might seem to be merely a  matter of directing attention. But 
exemplification plays a far more central role in understanding. Let’s look 
at some cases.
Ethics
Suppose our goal is to understand the wrongness of lying. This might mean 
a variety of  things. We might want to understand why lying is wrong, or what 
makes lying wrong, or when or to what extent lying is wrong.  These are all 
legitimate questions. But I am  after bigger game. I want to understand how 
lying’s being wrong fits into the fabric of  human life. Satisfactory answers 
to each of the foregoing questions  will supply part of the answer but, I sug-
gest, only part. Although it is widely agreed that lying is generally wrong, 
 there is considerable controversy about why. Kantians locate the wrongness 
of lying in its being a violation of the categorical imperative; consequential-
ists, in the undesirability of the outcomes that result. Perfectionists focus

--- Page 210 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 197
on the defective moral character of the liar; rights theorists, on the viola -
tion of the hearer’s rights to truthful information. And so forth.
Some phi los o phers, such as Strevens (2010), maintain that to under -
stand the wrongness of lying is to derive a proposition such as ‘Lying is 
generally wrong’ from the true moral law that grounds it. Each of the posi-
tions I’ve listed, we may assume, can provide a suitable derivation from its 
chosen basis. None has achieved consensus that its basis is the real basis . 
This is not by itself problematic. It could just be evidence that ethics is 
hard. I have a dif fer ent worry in mind. It is that any such derivation— even 
the one grounded in the real basis, if  there is such a  thing—is incomplete. 
It omits impor tant aspects that other theories supply. To see it, suppose 
we concede that, say, Kantians are right. What grounds the wrongness of 
lying is that lying typically violates the categorical imperative. Nevertheless, 
it remains true and not unimportant that liars are morally defective; that 
lies tend to produce a preponderance of undesirable consequences; that lies 
violate  people’s rights; and so forth. Even if  these truths cannot be derived 
from the categorical imperative, if we want to understand the wrongness of 
lying, they  ought not be overlooked.
I suggest that to understand the wrongness of lying is to appreciate how 
lying’s generally being wrong permeates  human relationships, practices, 
and institutions. This involves more than just recognizing how it fits into 
the moral order. Other aspects of lying’s wrongness stem from the cog -
nitive, emotional, social, and economic costs of lying and being lied to, 
as well as the costs of designing and implementing safeguards to protect 
against lies. Our understanding might incorporate an appreciation of the 
mechanisms to secure the bases of trust among colleagues and strangers, 
and/or mechanisms to limit the consequences of trust’s being betrayed, and 
so forth. It might be sensitive to the ways lying fosters distrust, undermin-
ing the credibility of even  those who tell the truth. It might even recognize 
how the wrongness of lying figures in the natu ral order— for example, in 
the evolution of language and of creatures capable of using language. To 
understand the wrongness of lying, of course, we also need to appreciate 
how and when lying is morally permissible, and how and when, permis -
sible or not, it is advantageous. The issue is extraordinarily complex. An 
understanding of it ramifies in numerous, sometimes surprising directions.
Each of the moral laws, and each of the social, institutional, and bio -
logical accounts I’ve mentioned, captures something significant about the

--- Page 211 ---

198  Chapter 9
wrongness of lying. Even if, as Kantians maintain, the reason why lying is 
wrong is in de pen dent of the positive or negative consequences of telling 
lies, it is hard to deny that lying often has bad consequences. The same 
holds for its figuring in a morally defective character. It is hard to deny that 
 these features  matter. If we want to understand the wrongness of lying, we 
should not lose track of such points. So an account of understanding that 
stops with grounding relations is inadequate. To understand the wrongness 
of lying evidently involves appreciating the myriad ways lying’s being wrong 
infiltrates multiple, disparate domains. Even if some of the  factors I mention 
are only peripherally related to what ever it is that makes lying wrong, we 
should not cavalierly dismiss them. A comprehensive understanding of the 
phenomenon would do well to accommodate such peripheral features.
I have cast a very wide net, and claimed that the phenomenon of interest 
extends across and, no doubt, well beyond its reach. Maybe moral wrong -
ness resides at the center of the net, but prudential and epistemological 
tendrils extend outward. How can we hope to grasp it? As I’ve described it, 
the prob lem is what William James (1983, 448) called a ‘blooming, buzz -
ing confusion’, with no obvious way to corral it. I’ve mentioned a bunch 
of disparate facts, each of which bears some connection to our topic, many 
of them mediated by controversial—or at least controverted— theories. It 
might seem that the effort to understand the wrongness of lying is hope -
lessly demanding.
Rather, I suggest that each of the plausible moral accounts of what makes 
lying wrong, and each of the plausible social, economic, and biological 
accounts, affords some insight into the issue by exemplifying a dif fer ent 
way in which lying is deleterious. Kantianism exemplifies the failure of 
re spect inherent in lying; consequentialism exemplifies the largely nega -
tive consequences; perfectionism exemplifies the defectiveness of the liar’s 
moral character; and so forth. Each highlights features that the  others 
obscure. The several accounts of what makes lying wrong are incompat -
ible. They cannot all be true. But each plausible account is true enough to 
be capable of exemplifying an impor tant feature of lying’s deleteriousness. 
To focus on only one account— even if it is the true and ultimate account 
of morality— would leave us with an impoverished understanding of the 
wrongness of lying.
It does not follow that anything anyone might say or think about the 
wrongness of lying has some place in my capacious account.  Because

--- Page 212 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 199
truthfulness is so central to  human interactions,  there is a lot that an 
understanding of the wrongness of lying might incorporate. But  there is 
plenty that it rightly excludes. The Pinocchio- inspired contention that 
lying’s wrongness engenders unattractive nose elongation has no place 
in an understanding of the topic. I suggest that any account that exempli-
fies deleterious features or consequences of lying is apt to exhibit some 
understanding of the topic. So do accounts that show why lying is some -
times advantageous or even admirable. But accounts that allege that lying 
has features it does not have, or that features of lying are deleterious (or, 
indeed, advantageous) when they are not, embody a misunderstanding of 
the topic.4 They purport to exemplify features that lying does not in fact 
instantiate or features that lying instantiates but are irrelevant to lying’s 
being wrong.
Mathe matics
One might think that the plausibility of my claim derives from the lack of 
consensus about the ground of lying’s wrongness. Perhaps the epistemic 
value of diverse exemplars stems from the sorry state of ethics. I disagree. A 
similar pattern obtains in mathe matics, a field characterized by overwhelm-
ing consensus. Mathematical theorems are proved and valid proofs are con-
sidered beyond dispute so long as the axioms and rules remain in effect. But 
what exactly is the function of proof?
Fermat’s last theorem is: For n > 2, xn + yn ≠ zn. It is true. By 1990, it had 
been tested computationally for values of n through many millions. By then, 
prob ably no one who considered the  matter worried that it was false. Still, 
mathematicians  weren’t satisfied. They demanded proof. Evidence, even 
overwhelming evidence,  wasn’t good enough. Why not? One seemingly 
plausible answer is they want a right to be sure. But  doesn’t all that evidence 
confer a right to be sure? By 1990  there was far more evidence of the truth 
of Fermat’s last theorem than  there is for almost any empirical contention 
we count as knowledge. No one denied that. Still, in mathematical circles, 
Andrew Wiles’s proof of the theorem was a cause for cele bration. This sug-
gests that the proof of a theorem is  doing something other than supplying 
sufficient reason to think that the theorem is true. What might that be?
One possibility is that what is wanted is not just sufficient reason to 
think that the theorem is true, it is sufficient reason to think that it is

--- Page 213 ---

200  Chapter 9
necessarily true . Empirical evidence, or the quasi- empirical evidence that 
testing cases computationally supplies, is evidence of truth, but not of nec-
essary truth. The prob lem with this proposal is that Fermat’s last theorem 
is a mathematical claim. We already know that if it is true, it is necessarily 
true.  There’s no chance that although true, it’s just a coincidence that it 
turns out to be true, or that, although true in this world,  there are other 
pos si ble worlds in which it is false. The goal of proof, it seems, is neither to 
engender a nonfortuitously justified belief that a mathematical proposition 
is true nor to engender a nonfortuitously justified belief that it is necessarily 
true. Something  else seems to be  going on.
 There are additional reasons to buttress this suspicion. We value proofs 
of what might be called Moorean mathematical claims, such as 2 + 3 = 5. 
They are, like Moore’s commonsensical claims, contentions we are com -
pletely convinced of in de pen dently of proof (see Moore, 1993). Indeed, it 
is overwhelmingly likely that if we had a putative proof that such a claim 
was false, we would reject the proof and the proof procedure that generated 
it rather than reevaluate the claim. Still, it is lovely to see how such a claim 
follows from the Peano axioms.
I suggest that the function of proof is not mainly to afford reason to 
believe that a theorem is true or that it is necessarily true. It is to exemplify 
a series of mathematical relations that show it to be true. Demonstration 
is exemplification. The function of a proof is to make the necessary truth 
of a par tic u lar mathematical proposition manifest— that is, to exemplify 
its necessary truth and to exemplify relations between its truth and other 
mathematical truths.
To see this, consider Pythagoras’s proof of the irrationality of 
2. (This is 
a very  simple, lucid, and justly famous proof. I include obvious steps, and 
explications in order to make my point clear.)5
The background:
1. A rational number is a ratio, a/b where a and b are integers.
2. Odd numbers always have odd squares. (This has been previously proven.)
3.  Common  factors cancel out, so  every fraction is equivalent to a fully 
reduced fraction.
The proof:
4. Let a/b be a fully reduced fraction. (This begs no question since common 
 factors cancel out.)
5. If 
2 is irrational, 2 ≠ (a/b)2.

--- Page 214 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 201
6. 2 ≠ (a/b)2 is equivalent to a2 ≠ 2b2.
7. Assume for reductio: a2 = 2b2. (That is, assume that 2 is rational.)
8. Then a2 is even (since it is equal to 2b2).
9. Therefore a is even (since the square of an odd number is always odd).
10. Since a is even, a = 2c (where c is some integer).
11. Therefore 2 b2 = a2 = (2c)2 = 4c2 (from 5 and 8 and ((2)2 = 4)).
12. Therefore b2 = 2c2 (by dropping a2 = (2c)2 and dividing by 2).
13. Therefore b2 is even (since it is equal to 2c2).
14. Therefore b is even (since the square of an odd number is always odd).
15. But if both a and b are even, then they have 2 as a common  factor.
16.  Therefore a/b is not a fully reduced fraction, which contradicts the   
hypothesis.
QED.
The proof consists of a chain of exemplars, each highlighting a feature 
that would have to obtain if 2  were rational. Some (like the fact that the 
square of an odd number is always odd), are drawn from previously proven 
background information.  Others are products of earlier steps in the proof. 
Many are equations. a2, 2b2, (2c)2, and 4c2 are mathematically equivalent. In 
Fregean terms, they differ only in their mode of pre sen ta tion. Despite their 
equivalence, the choice among them is not arbitrary. The modes of pre-
sen ta tion  matter, for the expressions exemplify dif fer ent features of their 
ostensible referent. For example, that b2 = 2c2 makes it manifest that b2 must 
be even. And in light of the fact that only odd numbers have odd squares, 
this makes it manifest that b must be even. Had another equivalent expres-
sion, such as 
(a2 + 14 − 25 − 32 ), replaced 2c2 in step 10, b’s evenness would 
have been obscured.  Because the proof must make b’s evenness manifest, 
such a substitution would be unacceptable. At dif fer ent points in the proof, 
dif fer ent features need to be exemplified. The proof proceeds by a series of 
transformations, each step exemplifying something that had been instanti-
ated but not exemplified previously. By highlighting consequences implicit 
in the assumption that 
2  is rational, proof as a  whole thereby exemplifies 
the impossibility of 2 being rational.
The mode of repre sen ta tion a proof uses to characterize the items it draws 
on is critical. For a sequence of mathematical propositions to constitute a 
proof, the mathematical entity or operation must be represented in a way 
that exemplifies the features that make manifest the connection between 
the premises, axioms, lemmas, and definitions and further ele ments in the 
chain, and ultimately to the conclusion.

--- Page 215 ---

202  Chapter 9
Mathe matics values multiple proofs of the same theorem. If truth  were 
the only issue, one valid proof would suffice. Possibly a second proof would 
give a modicum of corroboration; but beyond that, further proofs would be 
otiose. Gauss devised eight proofs of quadratic reciprocity. A vast number 
of additional proofs have been developed since. Why go to all that trou-
ble? Surely not  because  after the first few proofs mathematicians  were still 
harboring doubts about the theorem’s truth! Fans of grounding maintain 
that the only proof whose apprehension constitutes an understanding is 
the proof from the real metaphysically basic axioms (see Strevens, 2010). 
Neither position is plausible. Nor is  either consonant with mathematical 
practice. Rather, I suggest, the reason multiple proofs of the same theorem 
are valuable is that they exemplify dif fer ent mathematical relations.
 There are numerous proofs of the Pythagorean theorem. Pythagoras’s 
proof relies on the properties of squares; Bashkara’s proof, on properties of 
right triangles; Garfield’s proof, on properties of trapezoids. Each contributes 
to our understanding of geometry by showing how geometric truths about 
dif fer ent shapes interweave. Recently, Zimba (2002) devised a trigonomet-
ric proof of the theorem. This was something mathematicians thought 
could not be done. They believed that since sin2a + cos2a = 1 presupposes the 
Pythagorean theorem, any trigonometric proof of the theorem would be 
circular. But Zimba’s proof by subtraction does not rely on sin2a + cos2a = 1. 
So the role of the Pythagorean theorem in the proof of sin 2a + cos2a = 1 is 
irrelevant. Zimba’s proof thus exemplifies that the relation between Euclid-
ean geometry and trigonometry is more complicated and less stratified 
than was previously supposed. We increase our understanding of the theo-
rem by seeing how it figures in dif fer ent mathematical domains, how it 
follows from and leads to dif fer ent theorems. Our understanding of the 
warp and woof of the fabric of mathe matics is enhanced by each of the 
multiple proofs. Just as dif fer ent features of the moral realm are exemplified 
by dif fer ent accounts of the wrongness of lying, dif fer ent features of the 
mathematical domain are exemplified by dif fer ent proofs of the theorem.
Exemplification’s role in mathe matics extends beyond its function in 
proofs. It enables us to appreciate a major advantage that the Arabic numeral 
system has over the Roman numerals. We are taught in school that one of the 
limitations of Roman numerals is that the notation did not have a numeral 
for 0. This sensitized us to the bewilderment that would emerge should 
someone attempt to subtract V from V. But 0 plays another impor tant role

--- Page 216 ---

Exemplification in Understanding 203
in Arabic numerical notation. It serves as a place holder. Roman numerals 
had no need of such a place holder. Other early notations just used spaces 
between numerals. This makes it difficult to discern the difference between, 
say, 1 14 and 1 14. So 0 as a placeholder is an enormous con ve nience (see 
Mazur, 2014). All of this is true. But  there is another, conceptually deeper 
benefit. With Roman numerals, you can count only so far before you have 
to introduce another letter— C or M or what ever. This prompts the ques -
tion: what happens to the numbers when the alphabet is exhausted? The 
system of Roman numerals supplies no clue. The Arabic system, having the 
capacity to use 0 as a placeholder, exemplifies the unboundedness of the 
integers. They are never exhausted; you can just keep counting.
Conclusion
In this chapter I’ve argued that exemplification is an impor tant vehicle for 
epistemic access. It acquaints epistemic agents with features of  things they 
had been unaware of or whose significance escaped their notice. Exemplars 
such as textbook examples and commercial samples are conduits for the 
transfer of understanding or knowledge. But exemplification also figures as 
a source of understanding. Dif fer ent approaches to a prob lem can highlight 
dif fer ent aspects of it. The proof of a theorem exemplifies, and enables epis-
temic agents to understand, mathematical relations that  were latent in the 
axioms. Multiple exemplars exemplify dif fer ent aspects of the same pheno-
menon, enabling epistemic agents to appreciate how that phenomenon 
figures in the greater scheme of  things.

--- Page 218 ---

In this chapter, I look specifically at the role of exemplification in dance. 
By so  doing, I hope both to reinforce my earlier argument that the arts are 
vehicles of understanding and to highlight the ways in which symbols that 
are not and do not purport to be true can be vehicles for understanding. 
This is crucial for what follows. In the next two chapters, I  will argue that 
such symbols are ubiquitous in the sciences.
Dances as Symbols
Swan Lake is beautiful. It is delicate, graceful, enchanting. Martha Graham’s 
Night Journey is not. It is riveting, harrowing, horrifying, often ugly. Yvonne 
Rainer’s Trio A  isn’t even that. Being utterly pedestrian, it does not play on 
the emotions at all. But it is intriguing. Taken together,  these three dances 
raise questions: What is dance up to? What does it do and how does it do 
it? Night Journey discredits the thesis that the end of dance is beauty. Trio 
A discredits the thesis that the end is affective engagement. Possibly dance 
as such has no end. Dif fer ent works and dif fer ent genres pursue dif fer ent 
ends. But  whether or not dance as such has a telos, questions arise: What 
does this par tic u lar dance do? How does it do it? And why?
I  will argue that beauty, ugliness, motion, and emotion are among the 
means dance uses to embody and convey understanding. This is not to say 
that dance has only epistemic functions. We may value dances for their 
own sake, or for the plea sure they give, or for other reasons as well. What I 
claim is that one impor tant function of dance is epistemic. Dance enriches 
our lives at least in part  because it enables us to understand  things differ-
ently than we did before.
10 Embodied Understanding

--- Page 219 ---

206  Chapter 10
Like Goodman (1968), I believe that dances consist of symbols. This 
claim is not, on the face of it, problematic. Dance critics regularly speak of 
a genre’s vocabulary or idiom. If this way of speaking is accurate, choreog-
raphers draw on the resources of a symbol system to create their works. In 
that case, to glean an understanding from a dance, spectators must inter -
pret  those symbols correctly. They must recognize what the dance symbol-
izes. They must know how to read the dance. If they do, they understand 
what the dance conveys. But for the dance to convey understanding, rather 
than merely to be understood, more is required. The spectators must also 
have reason to accept what the dance conveys.
This is problematic. How can dances provide such reasons? Even if 
dances are comprised of symbols, they pres ent no arguments. They do not 
make statements, express propositions, or assert that the world is this way 
or that. Some, like Swan Lake and The Firebird, have a narrative structure. 
But they are fictions. And fictions do not make literal assertions about the 
way the world is. Moreover, much of what seems significant in such works 
does not figure directly in the plot. So, evidently, something  else is  going 
on besides telling a story. Other works, like Trio A and Merce Cunningham’s 
Points in Space are nonnarrative. They do not stand in a repre sen ta tional or 
denotative relation to the world. They are not truth apt.
To make my case, I need to undermine the idea that only symbols that 
figure in arguments— that is, only symbols that have a propositional struc-
ture or are components of items with a propositional structure can advance 
understanding. If nonpropositional items can advance understanding, then 
the thesis that dance advances understanding has some chance of being 
correct. Let’s look at some cases.
Consider the counterexample. If Mike asserts, ‘All swans are white’, all it 
takes to refute him is one black swan. No words need be spoken. The bird 
alone is enough. The black swan contributes to Mike’s understanding of 
ornithology by demonstrating to him that his belief about swan plumage 
was false. It may, of course, do more. Perhaps it has a  ripple effect, prompting 
him to revise a cluster of associated beliefs.
As van Fraassen (2008) argues, perspective also figures in our under -
standing of the world. By adopting a dif fer ent perspective, we come to see 
familiar items in new ways. We thereby appreciate relationships between 
them that we previously had overlooked or underemphasized. For example, 
the shift from a third- person to a first- person perspective may be crucial to

--- Page 220 ---

Embodied Understanding 207
appreciating the close connection between belief and assertion. The asser -
tion ‘It is raining and Kate does not believe it is raining’ is unproblematic. 
 There are,  after all, many facts that any given person does not believe. But 
‘It is raining and I do not believe it is raining’ is an instance of Moore’s 
paradox. It is not something I can reasonably assert. The first- person per -
spective, but not the third- person perspective, thus affords reason to think 
that assertion is intimately connected with belief.
A third case is pattern detection. Even if all the evidence is in hand, under-
standing is enhanced when a pattern emerges. In such a case, although the 
facts  were previously known, the relations between them  were not perspic-
uous. Snow’s plot made manifest that virtually all the cholera victims of the 
1854 epidemic got their drinking  water from a single source (Tufte, 1997). 
It led to the obvious, but at the time radical, conclusion that contaminated 
drinking  water was spreading the disease.
One might object that all of  these can be captured in propositions. So, 
one might think,  there is an implicit argument. It’s not the black swan, 
then; it is the proposition: ‘ Here’s a case that shows that your hypothesis is 
false: [insert black swan]’. It’s not the perspective, then; it is the proposition 
‘Looked at from this point of view, you  will see that the following is unas-
sertible [insert an instance of Moore’s paradox]’. It’s not the pattern; it is 
the proposition ‘This plot shows that the data cluster around a single point 
[insert map]’. Although one can frame such arguments, they do not para -
phrase away or capture in propositions the items in question.  Those items 
have been embedded into propositions. But they do their cognitive work 
in de pen dently of such embedding, and are only worth embedding  because 
of their prior cognitive status. In Wittgenstein’s (1961) terms, they show 
rather than say. They exemplify.
Propositions are standardly held to be that which truth- apt sentences 
express. Two sentences express the same proposition just in case they are 
co- intensional. Moreover, it is held, the co- intensionality condition is 
sometimes satisfied; some pairs of sentences are co- intensional. If ‘vixen’ 
and ‘female fox’ are synonymous, then ‘Vixens are fierce’ and ‘Female foxes 
are fierce’ are co- intensional. They express the same proposition. Any world 
in which vixens are fierce is one where female foxes are fierce; any world 
in which female foxes are fierce is one where vixens are fierce. Recently, 
metaphysicians have argued that propositions are too coarse- grained to do 
the work phi los o phers want done. One prob lem stems from the  human

--- Page 221 ---

208  Chapter 10
capacity for ignorance and error. Even if ‘vixen’ and ‘female fox’ are synon-
ymous, it is entirely pos si ble for Harry to believe that female foxes are fierce 
without believing that vixens are fierce. Even if ‘London is beautiful’ and 
‘Londres est belle’ express the same proposition, Pierre can believe one but 
not the other (Kripke, 2011b). Propositions, as standardly characterized, are 
not sufficiently fine- grained to reflect belief contents. Such contents are 
evidently hyperintensional.
Some, such as Bealer (1998), reject the co- intensionality criterion and 
maintain that propositions are hyperintensional too. If so, perhaps we might 
say that the contents of dances and other works of art are propositional. 
This would require a rather drastic departure from tradition in at least 
two re spects. First, it would recognize that propositions need not be 
truth apt. It is hard to see what the truth conditions on Points in Space  
or Trio A could be. Second, it would recognize that  there are cases where 
a symbol is so fine- grained that no other symbol could have the same 
content. Such symbols are semantically dense (see Goodman, 1968). 
Although the notion of a proposition can be stretched, I am not confi -
dent that hyperintensionalists want to stretch it this far. In any case, our 
concern is with what dances exemplify, not with their claims—if any—to 
be propositional.
Dances highlight certain properties, rendering them salient, and thereby 
affording epistemic access to them. Classical ballet, for example, literally 
exemplifies properties such as grace, delicacy, and beauty; and meta phor-
ically exemplifies properties such as love and longing, weightlessness and 
ethereality. Martha Graham’s modern dances meta phor ically exemplify 
psychological properties such as grief, regret, horror, and hope. They liter -
ally exemplify that the body of the dancer has a certain weight— that it is 
subject to literal as well as meta phorical gravity. George Balanchine and 
Merce Cunningham, choreographers who bridge the modern— postmodern 
divide, created works that exemplify properties of dance itself, movements 
of dancers in time and space. They also exemplify properties like vitality, 
dexterity, and sinuousness. The works of the choreographers in the mini -
malist, postmodern Judson Dance Theater exemplify properties of ordinary 
pedestrian movement. Rather than exemplifying properties ste reo typically 
associated with dance, they exemplify activities like walking,  running, carry-
ing a mattress, and climbing over a barrier.

--- Page 222 ---

Embodied Understanding 209
I have characterized the properties dances exemplify using monadic 
predicates. This might suggest that they can be instantiated in an instant. 
But the impor tant properties in dance are typically dynamic. They emerge 
and develop over time and across space. Jocasta’s convulsive grief, Odette’s 
ethereal grace, Cunningham’s jittery counterpoint, and Paxton’s prosaic walk 
are spatiotemporally extended. This, I suggest, is crucial to their epistemic 
functions.
A Look Back
The Judson Dance Theater consisted of a group of minimalist postmodern 
choreographers who sought to pare down dance to what they took to be its 
essence:  human bodies moving in space. They sought to de moc ra tize dance, 
to eliminate its elitist, distancing, off- putting qualities. They had no inter-
est in storytelling, in transcendence, in illusion of any kind. Their dances 
consist of mundane, pedestrian, nonstylized, uninflected movements of the 
sort you can see on the street. Yvonne Rainer expressed her choreographical 
ideals in her over- the- top “No Manifesto” of 1965:
No to spectacle no to virtuosity no to transformations and magic and make believe 
no to glamour and transcendency of the star image no to the heroic no to the anti- 
heroic no to trash imagery no to involvement of performer or spectator no to style 
no to camp no to seduction of spectator by the wiles of the performer no to eccen -
tricity no to moving or being moved. (Rainer, 1995)
Once all  these aspects of dance are excluded, what is left, the minimalists 
maintained, is the essence of dance— movement as such.
What might be the value of such a dance? We see  people walking, 
 running, climbing over barriers, carry ing loads  every day. Why should we 
go to a per for mance to watch them? Why should we buy a ticket? Sally 
Banes (2003, 3–5) suggests that the answer lies in defamiliarization, a pro-
cess by which what is familiar is rendered strange. The idea is this: when 
something is familiar, we are so accustomed to it that we do not  really look 
at it or attend to it. A passing glance enables us to recognize it as what it 
is and then move on. Defamilarization heightens awareness of  things that 
are so obvious that we routinely ignore them. We walk, run, climb, and see 
 others  doing so without giving it much thought. When we carry a mattress, 
we do give it thought. We are painfully aware that carry ing a mattress is

--- Page 223 ---

210  Chapter 10
hard. It requires continually readjusting our bodies to accommodate the 
awkwardly shifting center of gravity of the bulky, heavy, unwieldy burden. 
But we are intent on the task—we want to get the mattress moved. So we 
attend to the task and not to our  doing of it.
The Judson Theater dancers put us in a context where we attend to the 
physical intelligence that goes into such mundane activities. We notice and 
attune ourselves to the minute, intricate, muscular adjustments involved in 
keeping one’s balance while schlepping a mattress. We notice the rise and 
fall, the small and large physical adjustments that it takes to walk or run 
across the floor. The dances thus exemplify features that mundane motion 
instantiates but that we,  either makers or observers of that motion, rou -
tinely ignore. The exemplification is literal. The dancers exemplify features 
of walking by walking. They exemplify features of climbing by climbing. 
On the one hand, their message seems to be ‘What you see is what you 
get’. On the other hand, they put spectators in a context where they can ask, 
‘Well, what do we get?’ and see, perhaps for the first time, what was before 
their eyes all along. By making us aware of the physical intelligence of ordi-
nary, mundane movement, the Judson Theater’s dances increase our aware-
ness and advance our understanding of ourselves as organisms capable of 
locomotion.
Arguably, they do something more. Although many of the discrete, com-
ponent movements in Rainer’s Trio A are ordinary movements that pretty 
much anyone could do, it is not the case that the complex movements 
that they are part of are  things that just anyone can do. As Jill Sigman says, 
“Moving a head one way and feet another is difficult enough, but switching 
quickly from head to feet to other body parts is even more challenging. . . .  
Furthermore, some of the movements are simply difficult to accomplish. 
One passage requires slowly rising into relevé on one leg and repeatedly 
alternating legs. Another involves squatting and extending the left leg fully 
to the back, then bringing it  under the torso and through to the front with-
out losing one’s balance” (1998, 164–165). This undercuts the idea that the 
uninflected, unvirtuositic dances are just ‘slices of life’ brought indoors and 
presented in such a way that we can attend to ordinary movement for its 
own sake. Nevertheless, the dances exemplify ordinary movements, and 
pres ent the more complicated movements in the same uninflected way as 
they pres ent the ordinary ones. Perhaps they thereby exemplify that the

--- Page 224 ---

Embodied Understanding 211
ordinary is continuous with the extraordinary, or that the ordinary is itself 
extraordinary.
According to the 1960s minimalists’ ideology,  there is something phony 
or inauthentic about dances that purport to be something other than what 
they are. So it is perhaps not surprising that exemplification figures promi-
nently in their works. Since exemplification requires instantiation, a sym -
bol can exemplify only what it is— that is, only features it has. This suggests 
that what is characteristic of postmodern minimalist dance might not be 
characteristic of other forms of dance.
Ideologically, Merce Cunningham and George Balanchine are not far 
from the minimalists. They too eschew narrative and psychological expres-
sion. They too want to pare dance down to its essence. But rather than 
taking the essence of dance to be  human bodies moving in space, they take 
it to be dancers moving in space. So their works exemplify features of dance 
itself. Dancerly forms, movements, and patterns are exemplified in their 
works. Points in Space, Cunningham (1986) maintained, is about dance; it 
is not about anything  else. Unlike the Judson group, Balanchine and Cun-
ningham do not purport to restrict their range to movements anyone at 
all could do. They recognize that dancers have extraordinary physical and 
expressive abilities, and are willing to exploit the full range of  those abili -
ties. Thus they take properties like grace, virtuosity, suppleness, and the 
illusion of weightlessness to be suitable candidates for exemplification. So 
are abstract geometrical and kinematic patterns that can be realized only by 
trained, talented dancers.
Again the question is: what is the cognitive value of such a dance? A 
dance about dance could embody and convey an understanding of the art 
form. It could show what dance (or perhaps ballet, or perhaps a certain style 
of modern dance) as such does and how it does it. It could make manifest 
that dance is not just, or not mainly, a sort of entertaining pantomime 
for telling fairy tales without words— for conveying something that could 
be better done in words. Balanchine seems to suggest that classical bal -
let starts, ‘Once upon a time,  there was a prince who fell in love with an 
enchanted swan . . .’ Now take away the prince, take away the swan, take 
away the love and betrayal, take away the enchantment, and what do you 
have left? The answer to that question, arguably, is what Balanchine makes 
manifest in his ballets.

--- Page 225 ---

212  Chapter 10
Still,  there is something irritatingly self- indulgent about artists’ talk of 
exploring the limits of their medium. One wants to reply, ‘Yes, yes, I can see 
why artists working in a medium and art students studying a medium need 
to care about the limits of the medium. But why should the rest of us care? 
What sort of understanding does such an exploration yield for us?’  Later, 
I  will suggest reasons to think that Balanchine, Cunningham, Rainer, and 
their colleagues provide acceptable answers to  these questions. For now, 
however, let us look at their pre de ces sors.
Modern dance tends to re spect nature.  Human bodies pres ent them -
selves as  human bodies, not snowflakes or enchanted swans or ethereal 
spirits. They are subject to the laws of physics and psy chol ogy, and some-
times ground down to the earth by the forces acting on them. Modern 
dances are more likely to pres ent dancers writhing on the ground than leap-
ing improbably through the air. Psy chol ogy is central. In Martha Graham’s 
works we see the outward manifestations of  mental states, expressing fear, 
joy, elation, and revulsion. Rather than relying on established conventions, 
as classical ballet does, they create their own meanings— they constitute the 
symbols that convey their content.
One way is through narrative. Knowing, as we do, the story of Oedipus, 
we have resources for interpreting the gestures in Night Journey. But Night 
Journey is no mere pantomime of Oedipus Rex. It pres ents Jocasta’s mindset 
at the moment of her suicide, something Sophocles left out. It reviews the 
joys and sorrows and eventual horror of her life with her son/lover/hus -
band Oedipus. It displays the guilt, revulsion, and self- loathing that make 
suicide the only option. It does so through tensions and releases, conven -
tional gestures and newly in ven ted ones— motions that express tenderness, 
repugnance, love, and profound regret. The dance intimates that the true 
tragedy of Oedipus Rex is Jocasta’s. To have borne a son and, loving him, 
to have (inadvertently and with the best intentions) brought it about that 
such a horrifying fate could befall him is to have utterly betrayed one’s obli-
gation as a  mother. To have loved a man and put him in a position where 
all he could feel for you or himself is loathing and disgust is to have utterly 
betrayed one’s obligation as a lover and a wife. Night Journey enhances our 
understanding of Oedipus Rex. It pres ents the story from a novel point of 
view, and reveals features that are not salient in Sophocles. It modulates 
and elaborates the understanding we glean from the play, convincing us 
that  there is more to the story than the fate of one man with a tragic flaw.

--- Page 226 ---

Embodied Understanding 213
What ever insight into the  human condition we gain from the original play 
is extended and ramified through this new interpretation.
Modern dances, such as Night Journey , are not insular in the way the 
works of Rainer, Balanchine, and Cunningham are. They point beyond 
themselves and appeal to resources drawn from the outside. They refer to 
 things that are apparently not integral to dance. They may tell stories to 
express feelings. They elicit and express emotions. I have argued elsewhere 
that emotions exemplified in the arts are vehicles for understanding 
(see Elgin, 1996, 2007b). Still,  there is a worry. It seems that Martha Graham 
could give an utterly compelling per for mance of Night Journey even if she 
happened that day not to be feeling the amalgam of love, regret, revulsion, 
and self- loathing that the work expresses. The emotions expressed by the 
work evidently need not be felt by the dancer.
This, however, pres ents a difficulty for my position. Exemplification, as I 
keep insisting, requires instantiation as well as reference. If the dancer does 
not experience the emotions in question, how can the dance instantiate 
them? This is a tricky question that, I  will argue, reveals something impor-
tant about the philosophical significance of dance. But before I take up the 
prob lem, let us take a brief look at classical ballet.
Classical ballet is practically the antithesis of Judson Dance. It says ‘yes’ 
to many of the items listed in Rainer’s “No Manifesto.” Yes to spectacle, 
illusion, and make believe. Yes to magic, virtuosity, glamour, transcendancy 
of the star image. Emphatically yes to the seduction of the spectator. Clas-
sical ballets tell stories, magical stories about enchanted princesses and 
evil magicians. They rely on a fixed, regimented, vocabulary of techniques, 
positions, and steps that conspire to pres ent the illusion of weightlessness, 
of ethereality. Classical ballet looks outward. It is about something other 
than dance. Still, it hardly seems to open a win dow on the world. It por -
trays fairy tales. It is populated by necromancers and their victims, by wiz-
ards and magical creatures. If  there is a message  here, it may be that ballet 
seeks to enchant, but we should be wary of being enchanted. Although 
ballets are about something in the sense of being comprised of repre sen-
ta tional symbols,  there is evidently nothing in the world they are literally 
about. They are fictions. While telling stories about nutcrackers or firebirds 
or enchanted swans, they exemplify features like grace and delicacy, fluid-
ity and transcendence. They make manifest how beautiful, light, and ethe-
real  human beings can seem.

--- Page 227 ---

214  Chapter 10
Dance as Philosophy
This cursory reverse history of dance in the West shows a paring down, 
a stripping away. Each genre I mentioned took its pre de ces sors’ works 
to contain excesses that needed to be expunged, leaving only what was 
essential to dance. The move away from balletic spectacle was a progression 
 toward the exemplification of only what is essential to dance. Philosophi-
cally, this is in ter est ing. Who would have thought that dance is a hotbed of 
essentialism? But this trajectory raises an impor tant question. Dance con-
sists of  human bodies in motion. So on this essentialist account, dance 
should be restricted to what  human bodies in motion can exemplify. What 
is that? We know that an item can exemplify only properties it instantiates. 
So the question is, what sorts of properties can  human bodies in motion 
instantiate?
The postmodern minimalists maintain that bodies cannot instantiate 
properties like being weightless, or being an enchanted swan. So dances that 
portray them as such are in some re spect violating the essence of dance. 
They object to ballet’s pretense of defying gravity—of being lighter than 
one  really is. But pretending is something ordinary  people do, and pretend-
ing to be lighter than one is is something lots of us do. They object to the 
 grand leaps as not the sort of  thing that ordinary  people do. But Michael 
Jordan, at the height of his  career, prob ably made as impressively graceful 
leaps as Mikhail Baryshnikov. Granted, Michael Jordan is far from ordinary. 
But his extraordinary talent has nothing to do with dance. They object to 
ballet’s standardized, regimented symbol system, considering it an imposi-
tion of an authoritarian dance culture rather than deriving from the way 
ordinary  people behave. But  human beings are by nature acculturated. So 
to find that something is a product of culture is not to show that it is not 
natu ral for beings such as ourselves. Many of our cultural practices involve 
subjecting ourselves and each other to rigid rules. Ordinary language is 
a cultural construct that imposes grammatical rules on acceptable verbal 
be hav ior of  human beings. The inside— outside distinction turns out to be 
hard to draw.
The postmodern minimalists object to the psychological properties 
exemplified in both ballet and modern dance, on the grounds that they 
are  mental, not physical. This suggests that postmodern minimalists are 
closet dualists. A dualist would say that a figure bowed in grief exemplifies a

--- Page 228 ---

Embodied Understanding 215
posture from which one can infer that she is grieving, and that a trembling 
figure exemplifies motions from which one can infer that she is afraid. Still, 
grief and fear are  mental, not physical properties. But according to mate -
rialism, mind and body are one. So the figure bowed in grief itself instanti-
ates, and therefore is capable of exemplifying, grief. The trembling figure 
instantiates and is capable of exemplifying fear. No inference is needed.
This last point is critical. One way to accommodate the exemplification 
of emotional properties conveyed by dance is to say that they are meta-
phor ically exemplified. One dancer droops, displaying a par tic u lar posture 
that meta phor ically exemplifies grief. Another leaps, displaying a motion that 
meta phor ically exemplifies joy. This may be the right  thing to say. But the 
materialist position might be correct. In that case, postures and movements 
themselves can exemplify properties that we call  mental. This posture just 
shows grief, that movement just shows joy. For this is what grief looks like 
and that is what joy looks like.
This brings us back to a question I left hanging earlier. If the performer 
is not experiencing the emotions, can the dance exemplify them? The first 
inclination is to say ‘No’, or anyway ‘Not literally’. Emotions need to be 
experienced, and if the dancer is not experiencing them, who is? But the 
assumption that emotions need to be experienced to be instantiated is 
not as obvious as it looks. Although emotions are associated with distinctive 
feelings, emotions are not feelings. It is pos si ble to have an emotion that 
one does not feel. This, psychiatrists tell us, is what happens when a person 
is in denial. Other psychological  factors override or short- circuit the con-
nection between emotion and feeling, so that an emotion that is plainly 
being exhibited is not felt. It is also common in what Hume calls the calm 
passions— emotions like an enduring grudge or the standing affection for 
a life- long friend, which has no distinctive feeling associated with it, but 
which manifests itself in a complex disposition to behave in certain ways 
 toward that friend (see Hume, 1928, Book II). Still, one might object, even 
in  these cases someone has the emotion in question.  Whether it is felt or not, 
it resides in someone.
Could we say, then, that the emotions exemplified in Night Journey reside 
in the dancer? Even if Martha Graham does not feel the regret and revulsion 
and self- loathing the dance exemplifies,  those emotions are manifest in the 
motions her body goes through as she dances the part of Jocasta. She has 
them,  whether or not she feels them. If they are literally characteristics of

--- Page 229 ---

216  Chapter 10
a  human body, and are characteristics a  human body can have  whether it 
feels them or not, then they can be literally exemplified in the dance, by 
the dancer, regardless of what the dancer feels.
Similarly, of course, for other properties, like ethereality or weightlessness 
or enchantment. Real bodies cannot instantiate  those properties. But they 
can seem to instantiate them. So they can appear to be ethereal or weight-
less or enchanted. And they can literally exemplify the appearance. I men-
tion this possibility, not  because I think I can demonstrate  here that it is 
correct, but  because it seems to me that dance raises in ter est ing and impor-
tant questions in the philosophy of mind. If the mind just is the body, then 
what dancers do with their bodies, they do with their minds. The full title 
of Rainer’s work is Trio A or The Mind Is a Muscle, Part 1 . I suggest that the 
‘is’  here might be close to an “is” of identity or an ‘is’ of constitution— The 
muscle is (at least part of ) the mind.
I suggest, then, that the postmodern minimalist contention that earlier 
works are somehow phony or inauthentic  because they go beyond what 
is distinctive of bodies in motion is more problematic than it looks. It 
involves a tacit commitment to a limited, apparently dualistic conception 
of the range of  things that  human bodies actually do. This is not to say 
that the postmodern minimalists  were wrong to limit their range in the 
way that they did. Rather, it is to suggest that their understanding of the 
basis of the limits they set may be wrong. One of the ways dance advances 
understanding is by raising philosophical questions, like ‘What exactly is 
the relation of the body to the mind?’ and ‘How does the body in motion 
manifest intention, intelligence, emotion, and other putatively  mental 
properties?’
Many of the features exemplified in  human movement are exemplified 
elsewhere, as well. Patterns are abstract mathematical structures. So they 
might be exemplified in a dance, and instantiated not only in other  human 
activities, but in events of dif fer ent kinds. The dance of the snowflakes in 
The Nutcracker, for example, exemplifies the sort of pattern one sees when 
snow skitters across the ground. Patterns exemplified in dance are typically 
dynamic. They develop over time. So they often look like the patterns one 
sees in a kaleidoscope.  These are complex kinematic regularities. By exem-
plifying such patterns, dances sensitize spectators to them, enabling  those 
spectators to recognize them when they encounter them in other venues or 
to discern subtle or enigmatic aspects of them.

--- Page 230 ---

Embodied Understanding 217
Dance frequently exemplifies po liti cal properties as well. Yvonne Rain-
er’s egalitarianism is manifest in, among other  things, a democracy of the 
per for mance space.  There is no mandatory center of attention. Since the 
actions are uninflected, all the actions of all the dancers are potentially 
equally significant. The dance does not impel or compel the spectator to look 
at one spot or another. The ‘costumes’ of the dancers (if they are not nude) 
are pedestrian, thereby depriving the spectator of the sort of social cues that 
clothing often provides. Virtuosity is neither displayed by nor required of the 
dancers. All, evidently, are created equal.
The collaboration of Cunningham and John Cage was, on the face of 
it, odd. In works like Points in Space , dance and  music  were created in de-
pen dently. The dancers typically did not even hear the  music  until the first 
per for mance. So rather than  either art accommodating itself to the demands 
of the other, each stands alone. Each is worthy of attention. And in per-
for mance  either may call attention to or distract attention from the other. 
This is not an accident; nor, from the point of view of the creators, is it a 
defect. For the works exemplify the autonomy of the dif fer ent arts. They 
also exemplify the capacity of autonomy to provide an occasion for seren-
dipitous juxtapositions.
In classical ballet, as in many other dances,  music and choreography 
work together. Each enhances and draws on the other. The interdependence 
thus exemplified allows for the heightened effects that neither alone could 
achieve. Classical ballet also invokes the ‘star system’ that Rainer decried. 
It exemplifies a hierarchy, an inegalitarianism. Po liti cally, as well as stylisti-
cally, postmodern dance and classical ballet are antithetical.
We need not endorse its po liti cal stance to understand and appreciate a 
dance. If my contention is correct, what we should do is understand what 
the dance symbolizes, and how it reflects on other aspects of our experience. 
Dif fer ent dances display dif fer ent values. They afford access and insight into 
the values of egalitarianism, autonomy, inegalitarianism, and interdepen -
dence. Ordinarily, we might not think of works like Trio A or The Firebird as 
particularly po liti cal works. But once we realize that among the properties 
they exemplify are po liti cal ones, we are in a position to recognize a po liti-
cal dimension to other actions and institutions that we might other wise 
think of only apo liti cally. We emerge from a per for mance of such a work 
better equipped to recognize such features in other situations where we 
encounter them.

--- Page 231 ---

218  Chapter 10
Interpretation and Understanding
I have been urging that dances are symbols that exemplify features and 
render them epistemically accessible. But how can we understand such 
symbols? At a very abstract level, the answer is clear. We understand dances 
the same way we understand other symbols—we know how to interpret 
the symbol systems they belong to. I can read the menu if I understand 
German, for the symbols on the menu are words in German. It is plausible 
that ballet has something like a ‘language’— a set of repeatable, conven -
tional symbols whose interpretations are reasonably clear. But when Doris 
Humphrey is writhing on the floor, or Steve Paxton is carry ing a mattress, 
or Merce Cunningham is twitching in the corner, or Jill Sigman is dancing 
on crutches, what are we to make of it?  There does not seem anything like 
ballet’s regimented conventions to fall back on.
 Here, I think, it is worth taking seriously what writers on dance say when 
they speak of a choreographer’s vocabulary or idiom. They take it that 
to understand a dance, we need to be able to interpret that vocabulary or 
idiom.  There is no reason to think that this is easy or automatic. It may be 
that one needs to know quite a bit about what has been  going on in con-
temporary dance in order to understand a new work. It may be that we 
need to know what has been done, what has been tried, and  whether it 
succeeded or failed, to figure out what Sigman is up to. (But you also need 
to know German to read the menu.) If one has the requisite background, 
what is being symbolized may be perfectly clear. If not, one may won der 
why, for example, the dancers are nude, or are wearing masks, or are evenly 
distributed across the stage, or what ever. One may won der what the con-
nection between the score and the dance is or why words rather than  music 
constitute the score.  There is no reason to think that the answers to  these 
questions are obvious or are readily available to the novice spectator. We 
should no more expect to be able to interpret a dance in an unfamiliar 
idiom just by looking than we expect to be able, just by looking, to inter -
pret a menu, much less a poem or a news report or a scientific paper, in a 
foreign language.
Confronted with an alien dance form, we may initially be bewildered. 
We venture hypotheses and test them to discover  whether they make sense 
of what we are seeing.  There are many modes of access, so we may find that 
we have relevant background resources to build on. We might, for example,

--- Page 232 ---

Embodied Understanding 219
appeal successfully to our knowledge of other arts or of popu lar culture. In 
some cases we  will formulate plausible hypotheses that assign to a work 
an interpretation that accounts for the features we find salient. Then we 
have insights to export to other aspects of experience, and to bring to the 
interpretation of other works of art. The interpretation we venture may or 
may not stand up to further scrutiny. If, for example, it yields a reading that 
makes a new work anomalous, when it seems continuous with the chore -
ographer’s previous works, we have reason to doubt its adequacy. If the 
insights it leads to seem banal when the work seems intriguing, then again 
we have reason to think our interpretation is inadequate. If, on the other 
hand, it makes sense of the  factors we find salient and illuminates other 
aspects of experience, it is a prima facie plausible interpretation.
I claimed earlier that dance has the capacity to embody and convey an 
understanding of the wider world. I argued that this capacity is largely due 
to exemplification. We can now see what this involves. Dance, like other 
arts, exemplifies properties that are instantiated elsewhere but may fail 
to be noticed or properly attended to in the motley array of inputs that 
regularly confronts us. In exemplifying  these properties, a dance draws 
our attention to them and stresses their significance. It thus equips us to 
recognize them when we see them again and intimates that we would do 
well to attend to them. In effect, then, dance may be a source of working 
hypotheses. Obviously, not all such hypotheses are sound. An insight we 
attempt to export from a dance may fail to illuminate anything significant 
about other aspects of experience. Many dances are banal. In this they do 
not differ from other symbols that purport to reveal  things about the world. 
Many putatively informative conversations, and many scientific experi -
ments, are banal, too. But when a dance is cognitively effective, it reveals 
something to us. We come to see the story of Oedipus in a new light, or 
come to appreciate the complex physical intelligence of ordinary move -
ment, or come to recognize the precariousness of what we standardly take 
for granted.
In some cases we may remain bewildered. We have no idea why  these 
 people are  doing  those  things, why anyone would consider what is  going 
on art, or dance, or the sort of  thing anyone would want to do in public. 
Then we can make no sense of the work. But even this may be an advance 
in understanding. This is Socrates’s point. Knowing that you do not know is 
the first step  toward knowledge. Appreciating that you do not understand a

--- Page 233 ---

220  Chapter 10
work of art constitutes the first step (or at least an early step)  toward figur-
ing out how to make sense of it.
Conclusion
I have argued that dance highlights features and underscores their signifi -
cance.  These may be features of  human be hav ior— mundane or extraordi-
nary. They may be more abstract dynamic or kinematic patterns. They may 
embody views about weighty philosophical  matters— the relation between 
mind and body, between autonomy and interdependence, between the 
ordinary and the extraordinary. Dance can deepen understanding by 
sensitizing us to  things we tend to overlook, by undermining ste reo types, 
by problematizing assumptions we did not even know we  were making. 
Since dance, like the other arts, lacks the capacity to adduce arguments, it 
might seem that at best, it can advance hypotheses whose merits need to 
be demonstrated by argument. Even if this  were so, dance would have an 
impor tant epistemic function in identifying hypotheses worth testing. But, 
I suggest, argument is not the only way to buttress epistemically tenable 
convictions. Examples can be equally tenable. An exemplar— even if it is a 
nonverbal symbol— can show that something is the case, even though it is 
powerless to say anything. A work of art, such as a dance or a symphony, 
being an extended, textured, multilayered symbol, can show something quite 
significant.

--- Page 234 ---

Il faut reculer pour mieux sauter.
Earlier I said that felicitous falsehoods figure in understanding by contribut-
ing to an account’s overall tenability. The question is how. It might seem 
that considerations that are acknowledged to be false cannot be initially 
tenable. That is not so obvious, since initial tenability turns on what  people 
actually accept. That Amherst is ninety miles from Cambridge, although 
strictly false, is prob ably accepted and acceptable when considering driving 
from one city to the other. If so, it is initially tenable.  People might well 
accept considerations they consider false, particularly if they consider them 
true enough. In any case, falsehoods that lack initial tenability can still in 
princi ple contribute to the tenability of the account they belong to. As we saw 
earlier, not all ele ments of an acceptable account need be initially tenable. 
Some initially nontenable or even untenable considerations earn their ten-
ability by strengthening the tenability of a suitably tethered account. Thus, 
for example, early twentieth- century physics rightly accepted the positron 
 because the alternatives— physical theories committed to the existence of 
negatively charged electrons with no positively charged counter parts— were 
less tenable than theories that postulated an as yet undetected positively 
charged particle. The effectiveness of such a strategy does not yet vindicate 
felicitous falsehoods, though. ‘ There exist positrons’ was held to be true, 
although not yet in de pen dently confirmed.
How exactly can acknowledged falsehoods enhance tenability? In chap-
ter 2, I characterized felicitous falsehoods as false in ways that do not  matter. 
In this chapter I discuss laboratory experiments, thought experiments, 
and literary fictions. I argue that they all distance themselves from the facts 
11 Casting in Bold Relief

--- Page 235 ---

222  Chapter 11
in order to screen out irrelevant, potentially confounding complications. 
This enables them to exemplify impor tant features and patterns that would 
other wise be obscured. Once we recognize and appreciate the importance 
of  those features and patterns in artificial settings, we can test  whether they 
afford insight into what obtains in fact. Novels and thought experiments 
are clearly fictions. Some are felicitous.  Whether laboratory experiments are 
fictions is not so clear. What ever the verdict, they are like fictions in dis -
tancing themselves from the world in order to exemplify  factors that obtain 
but are hard to discern or whose significance is hard to appreciate in their 
natu ral settings. Although laboratory experiments, thought experiments, 
and fictions are unfaithful to the facts, their infidelity does not discredit 
them, for their contribution to understanding lies in what they exemplify, 
not in what they describe.
Laboratory Experiments
 Every discernible item has in def initely many discernible properties and 
stands in in def initely many discernible relations. Our only hope of under-
standing and coping with the chaos that confronts us is to ignore most 
of what is  there to be seen. To a considerable extent, selective disregard is 
automatic. In order to see anything, we overlook a lot. Where automaticity 
fails, we purposely block  things out. We scan the forest by purposely ignor-
ing individual trees, or focus on a tree by screening off the rest of the forest. 
In some cases, though, more than an act of  will is required to selectively 
dis regard what we need to. Then we may resort to experimentation. If it is 
unfeasible to simply pay no attention to the man  behind the curtain, we 
may contrive a situation that excludes him.
A laboratory experiment is no mere  matter of bringing nature indoors. 
It is a controlled manipulation of events, designed and executed to make 
some par tic u lar phenomenon salient. Natu ral entities are multifaceted. 
Impor tant properties and relations are often masked by the welter of com-
plexities that embed them. In experimenting, a scientist isolates a phenom-
enon from many of the forces that ordinarily impinge on it. To the extent 
pos si ble, she eliminates confounding  factors. She holds most ineliminable 
 factors fixed, effectively consigning them to the cognitive background of 
 things to be taken for granted. This enables the effect of the experimen -
tal intervention on the remaining variable to stand out. Through such a

--- Page 236 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 223
strategy, she casts into bold relief  factors that might typically be hidden 
from view.
Suppose a population of wild mice who  were accidentally exposed to 
bisphenol- A  later exhibited a high rate of liver cancer. To conclude that 
exposure to bisphenol- A caused their disease would be premature. For all we 
know,  those mice might have been peculiarly susceptible to liver cancer or 
have been exposed to an unnoticed carcinogen. To glean direct, nonanec -
dotal evidence of a connection between exposure to bisphenol- A and liver 
cancer, investigators place genet ically identical mice in other wise identi -
cal environments, exposing half of them to massive doses of the chemical 
while leaving the rest unexposed.  Because the assignment of a given mouse 
to one group or the other is random, the mice exposed to bisphenol- A and 
the mice in the control group are initially equal in expectation of develop-
ing liver cancer. Their common ge ne tic endowment and other wise iden-
tical environments neutralize a multitude of ge ne tic and environmental 
 factors believed to standardly influence the incidence of cancer. This blocks 
rival explanations that might be proposed for the elevated rate of cancer in 
the wild population.
The result of the experiment exemplifies the difference (if any) in the 
incidence of liver cancer between the two groups of mice. It not only instan-
tiates the difference, it also makes that difference manifest. If the difference 
is statistically significant, then the result exemplifies a correlation between 
exposure to bisphenol- A and the incidence of liver cancer. (For simplicity, I 
 will assume that the correlation, if  there is one, indicates that exposed mice 
are more likely to develop liver cancer than unexposed mice. It could go the 
other way. Perhaps exposure to bisphenol- A protects against liver cancer.) 
Although correlation does not imply causation, a robust correlation often 
provides strong evidence of causation. In this case, the background assump-
tion that moves us from a mere correlation to a causal judgment is the 
well- founded conviction that the experiment was so rigorously designed 
and executed that nothing but the exposure to bisphenol- A could have 
caused the difference. That being so, the result may also exemplify a causal 
relation.
So far we are just talking about the par tic u lar mice in the experiment. But 
the goal of the investigation is not primarily to discover their medical fates. 
It is to use their medical fates to learn something more general. Since the 
mice in the experiment  were chosen arbitrarily from the class of mice with

--- Page 237 ---

224  Chapter 11
a par tic u lar genome, it is straightforward to proj ect to other mice of the 
same strain. The experiment then also exemplifies the increased propensity 
of mice of that strain to develop liver cancer when exposed to bisphenol- A. 
Moreover, the mice are model organisms, so  there is reason to think that 
what holds for them also holds for the organisms they serve as models for—
in this case, mammals, including  humans. The experiment’s result instanti-
ates propensities to develop cancer in a variety of groups: the mice in the 
experiment, other mice of the same strain, mice in general, rodents, mam-
mals. It also instantiates a vast and variegated host of other properties. But 
given the background assumptions that motivate and shape the inquiry, it 
exemplifies the propensity of mammals exposed to bisphenol- A to develop 
liver cancer. The inference from mice to mammals is a big jump. But if the 
background assumptions legitimating treating the mice as model organisms 
are cogent, it is reasonable to treat the experiment as exemplifying a causal 
connection between exposure to bisphenol- A and cancer in mammals in 
general.
The interpretive path I just sketched is reminiscent of Capdev ila’s dis -
cussion of Rosso Galera, Rosso Guzzi.  Here the connecting links derive from 
medical science rather than Italian motorcycle culture. The interpretation 
I’ve given is mediated by background assumptions drawn from our current 
best understanding of carcinogens, of mammals, and of methods for inves-
tigating carcinogenicity. That understanding may be wrong in ways that 
would vitiate my interpretation. So it is fallible. But if the understanding 
is sufficiently accurate and adequate (even if not true in  every re spect), the 
interpretation is too. If the exposed mice show a sufficiently elevated rate of 
liver cancer, we are right to think that bisphenol- A is carcinogenic.
What if we are wrong? Exemplification requires instantiation. Although 
we have no reason to think so, suppose  there is a sharp threshold. Exposure 
below a certain level is causally inert. Above that level, cells go wild. Then 
the consequence of a small animal’s abrupt exposure to massive doses of 
bisphenol- A over a short period of time does not exemplify what hap -
pens to a large animal exposed to small doses over a long period of time. 
Given that  humans are never exposed to levels or spikes in level compa -
rable to  those of the mice, the experiment does not exemplify a danger 
to  humans. This could be so. An impor tant mediating assumption might 
be false. In that case, the result does not exemplify anything about  human 
vulnerability to cancer.

--- Page 238 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 225
Still, the result exemplifies a connection that justifies our thinking that 
exposure to bisphenol- A increases the likelihood of developing cancer. Even 
if the result is misleading, it affords insight into the structure of our current 
understanding of the subject. The attribution of the difference in incidence 
of cancer to exposure to the chemical is reasonable to the extent that the 
scientists contrived a situation where rival explanations of the difference 
between the exposed mice and the control group have been blocked. The 
projection to other mammals is reasonable to the extent that the grounds 
for taking the mice to be model organisms are sound.  Because the experi -
ment takes place against a cluster of fallible background assumptions, it 
does not afford conclusive evidence. But  because of its rigorous controls, it 
affords stronger and more direct evidence than a mere correlation between 
exposure and cancer in a wild population would.
Designing an experiment is setting a stage where events can play out. 
Conducting an experiment involves initiating and perhaps intervening in a 
course of events. Experiments are dynamic (Nersessian, 2007). They unfold 
as they do in part  because of the scientist’s actions. She instigates and per-
haps interrupts, deflects, impedes, or amplifies a natu ral sequence. She may 
isolate phenomena from their normal concomitants and introduce unusual 
provocations. The mice in the experiment are exposed to massive doses 
of bisphenol- A. This allows the scientist to obtain a pronounced effect in 
a relatively short time. Her working assumption is that a small mammal’s 
exposure to a large dose over a short period is equivalent to a large mammal’s 
exposure to a lower dose over a longer period. If that assumption is true 
enough, she can safely extrapolate from the laboratory situation to mammals 
in general, including  humans.
Experiments often involve creating and using items that are nowhere to 
be found in nature (Cartwright, 1983; Hacking, 1982). Genet ically identi -
cal mice are artifacts; their ge ne tic makeup is designed to suit the sorts of 
experiments in which they  will be used. Pure forms of chemicals are arti -
facts as well, being synthesized  under carefully controlled conditions to 
avoid contamination. This can be crucial.
The Miller— Urey experiment begins with chemicals believed to be pres-
ent on Earth in prebiotic times. The experiment consists of a sequence of 
chemical reactions whose ultimate output consists of new organic chemicals 
and amino acids. It thus shows how life could have emerged from nonliving 
 matter (Ball, 2005). For the experiment to work, the chemicals— methane,

--- Page 239 ---

226  Chapter 11
ammonia, hydrogen, and  water— had to be pure. Any hint of contamina -
tion would discredit the result. Moreover, to ensure that no organic mate -
rial was accidentally introduced during the course of the experiment, the 
chemical pro cesses had to be completely isolated from the environment. 
Although— indeed  because— the experimental components and conditions 
 were unnatural, the experiment revealed something impor tant about the 
natu ral world. It did so not by saying that something is the case, but by 
showing it to be the case. It exemplified a path from four initial chemicals 
to amino acids.
The sequence of chemical reactions that took place in the Miller— Urey 
experiment may have been instantiated not only at the dawn of life, but 
innumerable times since. According to Goodman, any of  those instantia -
tions could exemplify the emergence of organic compounds from the four 
original chemicals. Just ignore all the other chemicals in the neighbor -
hood; ignore the prevalence of oxygen and nitrogen in the atmosphere; 
concentrate on the reactions due entirely to hydrogen, methane, ammonia, 
 water, and electricity. But such a natu ral instantiation of the sequence of reac-
tions would be untrustworthy. The possibility of contamination would inevi-
tably loom large. What distinguishes the experiment from other instances of 
the sequence is that it constitutes a context where it is manifest that noth-
ing but the four chemicals and a bit of electricity was necessary to initiate 
the pro cess. The experiment thus affords not just an instance, but a telling 
instance. By exemplifying that  those chemicals and electricity suffice to 
generate new organic compounds, the experiment affords genuine insight 
into an aspect of nature.
An experiment unfolds over time. It has a narrative structure (Nerses -
sian, 1993), with a well- defined beginning,  middle, and end. Like a Greek 
tragedy, the experiment begins in medias res . The scientist conducts his 
investigation against a background of established findings and shared 
assumptions that frame the events and circumscribe their interpreta -
tion. The Miller— Urey experiment takes place against a cluster of back -
ground assumptions about chemical reactions. Its narrative arc starts with 
the enclosure of the pure chemicals in a carefully crafted, tightly sealed 
apparatus; it develops through the heating of the  water and the emission 
of an occasional spark that mimics the effect of lightning; and it climaxes 
when the reactions are complete. The denouement consists in extracting

--- Page 240 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 227
the resulting solution and subjecting it to chromatography to determine its 
chemical composition.
Experimental results do not speak for themselves. They require inter -
pretation. Their interpretation draws on background assumptions, beliefs 
about instrumentation, experimental design, the course of events that 
constitute the experiment, and the outcome. A change in any one of  these 
 factors can prompt revisions in  others. Against the background of the the-
ory of relativity, we interpret the Michelson— Morley experiment as afford-
ing evidence of the nonexistence of luminiferous ether; prior to the advent 
of the theory of relativity, it afforded evidence that the ether might not 
exist; long  after most physicists accepted the theory of relativity, Morley 
took the experiment to demonstrate that his interferometer was not sensi-
tive enough to mea sure ether drift, which he still believed was  there to be 
mea sured.
 These features of experiments are well known. I mention them to high-
light how distant many scientific experiments and their results are from 
the natu ral phenomena they illuminate. The items experimented upon are 
often artifacts constructed expressly for experimentation (see Cartwright, 
1983). The circumstances in which they are placed are artificial; they are 
carefully contrived situations, often ones that do not naturally occur but 
that are designed expressly to exemplify telling features of the phenomena. 
For an experiment to disclose something about a range of phenomena, it 
must exemplify features it shares with  those phenomena. But it may, and in 
some cases must, diverge from the phenomena in other impor tant re spects.
‘Natu ral experiments’ take advantage of natu ral, or anyway unarranged, 
distributions that mimic the laboratory scientist’s random assignments to 
treatment and control groups. The subjects are populations that are suitably 
alike except for exposure to the  factor  under investigation. John Snow’s 
study of the London cholera epidemic can be seen as a natu ral experiment 
in that, as far as anyone can tell, but for their source of  water, the  people 
who used the Broad Street pump  were suitably similar to the denizens of 
the work house, who used a dif fer ent pump, and the workers in the brewery, 
who did not drink  water.  Those two groups served as controls, enabling 
Snow to identify the pump as the source of the epidemic and contaminated 
 water as the cause of cholera. Natu ral experiments are welcome where it 
is immoral or unfeasible to conduct controlled experiments. But they are

--- Page 241 ---

228  Chapter 11
less trustworthy than laboratory experiments, for they rest on the optimis-
tic conviction that the natu ral arrangement controls for all the plausible 
sources of variation between the two subpopulations.
For scientific results to be acceptable, they must be replicable. Clearly not 
 every aspect of the original experiment must be reproduced. That would be 
impossible. Never again can an experiment instantiate being the first time a 
par tic u lar phenomenon was observed. Failing to replicate that feature is no 
flaw. Other features could be replicated, but  there would be no epistemic 
value in  doing so. Although the original experiment was conducted by a 
left- handed, squash- playing postdoc, it would be ludicrous to insist that 
only a left- handed, squash- playing postdoc could replicate it. Evidently, 
some features of an experiment are irrelevant and need not be replicated. 
But features that are irrelevant to one experiment may be relevant to another. 
Ordinarily, for example, the altitude at which an experiment is conducted 
is irrelevant. So many experiments originally performed in Mexico City can 
be replicated in New Orleans. But where altitude  matters, an experiment 
performed in New Orleans would not qualify as a replication of one done 
in Mexico City.
Replication requires that subsequent experiments match the first in 
 every re spect that is pertinent to the hypothesis being tested. The second 
experiment must exemplify the same features as the original when both 
are interpreted as tests of the same hypotheses. This allows for considerable 
variation in the other features the vari ous experiments instantiate. Indeed, 
such variation is desirable. If subsequent experiments instantiate the same 
unexemplified features as well as the same exemplified ones, their agree -
ment might be misleading.  Factors currently deemed irrelevant might in 
fact account for their common result. Instead of seeking to reproduce the 
original experiment as closely as pos si ble, it is methodologically prefer -
able to perform a variety of experiments that reproduce the features that 
the original exemplifies but differ from the original and from one another 
in  those that are not exemplified (Elgin, 1988, 89).
Experiments are conducted; they do not just happen. They have a nar -
rative structure. They are subject to interpretation and to reinterpretation 
if background assumptions change. They are repeatable. In short, they are 
close kin to dramatic enactments. This is not quite to say that experiments 
are works of fiction; but it is to suggest that the gulf between what we

--- Page 242 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 229
consider fact and what we consider fiction may be narrower than is typi -
cally supposed (see Cartwright 1983).
Nevertheless, one might think,  there is a crucial difference. Unlike the 
‘events’ in a novel or thought experiment, the events constituting an exper-
iment actually occur. They are pro cesses that real  things  really undergo. 
The real mice exposed to bisphenol- A  really exhibited an elevated rate of 
liver cancer. The Miller– Urey experiment produced real amino acids from 
real chemicals. The worry is that, unlike a standard experiment, a mere 
simulation—be it a computer simulation, a thought experiment, or a work of 
literary fiction— might omit something significant. In that case, what occurs 
in the simulation is not representative of what occurs in real ity. But the same 
holds when scientists move from the field to the lab. The controls introduced 
in the lab might inadvertently omit something significant. If so, the result 
does not directly proj ect onto the phenomena it concerns. The trustworthi-
ness of a laboratory experiment, a natu ral experiment, or a thought experi-
ment depends on the adequacy of the background assumptions that frame it 
and the scrupulousness with which the experiment is designed and executed.
Thought Experiments
In laboratory experiments, scientists simplify, streamline, manipulate, and 
omit, so that the effects of potentially confounding  factors are minimized, 
marginalized, or canceled out. An experiment deliberately departs from 
nature in order to advance an understanding of nature. Rather than invali-
dating the experiment, this departure is what enables it to disclose barely 
detectable or standardly overshadowed aspects of nature. Thought experi -
ments involve further distancing. They are not  actual, and often not even 
pos si ble, experiments. They are imaginative exercises designed to disclose 
what would happen if certain, perhaps unrealizable, conditions  were met.
Their reliance on imagination may give hard- nosed epistemologists 
pause. The imagination is,  after all,  free to entertain any ideas it likes. It 
is not bound to re spect conceptual connections, evidence, laws of nature, 
or the dictates of common sense. Familiar scientific thought experiments 
violate all of  these. But as Kant (1981) emphasizes, freedom is not lawless-
ness. Freedom consists in being bound by laws we set for ourselves— laws 
we reflectively endorse as reasonable and rational. As the locus of the  free

--- Page 243 ---

230  Chapter 11
play of ideas, the imagination is not a realm in which ideas are utterly uncon-
strained, bouncing off one another like gas molecules in random motion. It is 
a realm in which the play of ideas is bound by constraints the imaginer sets. 
Although the constraints are self- imposed and vary from one imaginative 
setting to the next, they are real. The power of thought experiments to illu-
minate the facts lies in no small mea sure in the flexible, variable, but none-
theless binding character of the constraints that the imagination imposes 
on them. By setting such constraints and drawing out their consequences, 
the imagination serves as a laboratory of the mind, a venue in which 
hypotheses can be contrived, elaborated, and tested. Moreover, in scientific 
thought experiments, the constraints, even if tacit, are recognized, shared, 
and reflectively endorsed by a scientific community. Even so, how can a 
thought experiment claim to yield any insight into the facts? Why  isn’t it 
simply an exercise in fantasy?
Unlike fantasies, thought experiments are not essentially private; nor 
are they particularly  mental. Although they are imaginative exercises, they 
are publicly articulated, discussed, illustrated and disputed. They consist 
of verbal or pictorial repre sen ta tions. Their claim to be imaginative stems 
from the fact that, like works of fiction, they are typically not, and in any 
case need not be, repre sen ta tions of anything real. But the unreality of the 
objects that ostensibly figure in them does not undermine their function.
In designing a laboratory experiment, a scientist may begin by perform-
ing something like a thought experiment. She runs through the expected 
course of events in her head and perhaps describes it to her research team 
before attempting to implement it in the lab. This suggests that the differ -
ence between real experiments and thought experiments lies in the fact 
that thought experiments sharply truncate the experimental pro cess. They 
omit the implementation step. But scientists  can’t do this whenever they 
please. The question is when is stopping short legitimate?
Sometimes an  actual experiment of the sort envisioned cannot be carried 
out. It is impossible or impracticable. As we saw, Einstein demonstrated the 
equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass via a thought experiment 
that could not be carried out. It would require sending an unconscious 
subject in a windowless enclosure into a region of deep space distant from 
any significant source of gravity, rousing him, and querying him about his 
experiences. This is morally, practically, and physically unfeasible. Still, the 
recognition that we cannot do a real experiment does not by itself legitimate

--- Page 244 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 231
the results of stopping short. Sometimes, the infeasibility of an experiment 
translates into the infeasibility of finding out a par tic u lar fact. The reason 
Einstein’s thought experiment is effective is that it takes the form of a chal-
lenge: Suppose the specified conditions  were met. How could a subject tell 
 whether he  was in one situation or the other? If our best efforts to identify 
a way to tell the difference fail, and fail for scientifically principled reasons, 
we have evidence of the equivalence. Our failure indicates that, if our theo-
ries are close to correct,  there is no difference to detect.
Sometimes the imaginative rehearsal reveals that an  actual experiment 
need not be carried out. The  mental run- through itself discloses the relevant 
information. Without physical implementation, Galileo’s thought experi-
ment discredits the Aristotelian contention that the rate at which bodies fall 
is proportional to their weight. According to Aristotle, a boulder should fall 
more quickly than a pebble, assuming they are composed of the same mate-
rial. What, Galileo won ders, are the implications for a composite object? 
He imagines an object consisting of a boulder tethered to a pebble. Being 
composed of two rocks and some rope, the composite object is heavier 
than  either rock alone. If Aristotle is right, it should fall more quickly than 
the boulder. But since, according to Aristotle, the pebble falls more slowly 
than the boulder, once the two are roped together, the pebble should retard 
the boulder’s fall. It should serve as a brake. Hence the rate at which the 
composite object falls should be between that of the boulder and that of 
the pebble. The composite object cannot fall both more quickly and more 
slowly than the boulder, so the Aristotelian commitments are inconsistent. 
By exemplifying the inconsistency, Galileo’s thought experiment demon -
strates that the Aristotelian account cannot be correct.
One might argue that Galileo’s thought experiment discredits my analy-
sis.1 Exemplification, I said, requires instantiation. Real chemical reactions 
occur in the Miller– Urey experiment. So it is plausible that by exem -
plifying  those reactions, the experiment affords epistemic access to them, 
enabling us to recognize them and appreciate their significance, not only 
in the experimental setting but also outside of it. In a mere thought experi-
ment, however, no physical changes actually occur. A thought experiment, 
not being material, cannot exemplify material properties. This is so. The 
sequence of ideas that constitutes Galileo’s thought experiment does not 
instantiate material properties of falling bodies.  There is, for example, no 
danger of being hit on the head by the falling rocks. But the rate at which

--- Page 245 ---

232  Chapter 11
bodies fall and the in de pen dence of that rate from the weight of  those bodies 
are abstract, mathematical properties. They can be instantiated by mate -
rial and immaterial sequences alike.  There is then no bar to saying that 
via exemplification thought experiments afford epistemic access to abstract 
properties that are in some cases instantiated in material objects. A thought 
experiment is a representation— a re- presentation—of abstract features, an 
imaginative re- embodiment of them. We are to imagine— that is mentally, 
verbally or pictorially pres ent— a situation where the abstract features are 
realized. In effect, we are to investigate what would happen in a virtual real-
ity where certain constraints are supposed to hold.2
Phi los o phers sometimes think that we resort to thought experiments 
only when, for one reason or another, a real experiment cannot be car -
ried out. Perhaps Galileo could not have conducted a real experiment to 
conclusively demonstrate his point. Maybe he did not have sufficiently 
accurate timers or a high enough tower from which to run the test. Maybe 
he did not have the resources to eliminate the effects of air re sis tance, and 
so on. Now, however, we could conduct the experiment.  Shouldn’t we? 
Prob ably not. Rather than concluding that the thought experiment was 
a second- best strategy resorted to  because of circumstances beyond the 
scientist’s control, we should recognize that a real experiment would not 
have made Galileo’s case any more forcefully than his thought experiment 
did. It would simply have muddied the  waters. Once we start dropping 
objects from towers, we face the prob lem that cancer- ridden wild mice pose 
for biologists and the emergence of amino acids in nonisolated situations 
pose for chemists. How do we know that unrecognized confounding  factors 
do not explain our finding? By deploying an austere thought experiment 
where the distance and duration of the fall, the presence or absence of air 
re sis tance, and a host of other pos si ble sources of interference are simply 
omitted, Galileo blocks such challenges. The thought experiment demon -
strates an inconsistency in the Aristotelian position—an inconsistency that 
would obtain regardless of the conditions  under which the experiment 
was conducted. Just as a laboratory experiment is preferable to a ‘natu ral 
experiment’, the thought experiment is preferable to an  actual experiment, 
 because it is invulnerable to a host of potentially misleading challenges that 
an  actual experiment would face.
Even in the empirical sciences, not  every question can or need be 
answered by direct appeal to observational evidence. Thought experiments

--- Page 246 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 233
are often appropriate where observation is not apt. This leads some to con-
clude that thought experiments are effective only where the issues con -
cern conceptual or theoretical commitments. If so, thought experiments 
disclose something about our concepts and our theories, not something 
about the world. Since we can tease out commitments in the armchair, 
it is no surprise that mere thought experiments are effective for revealing 
them. But to conclude that thought experiments do not reveal anything 
about the way the world is would be too hasty. Galileo’s thought experi -
ment did not just exemplify an inconsistency in Aristotle’s theory. It also 
showed that any theory that took the rate at which bodies fall to depend 
on their weight would be inconsistent. From this it follows that the rate at 
which bodies fall is in de pen dent of their weight. The thought experiment 
thus exemplifies a feature of real ity, not just of theoretical or conceptual 
commitments. That feature is, or is a consequence of, a modal fact. The rate 
at which objects fall is in de pen dent of their weight  because they could not 
fall any other way. Thought experiments, it seems, afford epistemic access 
at least to theoretical, conceptual, and modal  matters.
A thought experiment fixes certain par ameters (e.g., about the relevant 
laws of nature and the supposed initial conditions), provides a description of 
the experimental situation that sets out all and only the features considered 
relevant, and works out the consequences. Galileo’s two rocks are assumed 
to be made of the same material and to be the same shape, thereby obviat-
ing the effects of material constitution and shape on the outcome. They 
are assumed to be falling through the same medium. Weight is assumed 
to be additive, and a tethered material object is assumed to be subject to the 
same laws of nature as untethered ones (Gendler, 2010). In effect, the thought 
experiment invites us to consider what would happen if certain conditions, 
some expressly specified and some tacitly assumed, obtain.
Like literary fictions and ordinary experiments, thought experiments 
have a narrative structure. We perform thought experiments by imagining a 
scenario in which something happens— a sequence of events with a begin-
ning,  middle, and end. Thought experiments can be construed as tightly 
constrained, highly focused, minimalist fictions, like some of the works of 
Borges. If Borges’s minimalist stories are genuine fictions,  there seems no 
reason to deny that thought experiments are too.
To understand a thought experiment requires a suspension of disbelief. 
We grant its (tacit and explicit) assumptions even though we know that

--- Page 247 ---

234  Chapter 11
they do not— and in some cases cannot— obtain. Maxwell’s demon provides 
a telling instance. According to the second law of thermodynamics, when 
ensembles of gases at dif fer ent temperatures are brought into contact with 
one another and isolated from the wider environment, they  will evolve to 
thermodynamic equilibrium. That is, the resulting ensemble  will reach a 
stable, uniform temperature between the two original temperatures. Max -
well’s question is  whether this law is inviolable. To answer it, he mounts 
this thought experiment. Consider a vessel of air at uniform temperature. 
Its individual air molecules move at dif fer ent velocities, even though the 
mean velocity of any sufficiently large arbitrary collection of  those mol -
ecules is almost exactly uniform. Divide the vessel into two sections, A and 
B. Now imagine a demon capable of seeing and tracking individual mol -
ecules. He monitors a door between A and B, allowing only fast molecules 
to move from A to B and only slow molecules to move from B to A. Eventu-
ally most of the fast molecules  will be in B and most of the slow ones  will 
be in A. Simply by controlling access across the divide, the demon  will raise 
the temperature of B and lower the temperature of A, thereby violating the 
second law of thermodynamics. Although we know full well that no one 
is, or arguably could be, endowed with the abilities ascribed to Maxwell’s 
demon, we bracket that knowledge and see  whether such a being could 
defy entropy. Considerable ingenuity may be required to figure out which 
beliefs should be suspended and which ones should be retained. This is why 
scientific thought experiments are embedded in theoretical discussions that 
fix their par ameters. And it is why their implications are subject to dispute. 
Still, we are inclined to agree with Maxwell that the demon thought experi-
ment shows that the second law of thermodynamics is in princi ple violable. 
It is a merely statistical law.
Like literary works and ordinary experiments, thought experiments 
require interpretation. Sometimes interpretations diverge. The Einstein– 
Podolsky– Rosen experiment is a case in point. Very roughly, the scenario is 
this: Two particles interact, then fly off in opposite directions. Once they are 
separated, the mea sure ment of one should have no effect on the state of the 
other. But if we mea sure, say, the position of one and apply the Schrödinger 
equation, we can determine that the other also has a definite position. This 
seems to violate the uncertainty princi ple: being unexamined, the second 
particle should have no definite position. What does the thought experiment

--- Page 248 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 235
show? The answer is not at all clear. Apparently, even the authors disagreed. 
Podolsky thought it demonstrated that quantum mechanics is incomplete, 
while Einstein thought it showed  either that quantum mechanics is incom-
plete or that states of spatially separated objects are not in de pen dent of 
each other (Bokulich, 2001).
To recap: a thought experiment is an imaginative exercise designed to 
investigate what would happen if certain conditions  were satisfied. Con -
ducting it requires a suspension of belief, in that the conditions  imagined 
are not realized in fact, and may be inconsistent with conditions we know 
to obtain in fact. It requires a suspension of disbelief, in that it asks us to 
entertain scenarios that we know do not and often could not obtain. It 
depends on background assumptions about what commitments are to be 
retained, what commitments are to be relaxed, and what commitments are 
to be abandoned in entertaining the imaginative scenario.  Whether the 
constraints are tacit or explicit, in conducting the thought experiment the 
epistemic agent is bound by them. A thought experiment has a narrative 
structure, with a beginning,  middle, and end. It is subject to interpretation, 
and to reinterpretation if the background assumptions change. Schröding-
er’s cat, originally introduced to criticize the Copenhagen interpretation, 
now appears in  every interpretation of quantum mechanics, each offer -
ing its own account of the poor beast’s state. Fi nally, we saw that thought 
experiments are valuable in investigating what is not open to direct 
empirical inspection— conceptual or theoretical commitments and their 
consequences, as well as modal properties, and, I would add, relations of 
cotenability on noncotenability.
Fictions
The thought experiments I have mentioned so far have been drawn from 
the physical sciences. But thought experiments are ubiquitous in philoso -
phy as well. Like scientific thought experiments,  those in philosophy illu-
minate  factors that are not readily accessible to direct inspection.  Because 
of a difference in subject  matter, the range of  factors illuminated by philo-
sophical thought experiments is broader. Familiar philosophical thought 
experiments afford insights into normative properties (trolley prob lems, 
the experience machine), introspectively available properties (Mary, brains

--- Page 249 ---

236  Chapter 11
in a vat), and metaphysical properties (fission and fusion in personal iden-
tity, the ship of Theseus). No more than conceptual, theoretical, and modal 
properties, are  these open to direct empirical inspection.
Like scientific thought experiments, many philosophical thought exper-
iments are fairly austere. But philosophical thought experiments often are 
not so tightly bound by theoretical constraints as scientific thought experi-
ments tend to be. Thus  there is more controversy over what we should 
conclude from them. (Confession: I have no idea what the Chinese Room 
shows.) Many are relatively autonomous. We can fruitfully entertain them 
against the background of multiple sets of philosophical assumptions— 
indeed without even being aware that we are making philosophical assump-
tions. The trolley prob lem was introduced to disclose a consequence of the 
doctrine of double effect. It now has a life of its own (and seemingly innu-
merable  children and grandchildren).
If an austere thought experiment can afford epistemic access to a range 
of properties, and can do so in a context that is not tightly beholden to a 
par tic u lar theory,  there seems to be no reason to deny that a more extensive 
thought experiment can do the same. Indeed, philosophy provides exam -
ples. Plato’s Republic and Rousseau’s Emile are cases in point. This opens the 
way to construing works of literary fiction as extended, elaborate thought 
experiments. They afford epistemic access to aspects of the world that are 
normally inaccessible—in par tic u lar, to the normative, psychological, and 
metaphysical aspects that philosophical thought experiments concern.
Again one might worry about the capacity of exemplification to account 
for this. A work of fiction, not being alive, cannot instantiate psychological 
or moral properties. If it cannot instantiate them, it cannot exemplify them. 
But it can instantiate and exemplify abstract properties that are concret -
ized in  human agents. Suppose Meg instantiates a pattern of psychological 
features— a network of beliefs, desires, aversions, and preferences, for exam-
ple. Although the specific ele ments of her network are psychological, the 
pattern is abstract. In princi ple, it can be instantiated by something other 
than psychological ele ments. A fiction writer might create a scenario where 
that pattern is instantiated and exemplified via a sequence of descriptions. 
In effect, she takes a pattern that is embodied in fact, abstracts it, and re- 
embodies it in fiction. (Or, more likely, she abstracts individual ele ments 
instantiated in fact, finds or devises an appropriate pattern, and embodies 
that pattern in fiction.) Strictly, in the fictional setting it is not a pattern of

--- Page 250 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 237
psychological features. But it is a pattern that is, or that may be, instanti -
ated by psychological features. So it affords epistemic access to a pattern 
that we may find ourselves or our fellows instantiating.
Like an experiment, a work of fiction selects and isolates, manipulating 
circumstances so that par tic u lar properties, patterns, and connections, as 
well as disparities and irregularities, are brought to the fore. It may local -
ize and isolate  factors that underlie or are interwoven into everyday life or 
natu ral events, but that are apt to pass unnoticed  because other  factors typi-
cally overshadow them. This is why Jane Austen maintained that “three or 
four families in a country village is the very  thing to work on” (1814). The 
relations among the three or four families are sufficiently complicated and 
the demands of village life sufficiently mundane that the story can exem -
plify something worth noting about ordinary life and the development of 
moral character. By restricting her attention to three or four families, Aus -
ten in effect devises a tightly controlled thought experiment. Drastically 
limiting the  factors that affect her protagonists enables her to elaborate the 
consequences of the relatively few that remain.
If our interests are cognitive, though, it might seem that this detour 
through fiction is both unnecessary and unwise. Instead of resorting to fic-
tion,  wouldn’t it be cognitively preferable to study three or four real fami-
lies in a real country village? Prob ably not, if we want to glean the insights 
that Austen’s novels afford. Even three or four families in a relatively iso -
lated country village are affected by far too many  factors for the social 
and moral trajectories that Austen’s novels exemplify to be salient in their 
interactions. Too many forces impinge on them and too many descrip -
tions are available for characterizing their interactions. Any such so cio-
log i cal study would be vulnerable to the charge that unexamined  factors 
played a nonnegligible role in the interactions studied, that other forces 
 were significant. Austen evades that worry. She omits such  factors from her 
account and in effect asks: suppose we leave them out, then what would 
we see? Similarly, the model pendulum omits friction and air re sis tance, 
allowing the scientist in effect to ask: suppose we leave them out, then what 
would we see?
The question is how what we see in the fiction is supposed to inform our 
understanding of real ity. That Elizabeth Bennet and Mr. Darcy, who do not 
exist, are said to behave thus and so does not demonstrate anything about 
how real  people  really behave. That an idealized pendulum, which also

--- Page 251 ---

238  Chapter 11
does not exist, is said to behave thus and so does not demonstrate anything 
about how  actual pendulums behave.
Recall the paint com pany’s sample cards discussed earlier. Most  people 
speak of them, and prob ably think of them, as samples of paint— the sort 
of stuff you use to paint the porch. They are not. The cards are infused 
with inks or dyes that are the same color as the paints whose colors they 
exemplify. It is a fiction that they are samples of paint. But since the sole 
function of such a card is to convey the paint’s color, the fiction is no lie. 
All that is needed is something that is the same color as the paint. A fiction 
thus conveys the property we are interested in  because, in the re spect that 
 matters, it is no dif fer ent from an  actual instance. The exemplars on the 
paint cards need not themselves be paint. Similarly in literary or scientific 
cases. If the sole epistemic objective is to exemplify par tic u lar properties, 
then in a suitable context, any symbol that exemplifies  those properties 
 will do. If a fiction exemplifies the properties more clearly, simply, or effec-
tively than a strictly factual repre sen ta tion, it is to be preferred to the factual 
repre sen ta tion.
In Nicomachean Ethics , Aristotle (1985) suggests that we should call no 
man happy  until he is dead. Initially this seems implausible. As is well 
known, part of the prob lem is that what Aristotle means by ‘happy’ is not 
what we mean. ‘Flourishing’ would be a better term. But ‘call no man flour-
ishing  until he is dead’, even if not quite so implausible, still seems a bit 
extreme. Surely, one wants to object, we can easily discern that some of our 
fellows are currently flourishing. Aristotle defends his idea by contending 
that severe enough reversals of fortune late in life would justify the conclu-
sion that a man’s life had not been a happy (or flourishing) one. Maybe so. 
But even if someone suffered serious misfortunes late in life, it is tempting 
to object, ‘Well he was happy (or flourishing) up  until then’. Aristotle’s own 
example of Priam, the el derly king of Troy, invites this response.  Until the 
Trojan War, Priam prospered. His life ended in misfortune; but throughout 
most of it, he apparently flourished. This is the objection students typically 
raise, and if one just reads Aristotle, it does not seem unreasonable.
Oedipus Rex can be read as a thought experiment that vindicates Aristo -
tle’s claim. For most of his life, Oedipus, like Priam, seemed blessed with the 
gifts of fortune; and as far as anyone could tell, he lived a life of Aristotelian 
virtue. Evidently, he flourished and deserved to flourish. When Thebes suf-
fered a plague, which the oracle blamed on him, Oedipus discovered that

--- Page 252 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 239
he had unwittingly killed his  father and married his  mother. This discovery 
did not just doom his  future happiness, as the sack of Troy doomed Priam’s. 
It discredited his past happiness. He had, through no fault of his own, been 
living a lie. We might exonerate him for the wrongs he had done, since he 
acted out of nonculpable ignorance. But even if he was blameless, his rela-
tions to himself, to his wife/mother, to his children/siblings, to the citizens 
of Thebes who suffered for his iniquities, and to his own past,  were for -
ever changed, and would henceforth be tinged with revulsion. It turns out 
that he had not been flourishing during the early years, even though he and 
every one  else thought that he was.
Oedipus Rex is a work of fiction that advances our understanding not 
only of Aristotle’s ethics, but also of the  human predicament. It under -
scores the limits on  human knowledge and the vulnerabilities that stem 
from  those limits; the value of knowing oneself and one’s situation, and the 
limits on the  human capacity to do so. It does not constitute a proof that 
Aristotle is right, but it poses a challenge: you should be wary of calling a 
man flourishing during his lifetime  unless you are sure his situation is not 
like Oedipus’s. It is hard to see how the challenge can be met.
Kant (1981) maintains that not only is it impossible to know  whether 
someone  else has acted morally, it is impossible to know  whether you 
yourself have done so. For any action that accords with the categorical 
imperative,  there is always an available self- interested maxim that might 
have been the real motive. So it is impossible to glean unequivocal empiri-
cal evidence for moral action. But even if we can never discern that some -
one has behaved morally (that is, acted on account of re spect for the moral 
law), an author can effectively stipulate it. In A Tale of Two Cities  Dick-
ens portrays Sidney Carton’s self- sacrifice as stemming from purely moral 
motives. An author can portray a situation, develop a character, and convey 
his thoughts, feelings, and reasons for acting, thereby blocking the explana-
tion from self- interest. He can, that is, exemplify a pattern and demonstrate 
that  were that pattern to be instantiated, it would be an instance of acting 
morally.
If Kant is right about the impossibility of finding unequivocal instances 
of acting morally, how do we learn what a moral action is? Even if the 
categorical imperative is a deliverance of reason, we need to know how to 
apply it. Non- Kantians face a similar prob lem. Every one recognizes that 
it is difficult in practice to distinguish acting morally from acting out of

--- Page 253 ---

240  Chapter 11
self- interest. If I am right, fiction can play a major role in moral education. 
By exemplifying genuinely moral patterns of deliberation and action, it can 
teach us something that is at least hard, and might be impossible, to reli -
ably discern in real- life interactions.
 People have inner lives replete with motivations, perceptions, emotions, 
and thoughts.  Because a variety of combinations of psychological ele ments 
might yield the same outward be hav ior, it is impossible to uniquely deter-
mine the under lying psychological states from observations of overt be hav-
ior alone. Moreover,  people often misunderstand themselves, and often 
have reason to mask what they think and feel. So even if we ask them and 
they tell us, we  ought not be confident that we know how  things are with 
them. This raises the question: how do we learn (indeed, what even leads 
us to suspect) that other  people have inner lives that are quite unlike ours? 
Their feelings may not only be unlike what we actually feel about  things, 
but may also be unlike what we would feel if we  were in their place. It is 
one  thing to be able to imagine oneself having had someone  else’s experi-
ences. That is hard enough. But we can do  things that require yet more 
imaginative dexterity. Even if Jim recognizes that had he been treated as 
Jane was, he would be  bitter, he may also understand why she is willing to 
let bygones be bygones. This is an amazing cognitive achievement. I sug -
gest that fiction plays a major role in equipping us for this kind of feat. In 
reading a work of fiction we take up a point of view and try it on for size. 
In effect, we experiment with the perspective and see how  things look from 
 there. Many works portray the world through a protagonist’s eyes, convey-
ing her experiences, feelings, and thoughts. They disclose the limitations of 
her perspective. Some do more. A work may afford multiple perspectives on 
the same series of events, disclosing the resources and limitations of each. 
In effect, each filters events through a dif fer ent sieve.
Phi los o phers as well as nonphi los o phers have a tendency to take the 
fruits of introspection at face value, or at least to grant them a higher epis-
temic status than outsiders’ opinions about a subject’s state of mind. A work 
like Lolita, written from the perspective of an utterly unreliable narrator, 
affords insight into the limits of introspection. A character’s perspective 
can be so skewed or benighted that he is simply wrong about the central 
events of his life. Such a work can be construed as a thought experiment 
that undermines the conviction that a person’s access to his own motives, 
beliefs, and other attitudes always affords better evidence than the evidence

--- Page 254 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 241
that one’s words and actions afford to  others. Perhaps  there is privileged 
access in the sense that each of us knows herself in a way that she knows no 
one  else. But self- deceptive fictional characters undermine the conviction 
that we always know ourselves better than  others know us.
Cavell maintains that the prob lem of other minds is not, or not only, 
the prob lem of ascertaining  whether an entity has a mind, but the prob-
lem of figuring out what is on someone’s mind. Even if I am confident that 
an individual has beliefs, desires, preferences, and feelings, I am woefully 
underequipped to identify  those fine- grained  mental states. The prob lem 
is not just a prob lem about other minds, though. I may be equally under-
equipped to know what my  mental states are. Do I  really expect I’ll get 
the paper done, or have I managed to deceive myself into taking a hope 
for an expectation? Do I  really want the promotion, or do I just think I 
want it  because I know that it is the sort of  thing that  people in my posi-
tion are supposed to want? As Cavell (1987) reads Shakespeare’s tragedies, 
they afford evidence of the uncertainty of  mental state ascriptions. For the 
same sorts of reasons that Lear cannot recognize Cordelia’s devotion, that 
Othello cannot recognize Iago’s malevolence or Desdemona’s fidelity, that 
Hamlet cannot trust his judgment, we cannot be sure of the  mental states 
that we ascribe.
A work of lit er a ture can also function as something akin to an impossibil-
ity proof— a thought experiment that exemplifies the inadequacy of its own 
grounding assumptions. Davenport (1983) reads Middlemarch as a thought 
experiment about marriage. Both Dorothea Brooke and Dr. Lydgate are in 
deeply unhappy marriages.  Because in the world of the novel divorce is 
unthinkable (and unthought of), they are doomed to serve life sentences 
for their unwise choices of mates. By exemplifying the intractability of 
the prob lem they face, the novel provides reason to think that divorce, or 
something like it, should be an option. Davenport considers Middlemarch 
flawed  because it does not allow for the possibility of divorce. I disagree. I 
consider it a power ful thought experiment that reveals the unacceptable 
consequences of institutional arrangements that do not allow for exit visas.
Metaphysical thought experiments are often science fictional. Some 
are so austere that in their philosophical settings we do not know what to 
think. Literary and cinematic fictions help us out. What should we make 
of Putnam’s brains in a vat? The Matrix supplies an answer. What would 
a computer that passed the Turing test be like? His name is Hal. Could

--- Page 255 ---

242  Chapter 11
beings without inner lives actually be indistinguishable from us? The way 
to  settle such  matters (even tentatively and revisably) is to design a scenario 
in which the consequences of such hypotheses play out. Write a story about 
the love lives of zombies, or about the lives of zombies incapable of love. 
We may find that our off- the- cuff intuitions do not stand up  under elabora-
tion or that the consequences of our assumptions are quite dif fer ent from 
what the austere philosophical thought experiments led us to suppose.
Despite what I have said, the idea that fictions function as thought 
experiments that afford insight into  actual  human experience may seem a 
stretch. I do not think that it is. An example shows why. One of the myster-
ies of the Penn State pedophilia scandal is how Joe Paterno, the longtime 
football coach whom many considered a bastion of integrity, could have 
turned a blind eye to the actions of his assistant, Jerry Sandusky. Sports -
writer Thomas Boswell ventures the following answer:
Every body has weak spots in their character, fault lines where the right earthquake 
at the wrong time can lead to personal catastrophe. Most of us are fortunate that our 
worst experience  doesn’t hit us with its biggest jolt in exactly the areas where our 
flaws or poor judgment or vanity is most dangerously in play. It’s part good luck if 
we  don’t disgrace ourselves. But when it does happen, as appears to be the case with 
Joe Paterno, that’s when we witness personal disasters that seem so painful and, in 
the context of a well- lived life, so unfair that we feel a deep sadness even as we si-
mul ta neously realize that the person at the center of the storm can never avoid full 
accountability. . . .  Forces collide, conspire, confuse, and an icon of integrity fails to 
act, fails to see. (2011)
If this sounds familiar to  those who do not read the sports pages, it is 
 because the passage is a precis of Oedipus Rex as filtered through Aristotle’s 
Poetics (1973).3 The  great man, beset by hubris, does terrible  things and is 
brought down by his tragic flaw. One can quarrel with Aristotle’s reading 
of Sophocles or with Boswell’s implicit endorsement of that reading. One 
can doubt that Paterno was the man of integrity he was alleged to be. 
One can even think that ignoring rampant pedophilia is vastly worse than 
inadvertent patricide and incest among consenting adults. Still, Oedipus Rex 
provides a template for understanding Paterno. Having seen the pattern in 
fiction, we are in a position to entertain the possibility that it affords an 
understanding of what happened in fact.
One objection to the thesis that fictions function epistemically is that 
they provide no evidence about the way the world is (Carroll, 2002).4 Davies 
(2010) contends that my account is vulnerable to this objection.  Whether

--- Page 256 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 243
he is correct depends on what it is to provide evidence. According to David 
Lewis,
We who have lived in the world for a while have plenty of evidence, but we may not 
have learned as much from it as we could have done. This evidence bears on a certain 
proposition. If only that proposition is formulated, straightway it  will be apparent 
that we have very good evidence for it. . . .  If we are given a fiction such that the 
proposition is obviously true in it, we are led to ask: and is it also true  simpliciter? 
And sometimes, when we have plenty of unappreciated evidence, to ask the ques -
tion is to know the answer. (1983, 279)
Like Lewis and Davies, I maintain that fictions equip us to recognize and 
marshal information we already have. This enables us to treat that informa-
tion as evidence.  Whether this amounts to providing evidence or merely to 
providing access to evidence we already have makes no difference.  Either 
way, they advance understanding of the  actual world.
Fictions also exemplify abstract features and patterns, affording direct 
evidence of them, and indirect evidence that their real- world instantiation 
is pos si ble (Elgin, 1996). Davies maintains that this feature makes fiction 
a source of hypotheses, rather than evidence of a truth. Perhaps so. But 
fictions do not just generate hypotheses. By exemplifying features and pat-
terns that, if instantiated, are significant, they also provide reasons to think 
that the hypotheses are worth taking seriously. Some scientific simulations 
do the same. I see no reason to exclude symbols that play this role from 
the epistemic realm. If a work of fiction can afford reason to suspect that 
a pattern obtains in fact, or that discovering  whether it obtains would be 
epistemically worthwhile, the fiction functions epistemically,  whether or 
not we cash out ‘reason to believe’ in terms of evidence. A fiction can then 
render a hypothesis initially tenable.
Not  every falsehood is felicitous. So the fact that we can write a fiction 
that exemplifies a pattern does not ensure that the pattern can be pro -
jected onto the world. “The Elephant’s Child” is a fictional tale purporting 
to explain how the elephant got its trunk (Kipling, 1978). Once, the story 
goes, elephants had ordinary noses. But an insatiably curious elephant’s 
child wanted to know what crocodiles eat for breakfast. He bent down to 
ask a crocodile. The crocodile, smacking his lips and thinking that young 
elephant would be a delicious answer to that very question, bit the youth-
ful elephant’s nose and tugged on it. As the elephant (with the help of a 
friendly python) pulled back, its nose elongated  until it took the shape of

--- Page 257 ---

244  Chapter 11
a trunk. That basically is the story. What is wrong with it? As a  children’s 
story, perhaps nothing. But  there is surely something wrong with it as a 
contribution to the understanding (even a child’s understanding) of biol -
ogy. Since I contend that science can incorporate fictions and falsehoods, I 
am in no position to say, as  others would, that what is wrong with the story 
is that it is false. So is the ideal gas law and the thought experiment about 
Maxwell’s demon. The difference is that while the ideal gas law and Max -
well’s demon afford some understanding of the be hav ior of  actual gases, 
Kipling’s story affords no understanding of the phylogenesis of elephant 
trunks. If the story, with its tacit commitment to the heritability of acquired 
traits,  were true, it might yield some understanding of how the elephant 
got its trunk. But once we acknowledge that both it and its Lamarckian 
presuppositions are false, the story seems to have nothing to do with the 
phylogenesis of elephant trunks. We need to appeal to natu ral se lection 
for an explanation, and that explanation  will be entirely unsympathetic 
to any tugging- on- noses hypothesis. Kipling’s story, I suggest, is neither 
directly nor indirectly suitably tethered to the phylogenic facts it purport -
edly bears on.
Experiments yield evidence, not proof. And evidence is sometimes mis-
leading. The status of an item as a laboratory experiment or thought experi-
ment does not hinge on its being successful in advancing understanding. I 
do not claim that  every work of fiction succeeds. Nor do I claim that  every 
laboratory experiment or thought experiment does. Some are muddled or 
confused. Some overlook real possibilities or fail to control for impor tant 
variables. Some replicate what is already known or widely accepted. Some 
are trivial. Some thought experiments and literary works may even be 
the equivalent of high school science experiments, exemplifying what is 
already understood in an effort to show how such symbols advance under-
standing. Any finding must be tested by its fit with what we already have 
reason to believe. Galileo’s thought experiment revealed an inconsistency 
in Aristotle’s theory. It is, or is very close to, a crucial experiment. We need 
nothing further to show that Aristotle’s theory is false. But most experi -
ments and thought experiments, and most works of lit er a ture, work within 
a context of background assumptions. If the assumptions are incorrect or 
incomplete, an experiment or thought experiment may inherit and rein -
force their inadequacies. If they are (close enough to) correct and complete, 
the experimental result is prima facie informative.

--- Page 258 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 245
Still, we might resist identifying works of fiction with thought experi -
ments. The argument from banality is the contention that the knowledge 
imparted by fictions amounts to  little more than truisms (Carroll, 2002). 5 
The guiding idea seems to be that if fiction has an epistemic function, it is 
to impart truths like the morals of Aesop’s fables.  These truths are inferred 
inductively or deductively from stories. Since such truths are banal, they 
are, for the most part at least, epistemically inert. But the patterns and fea-
tures that works of fiction exemplify are far from truisms.  Because exem -
plars display rather than merely state, they can be exceedingly fine- grained. 
Hitchcock’s North by Northwest exemplifies delicate nuances in the texture 
of fear— a virtual continuum from trepidation to terror.  There is nothing 
banal about learning to recognize subtle differences and proj ect them prop-
erly onto members of the classes the exemplars typify. Nor is it likely that 
we  will be able to capture in a pithy proposition just what such a fiction 
discloses.
Davies worries that I ignore a fundamental difference between literary 
fictions and thought experiments. Thought experiments are part of science; 
so to proj ect their results onto the phenomena they pertain to is to remain 
within the realm of science. But to proj ect insights drawn from fiction 
onto  actual  human relations is to move beyond lit er a ture to an extraliterary 
realm. This, Davies charges, is illicit, for such projection is not “intrinsic to 
the proper engagement of literary works as lit er a ture” (2010, 65). Such polic-
ing of disciplinary bound aries strikes me as ill advised. If, as I have argued, 
works of fiction advance understanding in much the way that thought 
experiments do, it makes no difference  whether that advance counts as 
literary or extraliterary.
That a work is a rich source of insights is not a reason to doubt that it 
advances understanding. But it may be a reason to doubt that the work is 
a thought experiment. Ste reo typical thought experiments tend to be aus-
tere. They symbolize along relatively few dimensions. Although they require 
interpretation, the interpretation of any given thought experiment is sup -
posed to be univocal, at least  until the relevant background assumptions 
change. But univocality is not a virtue in literary or dramatic fictions. That 
Henry V can be interpreted as pro- war and antiwar is not a defect in the 
play. Literary works are semantically dense and replete (Goodman, 1968). A 
work is semantically dense in that the characters, events, perspectives, and 
their alternatives are selected from a dense field of alternatives.  There is no

--- Page 259 ---

246  Chapter 11
limit to the  factors, modes of description, or level of generality it could have 
deployed. Nor are  there general rules, like the rules about statistical signifi-
cance, that readily carry over from one novel to the next. In princi ple,  every 
semantic difference can make a difference to what the work conveys. And 
a feature that makes a difference to the interpretation of one work may be 
irrelevant to the interpretation of another. A work is replete to the extent 
that it symbolizes along multiple dimensions. Syntax, vocabulary, perspec-
tive, tone, and timbre may all function symbolically. Even punctuation can 
 matter. Any number of aspects of a fictional work can in princi ple contrib-
ute to its epistemic functioning. Moreover, works of fiction are apt to bear 
multiple correct interpretations. In several re spects, then, they differ from 
austere, univocal thought experiments. Perhaps this is a reason to deny 
that works of fiction are thought experiments; perhaps it is a reason to say 
that only  under an interpretation is a work of fiction a thought experiment; 
perhaps it is a reason to think that some thought experiments are more 
austere than  others.
I  favor the last alternative. Although ste reo typical thought experiments 
are austere,  there is a continuum of cases from Maxwell’s demon and trol-
ley prob lems through the myth of the cave and Emile to ‘didactic fictions’ 
like Animal Farm and  Uncle Tom’s Cabin, to Middlemarch and Oedipus Rex. I 
doubt that  there is a sharp boundary between thought experiments, strictly 
so called, and works of fiction. But demarcating the boundary is not so 
impor tant.  Whether or not we call works of fiction thought experiments, I 
have urged that fictions, thought experiments, and laboratory experiments 
function in much the same way. By distancing themselves from the facts, 
by resorting to artifices, by bracketing a variety of  things known to be true, 
all three exemplify features they share with the facts. Since  these features 
may be difficult or impossible to discern in our everyday encounters with 
 things, fictions, thought experiments, and laboratory experiments advance 
our understanding of the world and of ourselves.
In chapter 2 I said that despite or even  because of their inaccuracy, felici-
tous falsehoods embody and advance understanding. Pretty clearly, thought 
experiments are felicitous falsehoods if any symbols are. In this chapter I 
have argued that fictions are, or are closely akin to, thought experiments. If 
so, they too can be felicitous falsehoods. I do not contend that  every fiction 
or  every thought experiment is felicitous. Some are banal. They exemplify 
features that are obvious and uncontroversial anyway. Some are muddled.

--- Page 260 ---

Casting in Bold Relief 247
They exemplify nothing more than confusions that went into their design. 
They defy consistent interpretation and thus disclose nothing beyond their 
own incoherence. Some, such as racist works, mislead. They exemplify 
features that readers wrongly take to obtain in fact. Such falsehoods are 
infelicitous.
 Others, however, may be felicitous in some contexts or for some audi -
ences or for some purposes but not for  others. Einstein’s elevator exem -
plifies the equivalence of inertial and gravitational frames of reference. It 
operates in a context where a good deal of physical theory is presupposed. 
It is thus felicitous for  those at home in such a context. It can advance their 
understanding of inertia and gravity. But it is unlikely to do the same for 
novices or  those who consider themselves novices. They have no reason to 
think that their inability to distinguish between being at rest in a gravita -
tional field and moving with uniform acceleration in the absence of a gravi-
tational field is due to anything other than their ignorance.  Uncle Tom’s 
Cabin now strikes readers as exemplifying objectionable ste reo types and 
obvious moral truths. If it is not misleading, it is epistemically inert. When 
it was first published, however, its exemplification of the plights of the 
slaves was, for its intended audience— white Northern readers— revelatory. 
Now it is infelicitous; then it was felicitous. Even “The Elephant’s Child” 
may deserve a closer look. Interpreted as exemplifying something about 
phylogeny, it is infelicitous. Interpreted as a work about the importance of 
having strong friends (remember the python) or about the perils of nosi -
ness, it may be, for young  children, felicitous. The felicity or infelicity of a 
repre sen ta tion turns on its function. This is so  whether the repre sen ta tion 
is a free- standing one, like a work of lit er a ture, or is embedded in a scien-
tific, philosophical, or other systematic account.6

--- Page 262 ---

If  there is a gun on the wall in the first act, it must be fired by the third act.
— Anton Chekhov
Science is rife with models. Some, such as the hydraulic model of San Fran-
cisco Bay, are material.  Others, such as the virial equation, are abstract. Like 
epistemically effective literary fictions and thought experiments, epistemi-
cally effective models are felicitous falsehoods. How, given their manifest 
inaccuracies, can they contribute to the understanding of their targets? A 
model’s mode of reference is complex. Building on a paper of R. I. G. Hughes 
(1996), I argue that a model represents its target as having certain features. 
It does so by exemplifying  those features and imputing them to the target. 
Effective models afford an understanding of their targets  because their 
simplifications, idealizations, elaborations, and distortions make salient 
impor tant features of the targets.
Repre sen ta tion
Science, we are told, is (or at least aspires to be) a mirror of nature, while art 
imitates life. If so, both disciplines produce, or hope to produce, repre sen ta-
tions that reflect the way some part of the mind- independent world is. Sci-
entific repre sen ta tions are supposed to be complete, accurate, precise, and 
distortion- free. Although artistic repre sen ta tions are granted more leeway, 
they too are supposed to resemble their subjects. Under lying  these clichés 
is the widespread conviction that repre sen ta tions are intensional surro -
gates for, or replicas of, their objects. If so, a repre sen ta tion should resemble 
its referent as closely as pos si ble.
12 Chekhov’s Gun

--- Page 263 ---

250  Chapter 12
This ste reo type, I have urged, is false and misleading. It engenders 
unnecessary prob lems in both the philosophy of science and the philoso-
phy of art. It makes a mystery of the effectiveness of sketches, caricatures, 
scientific models, and repre sen ta tions with fictional subjects. Indeed, the 
ste reo type strongly suggests that  there is something intellectually suspect 
about such repre sen ta tions. Caricatures exaggerate and distort. Sketches 
simplify. Models may do all three. Many pictures and models flagrantly fail 
to match their referents. Repre sen ta tions with fictional subjects have no 
hope of matching, since they have no referents to match. The same sub -
ject, real or fictive, can be represented by multiple, seemingly incongruous 
repre sen ta tions.  These would be embarrassing admissions if repre sen ta tions 
 were supposed to accurately reflect the facts.
Mimetic accounts of repre sen ta tion fail to do justice to our repre sen-
ta tional practices. Many seemingly power ful and effective repre sen ta tions 
turn out on a mimetic account to be at best flawed, at worst unintelligible. 
Nor is it clear why we should want to replicate real ity. As Rebecca West 
said, “A copy of the universe is not what is required of art; one of the 
damn  things is ample” (1928, 131). 1 To replicate real ity would simply be 
to reproduce the blooming, buzzing confusion that confronts us. What is 
the value in that? Our goal should be to make sense of  things—to struc -
ture, synthesize, or ga nize, and orient ourselves  toward  things in ways that 
serve our ends.
The prob lem lies in the meta phor of the mirror and the ideal of rep -
lication. Neither art nor science is, can be, or  ought to be, a mirror of 
nature. Epistemically effective repre sen ta tions in both disciplines embody 
and convey an understanding of their subjects. Since understanding is not 
mirroring, failures of mirroring need not be failures of understanding. Once 
we recognize the ways science affords understanding, we see that the fea -
tures that look like flaws  under the mirroring account are actually virtues. 
A first step is to devise an account of scientific repre sen ta tions that shows 
how they figure in or contribute to understanding. It  will turn out that an 
adequate account of scientific repre sen ta tion also affords insight into repre-
sen ta tion in the arts.
The term ‘repre sen ta tion’ is irritatingly imprecise. Pictures represent their 
subjects; graphs represent the data; politicians represent their constituents; 
representative samples represent what ever they are samples of. Thus far I 
have relied on context to fix the reference of dif fer ent tokens of the term.

--- Page 264 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 251
In this chapter further regimentation is called for. We can begin to regiment 
by restricting attention to cases where repre sen ta tion is a  matter of denota-
tion. Pictures, equations, graphs, charts, and maps represent their subjects 
by denoting them. They are repre sen ta tions of the  things they denote.2 It 
is in this sense that scientific models represent their target systems: they 
denote them. But, as Bertrand Russell (1968) insists, not all denoting sym -
bols have denotata. A picture that portrays a griffin, a map that marks the 
route to Mordor, a chart that rec ords the heights of Hobbits, and a graph 
that plots caloric emissions are all repre sen ta tions, though they do not 
represent anything. To be a repre sen ta tion, a symbol need not itself denote, 
but it must be the sort of symbol that denotes. Griffin pictures are repre sen-
ta tions, then,  because they are animal pictures, and some animal pictures 
denote animals.  Middle Earth maps are repre sen ta tions  because they are 
maps, and some maps denote real locations. Hobbit height charts are repre-
sen ta tions  because they are charts, and some charts denote magnitudes of 
 actual entities. Caloric emission graphs are repre sen ta tions  because they are 
graphs, and some graphs denote real pro cesses. So  whether a symbol is a 
repre sen ta tion is a question of what kind of symbol it is.
Following Goodman, let us distinguish between repre sen ta tions of p and 
p- representations. If s is a repre sen ta tion of p, then p exists and s represents 
p. But s may be a p- representation even if  there is no such  thing as p (Good-
man, 1968). Thus,  there are griffin- pictures even though  there are no griffins 
to depict.  There are caloric- descriptions even though  there is no caloric to 
describe.  There are also mixed cases. The class of dog- representations includes 
both factual and fictional repre sen ta tions. Factual dog- representations are 
repre sen ta tions of  actual dogs; fictional dog- representations lack denotata. 
Literary fictions and thought experiments are p- representations that do not 
denote p.
Denoting symbols with null denotation may seem problematic. Occasion-
ally it is said that in the absence of griffins,  there is no basis for classifying 
some pictures as griffin pictures and refusing to so classify  others. Such 
an objection supposes that the only basis for classifying repre sen ta tional 
contents is by appeal to an antecedent classification of their referents. 
This is just false. We readily classify pictures as landscapes without any 
acquaintance with the real estate—if any— that they represent. I suggest 
that each class of p- representations constitutes a small genre, a genre com-
posed of all and only repre sen ta tions with a common ostensible subject

--- Page 265 ---

252  Chapter 12
 matter.  There is a genre of griffin- representations and a genre of ideal- gas- 
representations. We learn to classify repre sen ta tions as belonging to such 
genres as we study  those repre sen ta tions and the fields of inquiry that 
devise and deploy them. This is no more mysterious than learning to rec -
ognize pictures as landscapes without comparing them to the terrain they 
ostensibly depict.
Some repre sen ta tions denote their ostensible objects.  Others do not. 
Among  those that do not, some— such as caloric- representations— simply 
fail to denote. They purport to denote something, but  there is no such  thing. 
They are therefore defective.  Others, such as ideal- gas- representations, are 
fictive. Since they do not purport to denote any real object, their failure to 
denote is no defect (see Frigg, 2010). We know perfectly well that  there is 
no such animal as a griffin, no such person as Othello, no such gas as the 
ideal gas. Nonetheless, we can provide detailed repre sen ta tions as if of each 
of them, argue about their characteristics, be right or wrong about what we 
say respecting them, and, I have argued, advance understanding by means 
of them.
Representation- As
Symbol x is, or is not, a repre sen ta tion of y depending on what x denotes. 
And x is, or is not, a z- representation depending on its genre. This enables us 
to form a more complex mode of repre sen ta tion in which x represents y as z. 
In such a repre sen ta tion, symbol x is a z- representation that as such denotes 
y. Caricature is a familiar case of representation-as. Winston Churchill is 
represented as a bulldog; Teddy Roo se velt is represented as a bull moose.
Hughes (1996) argues that representation-as is central to the way that 
models function in science. A diagram represents a spring as a harmonic 
oscillator; the Hardy— Weinberg model represents a species as mating ran -
domly; an ideal gas model represents molecules as displaying no mutual 
attraction. A model, Hughes says, is a theoretical construct that involves 
three components: denotation, demonstration, and interpretation. Deno -
tation is the relation of ele ments of the model to ele ments of its target. 
Demonstration is the operation of the model according to its own ‘internal 
dynamic’, which enables us to use the model to derive conclusions. Inter-
pretation is a  matter of reading the conclusions derived from the model 
back into the target. For example, a model—such as an equation— denotes

--- Page 266 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 253
a pendulum, an  actual swinging bob. By plugging in values and perform -
ing a calculation, we demonstrate the relation between two mathematical 
variables. We then interpret the values of the variables as length and period, 
and impute them to the material pendulum.
Denotation is straightforward. It is the semantic relation of a name to 
the  thing it names, of a picture to the  thing it depicts, of a predicate to the 
 things it is true of. But more needs to be said about demonstration and inter-
pretation. A demonstration can be mathematical or material. “If we want to 
apply the wave theory of light to two- slit interference, for example, we can 
do one of two  things. We can  either model the phenomenon mathemati-
cally, or we can get out a  ripple tank and model light as a wave motion in 
the literal sense. In  either case we  will find that the distance between inter-
ference fringes varies with the separation of the sources, and also with the 
frequency of the waves” (Hughes, 1996, S322). Mathe matics does not typi-
cally strike us as dynamic. Equations sit quietly on the page. In saying that 
an equation has an internal dynamic, Hughes means that we reason with 
it, use it as an inference ticket, draw consequences from it. What is dynamic 
is the drawing out of consequences via inference. A major insight of his 
analy sis is that models are not static repre sen ta tions. They are tools. They 
enable us to figure  things out.
Hughes is right as far as he goes, but he stops too soon. The prob lem is 
that  there are always more consequences to be drawn from any demonstra-
tion. We need to know what direction to take in our reasoning and where 
to stop. That is, we need to know which of the inferences that we might 
legitimately make should be read back onto the target. Again exemplifica -
tion comes to the rescue. The demonstration,  whether in the  ripple tank or 
on paper, has irrelevant features— ones that  ought to be ignored. If we con-
tinued the demonstration endlessly, the number of irrelevant features would 
proliferate. But being irrelevant, they are not exemplified. They should be 
set aside. Interpretation involves ascertaining which features the demonstra-
tion exemplifies, hence which ones we should proj ect onto the target. This 
involves understanding how, in what re spects, and with what degree of 
precision the model represents. Models are symbols. To interpret them cor-
rectly requires appreciating which of their ele ments represent and what 
 those ele ments refer to.
Representation- of— that is, denotation— can be achieved by fiat. We sim-
ply stipulate: let x represent y and x thereby becomes a repre sen ta tion of y.

--- Page 267 ---

254  Chapter 12
This is what we do in baptizing an individual or a kind. It is also what we do 
in ad hoc illustrations, as, for example, when I say (with appropriate accom-
panying gestures), ‘If that chair is Widener Library, and that desk is Univer-
sity Hall, then that win dow is Emerson Hall’ in helping someone to visualize 
the layout of Harvard Yard. Like a chair or a desk, a p- representation can by 
arbitrary stipulation denote any object. We might, for example, point to a 
tree- picture and stipulate that it denotes the philosophy department. But 
our arbitrary stipulation does not bring it about that the tree- representation 
represents the philosophy department as a tree.
Does representation-as then require similarity? In that case, what blocks 
seemingly groundless and arbitrary cases of representation-as is the need 
for resemblance between the repre sen ta tion and the referent. Only a depart-
ment that resembles a tree could then be represented as a tree. But similarity 
does not establish a referential relationship (Goodman, 1968; Suárez, 2003). 
Repre sen ta tion is an asymmetrical relation; similarity is symmetrical. Repre-
sen ta tion is irreflexive; similarity is reflexive. Perhaps this shows only that 
similarity is not sufficient for representation-as. Something  else determines 
direction. Once the direction is established, it is the similarity between 
symbol and referent that brings it about that the referent is represented as 
what ever it is represented as.
The prob lem is this: Via stipulation, we have seen, pretty much anything 
can represent pretty much anything  else. So nothing beyond stipulation is 
required to bring it about that one  thing represents another. But similarity 
is ubiquitous. This is the insight of nominalism. For any x and any y, x is 
somehow similar to y. Thus if all that is required for representation-as is 
denotation plus similarity, then for any x that represents y, x represents y as 
x.  Every case of repre sen ta tion turns out to be a case of representation-as. In 
one way or another, the philosophy department is similar to a tree- picture, 
but it is still hard to see how that fact, combined with the stipulation 
that a tree- picture represents the department, could make it the case that 
the department is represented as a tree- picture, much less as a tree. Sup -
pose we add that the similarity must obtain between the content of the 
p- representation and the denotation. Then for any x- representation and any 
y, if the x- representation denotes y, the x- representation represents y as x. In 
that case, a tree that represented the philosophy department would not 
represent it as a tree. But a tree- picture that represented the philosophy 
department would represent it as a tree.

--- Page 268 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 255
The trou ble is that contentful repre sen ta tions, as well as chairs and 
desks, can be used in ad hoc illustrations like the one I gave earlier. If the 
portrait of the dean on the wall represents Widener Library, and the graph 
on the blackboard represents University Hall, then the map in the corner 
represents Emerson Hall. This does not make the dean’s portrait represent 
Widener Library as the dean. Evidently, it takes more than being repre -
sented by a tree- picture to be represented as a tree. Some philosophy depart-
ments can be represented as trees. But to bring about such representation-as 
is not to arbitrarily stipulate that a tree picture  shall denote the department, 
even if we add a vague intimation that somehow or other the department is 
similar to a tree. The question is, what is effected by such a repre sen ta tion?
To explicate representation-as, Hughes (1996) discusses Sir Joshua Reyn-
olds’s painting, Mrs. Siddons as the Tragic Muse. The painting denotes its sub-
ject and represents her as the tragic muse. How does it do so? It establishes 
Mrs. Siddons as its denotation. It might represent Mrs. Siddons, a person 
familiar to its original audience, in a style that that audience knows how to 
interpret. Then, without further cues, they could recognize that the picture 
is a picture of her. But the painted figure need not bear any par tic u lar resem-
blance to Mrs. Siddons. We readily take her as the subject even though we 
have no basis for comparison. (Indeed, we even take Picasso’s word about 
the identities of the referents of his cubist portraits, even though the fig -
ures in them do not look like anyone on earth.) Captioning the picture as 
a portrait of Mrs. Siddons suffices to fix the reference. So a painting can be 
connected to its denotation by stipulation. The painting is a tragic- muse- 
picture. It is not a picture of the tragic muse,  there being no such  thing as the 
tragic muse. But it belongs to the same restricted genre as other tragic- muse- 
representations. To recognize it as a tragic- muse- picture is to recognize it as 
an instance of that genre. Similarly in scientific cases. A spring is represented 
as a harmonic oscillator just in case a harmonic- oscillator- representation as 
such denotes the spring. The harmonic- oscillator- representation involves 
idealization. So it is not strictly a repre sen ta tion of a harmonic oscillator, 
any more than the Reynolds is a picture of the tragic muse.
In both cases, a repre sen ta tion that does not denote its ostensible subject 
is used to denote another subject. Since denotation can be effected by stipu-
lation,  there is no difficulty in seeing how this can be done. The difficulty 
comes in seeing why it is worth  doing. What is gained by representing 
Mrs. Siddons as the tragic muse, or a spring as a harmonic oscillator, or in

--- Page 269 ---

256  Chapter 12
general by representing an existing object as something that does not in 
fact exist? The quick answer is that the repre sen ta tion affords epistemic 
access to features of the object that are other wise difficult or impossible to 
discern. They exemplify  those features.
Nor does this occur only when a subject is represented as something fic-
tional. Legend has it that when  people objected that his portrait of Gertrude 
Stein did not look like her, Picasso replied, “No  matter. It  will” (Goodman, 
1968, 33). Although this remark might be dismissed as yet another expres-
sion of Picasso’s arrogance, Robert Schwartz (1985) argues that we should 
take it seriously. Through his portrait, Schwartz maintains, Picasso gave 
Stein a new look. In so  doing, he not only reconfigured Stein, he changed 
the world. Schwartz’s position can be elaborated to show how scientific 
models do the same. The first step is to explain how a portrait can literally 
give someone a new look and what follows from it.
Schwartz maintains that through his portrait, Picasso brought  people to 
see Stein differently. It did so, I suggest, by exemplifying features of Stein 
that  were normally overlooked. Picasso did not portray her as a dumpy, 
 middle aged, Midwestern  woman, but as magisterial, imposing, someone to 
be reckoned with. Through his portrait, he made  these features of Stein— 
being magisterial, being imposing, being someone (or something) to be reckoned 
with— salient. We see Stein differently as a result. If we had previously over-
looked the fact that she had  those features, then not only our perception 
of her but also our conception of her is reconfigured once we come to rec -
ognize them.
Moreover, Schwartz insists, we gain more than just a new way of looking 
at and thinking of Stein. We also gain new criteria for what it takes to look like 
Stein and what it takes to be like Stein.  These criteria afford bases for likening. 
 People, or indeed  things, that we would never previously have counted as 
looking like Stein are now recognized as  doing so, for they share the fea -
tures that her portrait exemplifies. They therefore have something signifi -
cant in common not just with Stein but also with each other. They belong 
to an extension that we are now in a position to call the Stein- lookalikes. If, 
via the picture, we see in Stein herself features we had overlooked, then we 
can see  others as like her in ways that go beyond her appearance—as being 
imposing, magisterial, someone to be reckoned with, for example. We then 
can recognize  others as Stein- alikes on the basis of something other than 
their appearance.

--- Page 270 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 257
At this point, metaphysicians might object that the extension consisting 
of all and only what we are now in a position to call the Stein- lookalikes 
and the extension of what we are now in a position to call the Stein- alikes 
existed all along. Picasso did not bring the extensions into existence. He did 
not create them. This is true. Extensions, marked or unmarked, are equally 
real; none is brought into existence by baptizing, exemplifying, or con -
struing. But most extensions strike us as motley collections of apparently 
disparate objects. Their members have nothing notable in common. The 
extension consisting of the Gobi Desert, an apple pie, and a baseball in 
Detroit have something in common with one another: they are all mem -
bers of that extension. This is true but trivial.  There’s  little reason to care 
about it. From our antecedent perspective, the extensions we now call the 
Stein- lookalikes and the Stein- alikes seemed arbitrary collections of unre-
lated  things. What Picasso brings out is that  these par tic u lar collections are 
by no means arbitrary— their members have something significant in com-
mon. They share the constellation of features that the portrait exemplifies.
Still, one might balk, at least about the Stein- alikes. Arguably we can con-
cede that the portrait instantiates, and therefore is capable of exemplifying, 
features like looking magisterial. But a portrait itself  can’t be magisterial. The 
claim that it exemplifies being magisterial is blocked from the outset, since 
exemplification requires instantiation. To  handle this objection, we need 
to appeal to representation-as. The portrait represents Gertrude Stein as 
magisterial insofar as it denotes her, belongs to the genre of magisterial- 
figure- portrayals, and belongs to that genre  because of the way it portrays 
her— namely as having certain discernible features that its subject purport-
edly shares with other members of that genre. (‘Purportedly’  because it is 
pos si ble to misrepresent someone as magisterial.)
Modeling
Models, like fictions, can simplify, omitting confounding  factors that would 
impede epistemic access to the properties of interest. They can abstract, par-
ing away unnecessary and potentially confusing details. They can distort 
or exaggerate, highlighting significant aspects of the items they focus on. 
They can augment, introducing additional ele ments that focus attention 
on properties of interest. They can insulate, screening off effects that would 
other wise dominate. They do  these  things in order to exemplify.

--- Page 271 ---

258  Chapter 12
A familiar worry, first encountered in the discussion of Galileo’s thought 
experiment, recurs  here. The same solution holds. Many scientific models, 
such as equations and diagrams, are incapable of instantiating the proper -
ties they apparently impute to their targets. If they cannot instantiate a 
range of properties, they cannot exemplify them. Suppose, via an equation, 
we model a pendulum as a  simple harmonic oscillator. Since exemplifica -
tion requires instantiation, if the model is to represent the pendulum as 
having a certain mass, the model must have that mass. But, not being a 
material object, the model has no mass. It cannot exemplify the mass of the 
pendulum. Indeed, the model does not exemplify mass. Rather, it exempli-
fies an abstract mathematical property, the magnitude of the pendulum’s 
mass. Where models are abstract, they exemplify abstract patterns, proper-
ties, and/or relations that may be instantiated in physical target systems. It 
does no harm to say that they exemplify physical magnitudes. But this is 
to speak loosely. Strictly speaking, they exemplify mathematical (or other 
abstract) properties that can be instantiated physically.
Even concrete models display the sort of divergence from their targets 
that we saw above. The San Francisco Bay- Delta model— a massive, hydrau-
lic scale- model of San Francisco Bay and its environs (see Weisberg, 2013)— 
has no tides. So it cannot exemplify the effect of tides on the  water in the 
bay. But it mimics the tides by gradually pumping salt  water into and out 
of the model’s basin. It thus exemplifies an effect that is instantiated by the 
ebb and flow of tidal  waters in the bay. Speaking loosely, we might say that 
it exemplifies the effects of the tides. Speaking strictly, we should say that it 
exemplifies an effect that is instantiated both by flow of  water in the model 
itself and by the tides.
Both literary fictions and scientific models exemplify properties and 
afford epistemic access to them. By omitting or downplaying the significance 
of confounding  factors (the Napoleonic wars in Pride and Prejudice, intermo-
lecular attraction in the ideal gas, friction in the model pendulum), they 
constitute a cognitive environment where certain aspects of their subjects 
stand out. They thereby facilitate recognition of  those aspects and appre -
ciation of their significance. They thus give us reason to take  those aspects 
seriously elsewhere.
Of course, this does not justify a straightforward extrapolation to real-
ity. From the fact that Elizabeth Bennet was wrong to distrust Mr. Darcy, 
we cannot reasonably infer that young  women in general are wrong to

--- Page 272 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 259
distrust their suitors, much less that any par tic u lar young  woman is wrong 
to distrust any par tic u lar suitor. But the fiction exemplifies the grounds for 
distrust and the reasons  those grounds may be misleading. Once we have 
seen them clearly in a fictional setting, we may be in a better position to 
recognize them in everyday situations. Nor from the fact that ideal gas mol-
ecules exhibit no mutual attraction can we reasonably infer that neither do 
helium molecules. But the be hav ior ideal gas molecules exemplify in the 
model may enable us to recognize such be hav ior amid the confounding 
 factors that ordinarily obscure what is  going on in  actual gases. In using 
a model, we implicate that the features of the phenomena that it brackets 
are for current purposes negligible.  Here, we suggest, we can safely ignore 
them.
Epistemic Access
Return to Reynolds’s repre sen ta tion of Mrs. Siddons as the tragic muse. The 
tragic muse is a figure from Greek my thol ogy who is supposed to inspire 
works of tragedy— works that pres ent a sequence of events leading inexora-
bly from a position of eminence to irrecoverable, unmitigated loss, thereby 
inspiring pity and terror (Aristotle, 1973). A tragic- muse- representation 
portrays a figure as capable of inspiring such works, one who exemplifies 
such features as nobility, seriousness, inevitability, and perhaps a somber 
dramaticality, along with a capacity to evoke or arouse pity and terror. To 
represent a person as the tragic muse is to represent her in such a way as to 
reveal or disclose such characteristics in her or to impute such characteris -
tics to her.
The ideal gas law is an equation ostensibly relating temperature, pressure, 
and volume in a gas. To satisfy that equation, a gas would have to consist of 
perfectly elastic spherical particles of negligible volume and exhibiting no 
mutual attraction. The law thus defines a model that mandates specific val-
ues for size, shape, elasticity, and attraction. With  these par ameters fixed, 
the interdependence of the values of temperature, pressure, and volume is 
exemplified. The law and the model it defines are fictions.  There is no such 
gas. Indeed, so far as we can tell,  there could be no such gas, since such a gas 
would violate several well- founded laws of physics. Nevertheless, the model 
advances our understanding of gas dynamics. It exemplifies a relation that 
is impor tant but hard to discern in the be hav ior of  actual gases. The model

--- Page 273 ---

260  Chapter 12
is a representation— a denoting symbol that has an ostensible subject and 
portrays its ostensible subject in such a way that certain features are exem-
plified. It represents its target (its denotatum) as exhibiting  those features. 
So to represent helium as an ideal gas is to impute to it features that the 
ideal gas model exemplifies. By setting the par ameters to zero, it construes 
the  actual size, shape, inelasticity, and mutual attraction of the molecules 
as negligible. Strictly, of course, in helium the values of  those par ameters are 
not zero. But if they are negligible, they can safely be ignored. In that case, 
the imputation allows for a repre sen ta tion that discloses regularities in the 
be hav ior of helium that a more faithful repre sen ta tion would obscure. The 
model then foregrounds the interdependence of temperature, pressure, and 
volume, making it and its consequences manifest.
Representing a philosophy department as a tree might exemplify the 
ways the commitments of the vari ous members branch out from a com -
mon, solid, rooted tradition, and the ways the work of the gradu ate students 
further branch out from the work of their professors. It might intimate that 
some branches are flourishing while  others are stunted growths. It might 
even suggest the presence of a certain amount of dead wood. Representing 
the department as a tree, then, affords resources for thinking about it, its 
members and students, and their relation to the discipline in ways that we 
other wise would not.
I said earlier that when x represents y as z, x is a z- representation that 
as such denotes y. We are now in a position to cash out the ‘as such’. It is 
 because x is a z- representation that x denotes y as it does. x does not merely 
happen to denote y and happen to be a z- representation. Rather, in being a 
z- representation, x exemplifies certain properties and imputes  those proper-
ties or related ones to y. ‘Or related ones’ is crucial. A caricature that exag-
gerates the size of its subject’s nose need not impute an enormous nose to its 
subject. By exemplifying the size of the nose, it focuses attention, thereby 
orienting its audience to the way the subject’s nose dominates his face or, 
through a chain of reference, the way his nosiness dominates his character. 
The properties exemplified in the z- representation thus serve as a bridge 
that connects x to y. This enables x to provide an orientation to its target 
that affords epistemic access to the properties in question.
 There is no guarantee that the target has the features the model exem -
plifies, any more than  there is any guarantee that a subject represented 
as the tragic muse has the features that a painting representing her as the

--- Page 274 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 261
tragic muse exemplifies. This is a question of fit. A model may fit its target 
perfectly or loosely or not at all. Like any other case of representation-as, 
the target may have the features the model exemplifies. Then the func -
tion of the model is to display  those features and make their significance 
manifest. We may see the target system in a new and fruitful way by focus-
ing on the features that the model draws attention to. In other cases, the 
fit is looser. The model does not exactly fit the target. A target that does 
not instantiate the specific properties its model exemplifies may instan -
tiate more generic properties that subsume the exemplified properties. 
If gas molecules are roughly spherical, reasonably elastic, and far enough 
apart, then we may gain insight into their be hav ior by representing them 
as perfectly elastic spheres with no mutual attraction. Perhaps we  will sub-
sequently have to introduce correction  factors to accommodate the diver-
gence from the model; perhaps not. It depends on what degree of precision 
we want or need.
Sometimes, although the target does not quite instantiate the features 
exemplified in the model, it is not off by much. Where their divergence is neg-
ligible, the models, although not strictly true of the phenomena they denote, 
are true enough of them. This may be  because the models are approximately 
true, or  because they diverge from truth in irrelevant re spects, or  because 
the range of cases for which they are not true is a range of cases we do not 
care about, as for example when the model ‘blows up’ at the limit. Where 
a model is true enough, we do not go wrong if we think of the phenomena 
as displaying the features that the model exemplifies.  Whether a repre sen-
ta tion is true enough is a contextual question. A repre sen ta tion that is true 
enough for some purposes or in some re spects is not true enough for or in 
 others. This is no surprise. No one doubts that the accuracy of models is 
limited. In yet other cases, the model simply does not fit. Then it affords 
 little or no understanding of its target. Not every one can be informatively 
represented as the tragic muse. Nor can  every object be informatively repre-
sented as a perfectly elastic sphere.
Earlier I dismissed resemblance as the vehicle of repre sen ta tion. I argued 
that exemplification is required instead. But for x to exemplify a property 
of y, x must share that property with y. So x and y must be alike in re spect of 
that property. It might seem, then, that resemblance in par tic u lar re spects 
is what is required to connect a repre sen ta tion with its referent (Giere, 
1999).  There is a grain of truth  here. If exemplification is the vehicle for

--- Page 275 ---

262  Chapter 12
representation-as, the repre sen ta tion and its object resemble one another in 
re spect of the exemplified properties. But resemblance, even resemblance in 
a par tic u lar, relevant re spect, is not enough, as the following tragic example 
shows.
On January 28, 1986, the space shut tle Challenger exploded  because, 
owing to cold weather, its O- rings failed to effect a seal. The previous day, 
engineers involved in designing the shut tle had warned NASA about that 
very danger and faxed data to NASA to support their concern. The print -
outs contained complex repre sen ta tions conveying vast amounts of informa-
tion about previous shut tle flights. They included mea sure ments of launch 
temperatures for previous flights and mea sure ments of six types of O- ring 
degradation  after each flight. Had loss of elasticity been plotted against 
temperature, the danger would have been clear. The evidence that the 
O- rings  were vulnerable in cold weather was contained in the data. But 
it was obscured by a mélange of other information that was also included 
(Tufte, 1997). So although the requisite resemblance between the highly 
complex, multipurpose model and its target obtained, it was overshadowed 
in the way that a subtle irregularity in an elaborate tapestry might be. As 
it was presented, the data instantiated but did not exemplify the corre -
lation between temperature and loss of elasticity. They did not represent 
the O- rings as increasingly inelastic as the temperature dropped.  Because 
the correlation between O- ring degradation and temperature was not per-
spicuous, the NASA decision makers did not see it. The launch took place; 
the shut tle exploded; the astronauts died. When the goal of a repre sen ta-
tion is to afford understanding, its merely resembling the target in relevant 
re spects is not sufficient. The repre sen ta tion must make the resemblance 
manifest.
Drawing on Hughes’s account, I have argued that models exemplify fea-
tures they share with their targets and impute  those features to their targets. 
Where they are successful, they afford epistemic access to aspects of their 
targets that we might other wise miss. When an economic model represents 
a transaction as occurring in a situation where  there is perfect information, 
it is not purporting or pretending that  actual financial transactions occur in 
such contexts. Rather, it  factors out what might be seen as interference. By 
exhibiting what would occur in such a context, it equips us to understand 
why and to what extent differences in information available to dif fer ent 
parties to a transaction  matter.

--- Page 276 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 263
Models are selective. They highlight some features of their targets by 
marginalizing or downplaying the significance of  others. The utility of any 
par tic u lar model is therefore limited. The Hardy— Weinberg model repre-
sents a population as consisting of infinitely many members of a species 
who mate randomly, where that population is not subject to mutation, 
migration, or ge ne tic drift. It exemplifies the pattern in the re distribution 
of alleles in the absence of evolutionary pressures. Inasmuch as evolution -
ary pressures are always pres ent, the model cannot, nor does it pretend to, 
account for allele distribution generally. It is, however, very useful for some 
purposes. If population ge ne ticists want to understand how significant an 
evolutionary  factor such as migration is, they need a base rate. They need, 
that is, to know how alleles would redistribute in its absence. Features that 
can be neglected in some contexts or for some purposes cannot always be 
neglected.
By exemplifying a feature, a model affords epistemic access to it, and pro-
vides reason to suspect that it is significant. It thereby equips us to see the 
target differently than we other wise might. Instead of thinking of a feature 
as just one of innumerable features of the target, we have reason to take it 
seriously. Familiar gas models represent gas molecules as lacking attractive 
force. If the results of our calculations are confirmed when we read them 
back into the target, we have reason to think that intermolecular forces do 
not play a significant role in gas dynamics. Knowing as we do that  every 
material object attracts  every other one, we do not conclude that  there is 
no attraction. Rather, we conclude that for the sort of understanding we 
currently seek, at the level of precision we are interested in, intermolecular 
attraction is negligible. This suggests that we think of the target in terms 
of the features exemplified in the model. Roughly, it invites us to think of 
 actual gases as ideal gases with distortions, springs as harmonic oscillators 
with confounding features, and so forth.
Likening
Models liken. If effective, they exemplify features that the members of their 
target class share. They thereby have the capacity to bring to light signifi -
cant affinities among members of the class. Let’s look at a  couple of cases. 
Strictly, the equation pV = nRT would hold only of spherical molecules. In 
effect, the model defines a fictional gas whose molecules are spherical.

--- Page 277 ---

264  Chapter 12
However, the model is supposed to illuminate the be hav ior of real gases, 
whose molecules are lumpy. Moreover, molecules of dif fer ent gases have dif-
fer ent configurations of lumps. On the face of it, the shapes of oxygen mol-
ecules and argon molecules do not strike us as particularly similar. But the 
model intimates that the  actual differences in shape can be ignored. Where 
the model is appropriate, they are negligible. And where the differences 
are negligible, gas molecules are relevantly alike. By representing  actual gas 
molecules as spheres with distortions, and making the case that the distor-
tions have negligible effects, the model likens  actual gas molecules to one 
another.
A more in ter est ing case is biology’s evolutionary game- theoretic model. 
It applies to, among other  things, predator— prey interactions, mating 
be hav ior, fertility and fecundity rates, and altruism. It is a dynamic model, 
displaying change over time. Even if one is completely convinced that 
natu ral se lection underwrites all  these phenomena, my list seems to consist 
of wildly disparate items. It is far from obvious that, at any level of abstrac-
tion, predator— prey interactions and altruism are the same sort of  thing. 
Off the cuff, they seem virtually antithetical. Although we readily grant that 
in one way or another, natu ral se lection accounts for all of the items on my 
list,  there seems no a priori reason to suspect that  there is a single way that 
natu ral se lection accounts for all of them. It would not be surprising if each 
had a separate evolutionary explanation. What the game- theoretic model 
does is show that at a certain level of abstraction,  these phenomena are all 
alike. They are instances of the same sort of pro cess. The model thus unifies 
the domain and effects a likening among seemingly disparate phenomena. 
We can now appreciate why, from an evolutionary perspective, altruistic 
be hav ior and predatory be hav ior are alike.
If we think of the target in terms of the features the model exemplifies, 
we may recognize and appreciate the significance of affinities we would 
other wise overlook. Newton’s law of gravity enables us to recognize that 
the moon’s staying in orbit, the ebb and flow of the tides, and the apple’s 
falling from the tree are fundamentally the same sort of  thing. The glaring 
differences between them are to be ignored. In impor tant physical re spects, 
the motions are alike— they satisfy the same equation, and thereby exem -
plify the same sort of be hav ior. Perhaps surprisingly, a good way to under-
stand why satellites remain in orbit is to represent them as falling bodies.

--- Page 278 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 265
Models do not, of course, only omit. If they did,  there would be no 
 reason to consider them inaccurate. They could be construed as schematic 
or partial repre sen ta tions of the phenomena they bear on. But models 
also distend, distort, exaggerate, and even introduce ele ments that answer 
to nothing in the target.  These distentions, distortions, exaggerations, and 
interpolations scaffold representation-as. A distended, distorted, or exagger-
ated model can exemplify features that obtain in the target but are difficult 
to discern  there. For example, according to Kepler’s laws, the orbit of the 
Earth is elliptical, with one focus at the sun. The major axis and the minor 
axis are almost equally long. The shape of the ellipse is very close to that 
of a circle. But to highlight the fact that the orbit is not a circle, models 
of Kepler’s laws typically represent the major axis as considerably longer 
than the minor axis. This would be objectionable if we took such models to 
exemplify the  actual shape of the orbit. But since they exemplify only the 
orbit’s being elliptical rather than circular and not the precise shape of the 
ellipse,  there is no difficulty. Maxwell’s repre sen ta tion of electromagnetic 
radiation as involving rotating vortices separated by ‘idle wheels’ denotes 
that radiation and, through the introduction of fictional ele ments, makes 
manifest how the relational structure of the production and transmission of 
electric and magnetic forces in an electromagnetic medium is like the rela-
tional structure of the production and transmission of mechanical forces in 
a mechanical medium (Nersessian, 2008, 29–48). Through this model, Max-
well effected a likening of electromagnetic and general dynamical pro cesses.
To properly understand a model or other representation-as we must 
interpret it correctly. Some features of the repre sen ta tion are inert. It makes 
no difference, for example, what typeface the statement of Kepler’s laws is 
in or  whether the hydraulic model of San Francisco Bay is properly oriented 
 toward the magnetic North Pole. The laws represent the orbit of the Earth, 
regardless of font, and the model would simulate the effects of the tides 
equally well if it  were rotated 30 degrees. Some features function as scaf -
folding. They do not themselves exemplify features of the target. But they 
enable the model to exemplify the features it imputes to the target. The idle 
wheels in Maxwell’s model and the canine features in Churchill’s caricature 
scaffold in that they enable the repre sen ta tions to highlight the features 
they exemplify. They are thus not irrelevant to how the symbol represents, 
although they do not figure in what it represents. They are not to be read

--- Page 279 ---

266  Chapter 12
back into the target. Fi nally,  there are the features that the model exempli-
fies:  these are the ones it imputes to its target.
Thus far, I have assumed that a model represents something that is, in 
Williams’s phrase,  there anyway. The target is as it is regardless of how or 
 whether it is represented. If so, the role of the model is to bring to light 
unanticipated or unappreciated aspects of the phenomena it models. Some-
times this is so. The planets are  there anyway and are unaffected by their 
susceptibility to being modeled as point masses. If all models fit this mold, 
it would not be unreasonable to balk at the claim that anything properly 
called ‘worldmaking’ is  going on (see Goodman, 1978). But  there are cases 
where the relation between model and target is more dynamic and interac-
tive than this picture suggests. The demarcation of the target is the product 
of a negotiation between an antecedent partition of the domain and the 
resources a model can bring to bear.
Hasok Chang’s (2004) account of the tandem development of the ther-
mometer and temperature brings this out. One might have thought that 
the inventors of the thermometer began with an antecedently recognized 
magnitude— temperature. Their challenge was to come up with a way to 
mea sure it. That is: given temperature, invent the thermometer. But, Chang 
argues, this is an oversimplification. At the outset,  there  were phenomeno-
logically distinct experiences as of hotter or colder. Being grounded entirely 
in sensory experience, judgments about felt differences  were subject to 
unwelcome fluctuations. Two perceivers of the same phenomenon would 
give dif fer ent verdicts. The same phenomenon, when judged against dif-
fer ent backgrounds, would be felt to be hotter or colder. “Put one hand in 
a bucket of hot  water and the other one in cold  water;  after a while take 
them out and put them in a bucket of lukewarm  water; one hand feels that 
the  water is cool, the other feels it is warm” (Chang, 2004, 43). Hint that 
it is a hot coal, and an ice cube dropped down someone’s back  will be felt 
as a burn. Scientists  couldn’t rest satisfied with  these verdicts. Too much 
seemed to depend on the conditions of perception and sensibilities of the 
perceivers. So they sought to create a device that would mea sure the ‘real’ 
differences, but bracket  those that depended on the varying sensibilities 
and conditions of perceivers. They  couldn’t quite succeed. The best devices 
they could come up with did not quite reflect the differences in felt hotness 
or coldness even when obvious biases and idiosyncrasies  were controlled 
for. Initially, of course, this might just be evidence that their devices  were

--- Page 280 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 267
inadequate. But eventually, they came to trust the devices. Rather than 
concluding that thermometers  were not  really mea sur ing heat, scientists 
concluded that what perceivers take to be experiences of heat are actually 
experiences of heat with confounding  factors, such as barometric pressure 
and humidity. They redefined the target of their mea sure ment to legitimize 
the mea sur ing device.
The thermometer is not just a mea sur ing device, it is a model. It rep -
resents changes in the height of a column of mercury as changes in tem -
perature. That is, the thermometer exemplifies magnitudes or changes 
magnitude and imputes them to the target. So Chang’s discussion shows 
that models can figure in the constitution of the phenomena they model. 
The pro cess of inventing the thermometer was in part a pro cess of consti-
tuting a specific magnitude to be mea sured.
Multiple Models
This account enables us to see why dif fer ent models of the same target 
serve dif fer ent purposes. For some purposes, representing light as a wave 
is valuable; for  others, it is preferable to represent light as a particle. For 
some purposes, representing a customer as an ideally rational agent with 
full information is appropriate; for  others, representing her as an individual 
with idiosyncratic and mutually inconsistent desires and preferences and 
with limited information is preferable. Each model exemplifies dif fer ent 
features and affords epistemic access to dif fer ent aspects of the target.
Another question looms. Why, when we refine a model, does its more 
idealized pre de ces sor endure? The ideal gas pV = nRT was exported from 
thermodynamics to statistical mechanics. The model has under gone 
numerous refinements which successively de- idealize its assumptions. The 
van der Waals equation, for example, accommodates intermolecular forces 
which the earlier model scrupulously ignores. Further refinements in the 
equations of state yield increasingly realistic repre sen ta tions. Eventually we 
get the virial equation,
PV/NkT = 1 + B/V + C/V2 + D/V 3 + E/V4 +  . . .,
“which can be rendered arbitrarily precise by extending the equation in def-
initely, with each added term being derivable from increasingly detailed

--- Page 281 ---

268  Chapter 12
assumptions about the intermolecular forces” (Doyle et al., 2015, 5). Armed 
with the virial equation, why  don’t we jettison the pre de ces sors or consign 
them to the dustbin of the history of science? Boyle, Charles, van der Waal, 
et al. seem to have been supplanted.
One pos si ble answer is intellectual inertia. We  don’t clean our concep-
tual closets all that often, so remnants of outgrown commitments remain. 
This, perhaps, is why we remember the old models. But it  doesn’t explain 
why we continue to use them, particularly if we consider them outdated. 
And it certainly does nothing to justify their continued employment.
Another possibility is that the older models are easier to use. They require 
fewer and simpler calculations. But the virial equation is not particularly 
difficult. The math is straightforward. So  there is  little practical advantage 
in using the earlier models. And even if  there  were a practical advantage, it 
is far from obvious that availing ourselves of that advantage would be epis-
temically legitimate.
I suggest that it is a  mistake to think that the virial equation is to be pre-
ferred simply  because it can be made arbitrarily precise, and can accommo-
date increasingly detailed and accurate assumptions. I am not denying that 
the equation is an impressive accomplishment. Nor am I denying that it is 
the right model to use in certain circumstances. What I am denying is that 
what we want of a model is as precise and detailed a repre sen ta tion as 
we can get. The aim of modeling is to come up with a repre sen ta tion that 
affords an understanding of the phenomena, not one that replicates the 
phenomena. That is why we can be entirely justified in deploying an ide -
alized model when a more realistic one is available. The highly idealized 
pV = nRT exemplifies a relation between pressure, temperature, and vol -
ume, and in imputing it to its target implicates that further  factors, such 
as intermolecular forces, are negligible. By omitting the negligible, we put 
ourselves in a position to appreciate the relations that  matter. In contexts 
where  those forces are negligible, we do well to set them aside. If, for exam-
ple, we want to understand how a pressure cooker works, or how a football 
might deflate in cold weather, we need no more than pV = nRT. In other 
contexts, intermolecular forces are nonnegligible. Then we should use a 
dif fer ent model— one that accommodates them to the extent that  they are 
nonnegligible. Maybe this means using the van der Waals equation. Maybe 
it means  going all the way to the virial equation.

--- Page 282 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 269
If I want to make the world safe for the ideal gas model, however,  there 
is a worry that has to be faced. I said earlier that not  every feature of a model 
exemplifies. So a seemingly efficient way of accommodating the cases 
where intermolecular forces are negligible and the cases where they are 
only slightly significant would be to use the virial equation and interpret 
it so that only some of the terms exemplify. That would amount to neglect-
ing the terms whose contribution is negligible. Rather than taking dif fer-
ent models to exemplify dif fer ent features of the target, we would assign 
dif fer ent interpretations (in Hughes’s sense of ‘interpretation’) to a single 
model. This could be done. It might even be a good idea. Still,  there is the 
pesky ideal gas law rattling around in our brains. Why?
According to Chekhov, if a gun is on the wall in the first act of a play, it 
must be fired by the third act. His edict has an analogue in science. Suppose 
we are in a context where pV = nRT would be appropriate. Instead, we might 
use the virial equation,
PV/NkT = 1 + B/V + C/V2 + D/V 3 + E/V4 +  . . .,
and ignore the bits we  don’t need. But if we  don’t need them, why are we 
given them? What is the point of all the additional bells and whistles? 
(What is that gun  doing on the wall if it’s never  going to be fired?) To 
include multiple terms is to implicate that they have a bearing on the issue. 
This follows from Grice’s second maxim of quantity: “Do not make your 
contribution more informative than is required” (1989, 26). In including 
unnecessary details, we court misunderstanding; we invite the audience 
to conclude that the details are in fact necessary. Somehow, even in this 
 simple case, audience members may think, we are supposed to recognize the 
significance of E/V4.
But all models have features that do not represent. Kepler’s laws are in 
some font or other; the diagram of the harmonic oscillator is some height 
or other. The hydraulic model of San Francisco Bay is some distance or 
other from the magnetic North Pole. To treat  these features as significant is 
to misinterpret the model. Similarly, even if Chekhov could have left the 
gun off the wall, the wall would be some color or other. He could not insist 
that if the color of the wall performs no function, the wall should have 
no color, for a transparent wall would itself be deemed significant. The

--- Page 283 ---

270  Chapter 12
standard accommodation to the inevitable is to make the ineliminable fea-
tures as unobtrusive as pos si ble. So the wall would be a neutral shade, the 
font would be a standard font, the diagram would be designed simply to fit 
neatly on the page, and the model of San Francisco Bay would have no fea-
tures that even hinted that its distance from the magnetic North Pole mat-
tered. Arguably, then, we could supplant the other models with the virial 
equation and simply interpret it so that the irrelevant features are, like the 
color of the wall or the font of the equation, sidelined. This could be done. 
But it would make the model ambiguous. Sometimes the equation would 
exemplify the value of E/V4, sometimes it would not.
Science places a premium on intersubjective agreement.  Because scien-
tists build on one another’s findings, it should be clear exactly what  those 
findings are and what justifies them. So other  things equal, science seeks 
univocal symbols. Ambiguity is thus, as far as pos si ble, to be avoided. This, 
I suggest, is why, rather than replacing the more idealized equations of state 
with the virial equation, statistical mechanics retains them. One way or 
another, context has to be accommodated. The choice is between admitting 
multiple models, each suited to a separate range of contexts, and admitting 
a single model whose interpretation varies with context.
 Because models depend on exemplification, they are selective. A model 
makes some features of its target manifest by overshadowing or ignoring 
 others. So dif fer ent models of the same target may make dif fer ent features 
manifest. Where models are thought of as mirrors, this seems problematic. 
It is hard to see how the nucleus of an atom could be mirrored without 
distortion as a liquid drop and as a shell structure. 3 Since a single material 
object cannot be both fluid and rigid,  there might seem to be something 
wrong with our understanding of the domain if both models are admissi -
ble. But if what one model highlights is that in some significant re spects the 
nucleus behaves like a liquid drop, and another model highlights that in 
some other significant re spects it behaves as though it has a shell structure, 
 there is in princi ple no prob lem.  There is no reason why the same  thing 
should not share some significant properties with liquid drops and other 
significant properties with rigid shells. It may be surprising that the same 
 thing could have both sets of features, but  there is no logical or concep -
tual difficulty. The models afford dif fer ent perspectives on the same real ity. 
And it is no surprise that dif fer ent perspectives reveal dif fer ent aspects of 
that real ity.  There is no perfect model (Teller, 2001) for the same reason that

--- Page 284 ---

Chekhov’s Gun 271
 there is no perfect perspective.  Every perspective, in revealing some  things, 
inevitably obscures  others (van Fraassen, 2008).
Conclusion
In chapter 2, I said that models like the ideal gas and the harmonic oscilla-
tor are felicitous falsehoods. They afford an understanding of their targets 
 because their inaccuracies do not interfere with, and may even enhance, 
their epistemic function. We see now how this can be so. Effective models 
exemplify features they share with their targets and represent their targets 
as having  those features. This makes them epistemically felicitous. But not 
all models are, even in my extended use of the term, falsehoods. A model 
 house on a building site is a real  house. You could live in it. Eventually 
someone prob ably  will. A model organism is a real, live organism— a mouse 
or frog or fruit fly. Like models that are felicitous falsehoods, such models 
exemplify features they share with their targets and represent their targets 
as having  those features. And like all exemplars, they symbolize selectively. 
The model  house shares a vast number of features with  houses it serves as 
a model of. It does not, however, exemplify all of them. Not being made of 
marshmallow is a feature that the model and its target share; but it is not 
exemplified by the model or imputed to the target. Drosophila melanogaster 
is a model organism that exemplifies general ge ne tic features bearing on 
heritability of traits, susceptibility to mutation and the like; and it repre -
sents other organisms as having  those features. It does not, however, in its 
standard uses, exemplify features that are peculiar to invertebrates, flying 
animals, or insects. The model  house exemplifies its floor plan, the place -
ment of win dows, the height of the roof, and the like. It typically does not 
exemplify the colors of the walls in the dif fer ent rooms, the way it is fur -
nished, and so forth. Features that are not exemplified are repre sen ta tionally 
inert.  Those features,  whether shared with the target or not, are negligible. 
Understanding is not impeded by neglecting them.

--- Page 286 ---

Disciplinary Demands
 There are often multiple ways to understand a given topic, for the relevant 
information may be integrable into diverse accounts. A ge ne ticist, a nutri-
tionist, and an epidemiologist are apt to understand the increasing inci -
dence of diabetes differently. Even if they draw on the same empirical data, 
each interprets  those data in terms of dif fer ent models and appeals to dif-
fer ent background theories for support. Each highlights features that the 
 others marginalize. Dif fer ent histories of the same episode show similar 
diversity. One may focus on po liti cal  factors, another on economic con -
siderations, a third on the effects on domestic life. This enables them to 
discern dif fer ent patterns in the data, and draw dif fer ent inferences from 
them.
Can works of art afford historical understanding? Or are the commit -
ments of art and history too disparate for a single work to satisfy the demands 
of both? To examine the issue, I focus in this chapter on Maya Lin’s Viet -
nam Memorial. As a monument, it denotes and commemorates something 
deemed to be historically significant. It makes reference to the past. That 
alone does not indicate that it affords any understanding of the events 
it refers to. The Washington Monument affords no understanding of the 
first US president. Nor, if it does afford some understanding, should we 
automatically conclude that it affords a historical understanding. The ques-
tion is how the Vietnam Memorial refers to the episode it commemorates. 
Does it do so in ways that comport with the expectations of the discipline 
of history?
A discipline is constituted in large mea sure by methodological and 
normative framing commitments that are reflectively endorsed by the 
13 Borders and Crossings

--- Page 287 ---

274  Chapter 13
legislating members of a par tic u lar realm of epistemic ends. Natu ral science 
is committed to accepting only findings that are intersubjectively accessible, 
backed by empirical evidence, preferably testable, and defeasible. Although 
romantic poetry affords an understanding of the natu ral world, it does 
not afford a scientific understanding, for it does not re spect science’s fram-
ing commitments. Mathe matics demands proof. Although  there is plenty 
of evidence for Goldbach’s conjecture, that evidence does not figure in a 
mathematical understanding, since instantial induction— regardless of the 
number of instances— does not amount to proof. History, like natu ral sci -
ence, requires that evidence be publicly accessible, publicly assessable, and 
defeasible. The evidence must concern past events. A historical understand-
ing of  those events typically treats them as sequential and shows why, in 
the circumstances, they  were to be expected (Hempel, 1965). This is far 
from a detailed characterization of what disciplinary understanding con -
sists in. My point is to emphasize that disciplines are more than ways of 
marking off turf. They carry commitments about how a par tic u lar subject 
 matter is to be properly understood.
One critical question is how strong a discipline’s framing commitments 
are. Should they be construed as inviolable requirements, as rules of thumb, 
or as something in between? Disciplines evolve. So presumably framing com-
mitments cannot be utterly rigid. But how flexible they are or should be, 
and  whether this varies from one discipline to the next, remain open ques-
tions. In this chapter I am concerned primarily with history. I  shall treat its 
framing commitments as touchstones that establish strong presumptions 
but not rigid requirements. Some works that are treated as uncontrover -
sially providing historical understanding seem not to fully conform to any 
plausible rigid rubric.
The question I address  here is  whether it is plausible to contend that 
works of art, functioning as such, can embody and convey the sort of 
understanding of a period that the discipline of history demands. Obvi -
ously works of art can serve as historical evidence. Like other artifacts, they 
are products of an era and can be used to shed light on what was  going on 
during that era. Poe’s “The Raven” and Mussorgsky’s Night on Bald Moun -
tain can, for example, serve as evidence of the nineteenth- century fascina-
tion with the macabre. My question is  whether works of art can wholly or 
largely constitute an understanding of an episode, where an episode is a 
constellation of related events that take place over a limited span of time.

--- Page 288 ---

Borders and Crossings 275
I  will suggest that the answer is yes. In par tic u lar, I  will urge that some 
monuments, and perhaps some other works of art, are jointly artistic and 
historical symbols. Nor is their performing both roles a coincidence. They 
embody and convey a historical understanding of the episode they con -
cern, and they do so  because of their aesthetic functions.
Must Understanding Be Discursive?
Grimm (2008), Khalifa (2012), and  others contend that understanding is 
keyed to explanation. This at least strongly suggests that  those who under-
stand a phenomenon can give or accept a verbal account of it. If so, all 
understanding is discursive. In that case, my contention that dance embod-
ies understanding is incorrect. They are surely right that formulating and 
articulating an explanation of a phenomenon is a manifestation of under-
standing it. But Lipton (2009) makes a compelling case that the ability to 
explain is not necessary. Someone could, he maintains, display her under-
standing of the retrograde motion of the planets by properly manipulating 
an orrery.1 Moreover, I would add, someone could teach why the planets 
display retrograde motion by giving a nonverbal demonstration using an 
orrery. With the orrery, we can just see why, from the perspective of an 
observer on Earth, Mars appears to reverse its direction as it orbits. If we 
cannot correctly express our understanding in words, that seems at best 
a minor defect. Still, our inability to explain might just be put down to 
inarticulateness. We apprehend and appreciate what is  going on, but words 
fail us. Lipton’s second example goes deeper. Galileo demonstrated that 
gravitational acceleration is in de pen dent of weight by showing that the 
alternative leads to a contradiction. We understand that this must be so— 
that it could not be other wise— even if we have no idea why gravitational 
acceleration is in de pen dent of weight, or what an explanation of that in de-
pen dence would look like. In general, it is very hard to explain why a is 
in de pen dent of b. A third example, this one mine, is Richard Feynman’s 
dropping an O- ring into a glass of ice  water to demonstrate that O- rings lose 
elasticity in the cold. This enabled scientific novices to understand why the 
O- ring’s failure caused the space shut tle Challenger to explode. Feynman’s 
point could be captured in words. Indeed, expert witnesses testifying before 
a congressional committee had put it into words. But the congressmen did 
not understand the verbal explanations. The demonstration did the trick

--- Page 289 ---

276  Chapter 13
(Feynman, 2001).  These examples show that understanding need not be 
discursive. It is pos si ble to understand something without being able to 
put one’s understanding into words, and pos si ble to understand something 
without understanding a lucid verbal explanation of it in a language one 
speaks fluently.
Lipton does not convince every one. Khalifa (2012) contends that the 
understanding Lipton’s examples provide is somehow deficient. The best 
understanding of the phenomena would be explanatory. He gives no rea -
son to think so. What could supply a better understanding of the in de pen-
dence of an object’s weight from its rate of fall than Galileo’s demonstration 
that it could not be other wise? Granted, that understanding might prompt 
us to won der why it could not be other wise. And to understand that would 
likely require a good deal of theorizing. So embedding the demonstration 
in a tenable theory would be worthwhile. But that does not show that the 
unembedded understanding that the demonstration provides is in any way 
second best.
Grimm (2008) advocates expanding our conception of explanation 
so  that Lipton’s demonstrations count as explanations. Then to demon -
strate that p is to explain that p. This seems ad hoc. Explanations are discur-
sive; they say why something is so. Demonstrations exemplify; they show 
why something is so. We currently lack a workable conception of explana-
tion that comprehends demonstration.
 Whether or not demonstrations afford the best sort of understand -
ing,  whether or not they are (perhaps in an extended sense) explanations, 
 there is  little doubt that they afford some understanding of the phenomena 
they concern. As we have seen, understanding admits of degrees.  Children, 
novices, and cutting- edge inquirers often have a level of understanding that 
falls short of our (realizable or unrealizable) ideal. That is all that we need. 
For our purposes  here, the issues raised by Lipton’s critics are irrelevant.
Still, the examples come from science. Our question is  whether the 
point extends to history. To answer that, we need some characterization 
of what is required for the distinctive sort of understanding that works of 
history provide. I cannot give a criterion for being a work of history, or 
for constituting a distinctively historical understanding. But some features 
stand out. A work that embodies and conveys a historical understand -
ing is a selective account of the past. Selectivity is mandatory  because a 
mere amalgamation of every thing that is known about an episode of any

--- Page 290 ---

Borders and Crossings 277
complexity— the Reign of Terror, the moon landing, the ratification of the 
Nineteenth Amendment— would be such a motley chronicle of events that 
it would make no sense. Selectivity fosters coherence. The vari ous ele ments 
that comprise a work of history should collectively constitute a coherent 
account. The account should be as of events structured sequentially in time. 
Williams (2002, 243) maintains that the account itself should be structured 
sequentially. If so, it  will have a narrative form, with a beginning,  middle, 
and end (White, 1965).
It is not obvious that narrative form is strictly required. Garry  Wills’s 
Lincoln at Gettysburg  (1992) is largely thematic. It weaves the Gettysburg 
Address into several historical narratives: a po liti cal narrative, a rhetorical 
narrative, and a narrative about the nineteenth- century cult of death. Each 
enriches and deepens the understanding that the  others provide. Arguably, 
all three are needed to establish  Wills’s thesis that the Gettysburg Address 
fundamentally changed Amer i ca’s conception of itself as a nation. This sug-
gests that a narrative form may be just one, albeit fairly standard, way to 
structure events in time so as to make historical sense of the episode they 
belong to. A history should be accurate (Williams, 2002). Just how accu -
rate, and in what re spects it should be accurate, is controversial. Thucydides 
composed the speeches he purportedly quoted in The History of the Pelo -
ponnesian War, including Pericles’s famous funeral oration. No one knows 
what, if anything, Pericles or the other orators actually said. Con temporary 
historians often use hedging verbs. They say that their protagonists would 
have done this, or must have known that, or  were bound to have accepted 
the other.  These locutions signal that although the historians have no spe-
cific evidence to back their claims about the protagonists, such actions and 
attitudes  were characteristic of  people relevantly like the protagonist in the 
period  under discussion. Moreover, like the sciences, histories often make 
use of schematized models, such as ‘triangular trade’, ‘coup d’état’, and ‘oli-
garchy’.  These, like scientific models, idealize, simplify, and thereby depart 
from truth. 2 When they contribute to historical understanding, they are 
felicitous falsehoods. Rather than saying that historical accounts must be 
true, it is preferable to say that they must be true enough. Moreover, a work 
of history must be backed by evidence, and the chain of evidence should 
bottom out in primary source material— firsthand testimony, con temporary 
documents, artifacts of the period  under investigation. To be sure, histori-
ans can draw on the work of other historians. Appeal to secondary sources

--- Page 291 ---

278  Chapter 13
is not ruled out so long as the chain of evidence, however long, terminates 
in acceptable primary source material. Histories, being empirical, must be 
defeasible. Information about the past must be capable of discrediting a his-
torical account. I  will call anything that embodies and conveys a historical 
understanding a work of history.
Nonnarrativity
If what is suitably accurate is true enough, documentaries such as The Sor-
row and the Pity qualify as works of history. Although they are not primar -
ily verbal, they are nonfictional cinematic repre sen ta tions that provide a 
historical understanding of the episodes they concern. I  will go further and 
urge that static works can also provide historical understanding. Before I do 
so, however, I want to return to the scientific cases discussed above.
The manipulation of the orrery shows why Mars seems to change direc-
tion. It highlights consequences for terrestrial observers of the fact that the 
Earth travels around the sun more quickly than Mars does. Galileo’s thought 
experiment is a reductio. It makes manifest the inconsistency inherent in 
the assumption that gravitational attraction and weight are linked; that is, 
it shows that the assumption cannot be correct. Feynman’s demonstration 
shows why the O- rings could not create a seal: the material, having lost 
elasticity, could not expand to seal the gaps that the O- rings  were supposed 
to seal.
In all three cases, the primary mode of reference is exemplification. The 
orbs on the orrery exemplify motions; the postsubmersion O- ring exempli-
fies inelasticity. They instantiate and thereby refer to some of their proper-
ties, making them salient, and enabling interpreters to appreciate them and 
their significance. As we recognized earlier, in Galileo’s thought experiment 
nothing actually falls. Since nothing has the property of falling, nothing 
exemplifies that property. Rather, object- representations ( either  mental 
repre sen ta tions, or publicly available descriptions or depictions) exemplify 
an abstract mathematical property that they share with  actual falling bod-
ies. The thought experiment exemplifies the in de pen dence of the abstract 
mathematical property that in material objects is a mea sure of weight from 
the abstract mathematical property that in material objects is a mea sure of 
rate of fall. It thereby exemplifies the in de pen dence of weight from gravita-
tional acceleration. In each case, the symbols that embody and convey an

--- Page 292 ---

Borders and Crossings 279
understanding of a phenomenon are not primarily discursive or repre sen-
ta tional. They afford understanding via exemplification.
I have argued that in the arts, nondenoting symbols embody and convey 
an understanding of a topic (Elgin, 2002). It would not be surprising, then, 
that works of art can afford an understanding of the past. This involves 
more than conveying discrete bits of knowledge about the past. It is easy to 
see that a Gainsborough portrait conveys the knowledge that eighteenth- 
century British merchants wore ruffles, and that a Heda still life conveys the 
knowledge that in the seventeenth  century the Dutch had access to lemons. 
 These are isolated facts. They provide evidence about the past. A historical 
understanding, on the other hand, is an integrated account of a past episode 
that involves a sequence of events. So to claim that works of art embody 
an understanding requires saying more than that they convey separate fac -
toids about the past or even that they convey factoids that can serve as 
evidence about the past. And to say that they embody a historical under-
standing requires saying that they do so in terms of a selective sequence of 
events. A documentary plainly satisfies  these requirements. I suggest that a 
static work of art can do so as well.
Monuments are works of public art, expressly designed to commemorate 
what are taken to be historically impor tant episodes. If any works of art 
embody and convey historical understanding, monuments are apt to do so. 
I  will argue that Maya Lin’s Vietnam Memorial (henceforth the Memorial) 
does exactly that.
The Memorial is located on the Mall in Washington, DC, a long parkland 
dotted with monuments that collectively constitute a patriotic gloss on US 
history.3 The Mall is not flat. At the Memorial’s location  there is a hill. But 
the Memorial is not on the hill. Rather, it is gouged out of the hill. It is a 
gash in the land, an open wound. That wound in the physical land is a meta-
phor for a wound in the country, the po liti cal land. The Memorial is made 
of black stone. It consists of two conjoined triangles that share an edge and 
open out  toward the Mall in a V shape with a 125°  angle. One triangle points 
 toward the Washington Monument; the other,  toward the Lincoln Memo-
rial. The Vietnam Memorial thus locates the episode it commemorates with 
re spect to the fundamental ideals on which Amer i ca was founded. It alludes 
to  those ideals.
Etched in the stone are the names of the 58,272 US military personnel 
who  were killed or declared missing in action during the Vietnam War. The

--- Page 293 ---

280  Chapter 13
names are all the same size and are in the same font. Rank is not included. 
 Every one deserves to be remembered. Each is represented as being as impor-
tant as any other. The recording of the names thus exemplifies the ideal 
that all are created equal, an ideal articulated in the Declaration of In de-
pen dence, operationalized in the Constitution, and reinforced in Lincoln’s 
Gettysburg Address. The stone is highly polished; viewers see their own 
reflections as they look at the names. This invites the living to identify with 
the dead and to reflect on their own attitudes  toward the Memorial and 
what it commemorates. The order of the names is the order in which their 
 bearers died or went missing. The shape of the Memorial displays the course 
of the war, starting small in 1959, ascending to the apex in mid-1968, then 
descending to 1975— from a trickle to a flood to a trickle. The configuration 
thus constitutes a narrative arc, displaying the trajectory of the war in terms 
of its American casualties. Collectively the names represent the war’s cost, 
not in money, but the irrecoverable cost in lives.
The Memorial also symbolizes American ambivalence about the war. 
Among the ideals that  were ensconced at the founding of the country are 
freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and the right to petition the gov-
ernment for redress of grievances. The Memorial’s pointing across the Mall 
to the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial can be read as 
alluding to the patriotism of  those who exercised  these rights by assembling 
on the Mall to protest against the war. Then  there is the wound. Is it simply 
a mark of the loss of lives? Is it an honorably acquired war wound? Or is it 
a wound on the honor of the country that professes ideals that it does not 
live up to? Did the war instantiate the ideals or betray them? The legacy of 
the war is controversial. The ambiguity of the gash expresses the nation’s 
ambivalence about the war.
It seems obvious that the Memorial conveys an understanding of the 
war. But does it convey a historical understanding? Let’s look back at the 
touchstones mentioned above. The Memorial is structured sequentially in 
time. The names are listed, not in alphabetical order, or by rank or unit or 
age or state, but in the order in which their  bearers died or  were declared 
missing in action. So you can read the course of the war by reading the names 
in order. The names could have been put in columns of the same height. 
Instead,  there is a quite literal narrative arc, peaking at the apex of the tri-
angles, displaying the escalation and de- escalation of the war. The work is 
grounded in primary sources— the Department of Defense casualty lists and

--- Page 294 ---

Borders and Crossings 281
documents pertaining to  those missing in action. The work is defeasible. It 
would be discredited if, for example, the list was irresponsibly augmented 
or truncated (‘irresponsibly’,  because a few erroneous inclusions or exclu-
sions would presumably not discredit the work) (Kvanvig, 2003).
The work is plainly selective. Much is omitted.  There is no recognition 
of, for example, the geopo liti cal context of the conflict, the Machiavellian 
machinations of politicians, the perspective of the Viet nam ese  people. But all 
works of history are incomplete.  There is simply too much information about 
any historical episode to incorporate it all into a coherent, comprehensible 
account. The historian has to solve complex prob lems of se lection— what 
to include and what to omit, at what level of precision to pres ent the mate-
rial, from what orientation to address the issue, what themes to emphasize. 
She must, that is, decide what features of the episode her account  will 
exemplify. The Memorial omits any explicit recognition of the reasons for 
the war. It tells its story by counting the cost. And it mea sures the cost 
in lives according to the metric ‘all are created equal’. The Memorial does 
not and does not purport to convey a comprehensive understanding of 
the war. No single work of history could do that. Still, you  will enrich your 
understanding of this period in US history, if you properly interpret it and 
incorporate what it conveys.
We might doubt that an expert on the war could gain an understand -
ing from the Memorial. He would presumably already grasp the insights 
and orientation that the Memorial pres ents. This is not so obvious. What 
I have called the narrative arc of the piece might make manifest aspects of 
the escalation and de- escalation that he had overlooked. If so, the Memo-
rial would function for the historian in much the way that a work written 
by another historian would. It would serve as a secondary source. Still, it 
is perhaps unlikely that the understanding of a scholar who specialized in 
the war would be much enhanced by the work. If the Memorial is a work of 
history, it is a work of popu lar history, functioning not primarily to deepen 
the understanding of experts, but rather to deepen the understanding of 
ordinary  people.4
Arguably, then, the Memorial affords historical understanding. It bears 
at least one interpretation that satisfies plausible requirements for being a 
work of history. A separate question, though, is  whether it does so by func-
tioning as a work of art. Or does it simply play two distinct, mutually in de-
pen dent roles?

--- Page 295 ---

282  Chapter 13
Aesthetic Functions
The history of aesthetics is littered with failed attempts to articulate neces-
sary and sufficient conditions for being, or functioning as, a work of art. 
At best we have clear cases, and what Goodman called symptoms of the 
aesthetic— that is, defeasible but presumptive indications that an item is 
functioning aesthetically. The Memorial displays Goodman’s symptoms. Its 
 doing so underwrites its capacity to provide historical understanding. That 
being so, then at least by Goodmanian standards, it is functioning as a work 
of history by functioning as a work of art. The symptoms are  these:
(1) Syntactic density, “where the finest differences in certain re spects con-
stitute a difference between the symbols” (Goodman, 1978, 67–68). Had 
the stone been less reflective, or the orientation  toward the Mall been 
dif fer ent, or the Memorial been placed atop the hill, it would have been 
a dif fer ent symbol.
(2) Semantic density, “where symbols are provided for  things distinguished 
by the finest differences in certain re spects” (Goodman, 1978, 68). 
The names could have been given with ranks, units, and so on. Fonts 
could have been dif fer ent for military personnel of dif fer ent ranks. That 
is hardly unpre ce dented. It is what is done in the war memorials in 
Canterbury Cathedral. The choice to omit such markers was a choice 
from among a dense range of alternatives.
(3) Relative repleteness, “where comparatively many aspects of a symbol are 
significant” (Goodman, 1978, 68). As we have seen, a vast number of fea-
tures of the Memorial symbolize: its position, orientation, shape, configu-
ration, the order of names, the font, the polish of the stone, and so forth.
(4) Exemplification, “where a symbol,  whether or not it denotes, symbol -
izes by serving as a sample of properties it literally or meta phor ically 
possesses” (Goodman, 1978, 68). The number of casualties, the rate of 
casualties, the names of the casualties, the relation of the Memorial to 
other monuments, and the shape of the Memorial are literally exempli-
fied; the ideals, realized or betrayed, the wound in the body politic, 
and the ambivalence about the war are meta phor ically exemplified.
(5) Complex and indirect reference, “where a symbol performs several in -
tegrated and interacting referential functions, some direct, some mediat-
ed through other symbols” (Goodman, 1978, 68). The triangles pointing 
 toward the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument make 
direct reference to  those monuments. Via that reference, the Memorial 
makes indirect reference to the ideals that the two monuments stand for. 
It indirectly refers to their meta phorical exemplification of ‘all are created 
equal’, and in turn refers back to the exemplification of that ideal in the

--- Page 296 ---

Borders and Crossings 283
names on the Memorial itself. It refers to the exercise of the constitutional 
rights by the antiwar protesters and both makes reference to and calls into 
question the nature of the wound symbolized by its shape and position. 
And so forth. This makes it plausible that it is by functioning as a complex 
aesthetic symbol that the Memorial conveys an understanding of history.
One might, however, won der  whether the Vietnam Memorial is a special 
case. In some re spects the answer may be ‘yes’. The obvious narrative arc is 
distinctive. But as I suggested earlier, narrativity may be optional. Then the 
relevant requirement is that a work of history be “a selective account of the 
past, structured sequentially in time, that is designed to make sense of it” 
(Williams, 2002). Regardless of what we say about how representative the 
Vietnam Memorial is, I do not mean to suggest that  every memorial or mon-
ument functions as a work of history. A work can commemorate an event 
without affording any historical understanding of it. But the criteria for a his-
tory can be realized at dif fer ent levels of generality or abstractness. So a suit-
ably accurate memorial that commemorates wars or  battles, or the reigns of 
kings or the tenures of poets laureate in a temporal sequence, might function 
as a work of history, even though it lacks the specificity of Lin’s Memorial.
Moreover, a work of art that is not expressly designed to commemorate 
a par tic u lar historical episode might plausibly function as a work of history. 
Consider, for example, The Disasters of War, a series of prints Goya made in 
response to the Peninsular War (1807–1814) and its aftermath. They focus 
on the horrors of war: humiliation, degradation, rape, torture, mutilation, 
desecration, destitution, death. They concern not the  causes of war, but the 
effects—in par tic u lar, the effects on the innocent:  women,  children, non-
combatants, priests. The prints open out into an indefinite space, suggest -
ing that the mayhem flowing from war is random. It could occur anywhere 
to anyone.  There is no differentiation between friend and foe. Atrocities are 
perpetrated by both sides. Nothing in the prints points to hope, charity, or 
even rationality. War is monstrous. It strips  people of reason and empathy 
and turns them into savages. Many of the prints can be correlated with spe-
cific events in the Peninsular War. Interpreted as a commentary on that war, 
they function in much the way the Vietnam Memorial does. But the series 
might also be interpreted more generally. It is a template or schema into 
which you can insert any war you please: the Trojan War, the Anglo- Boer 
War, the Chaco War, the Vietnam War. It makes no difference. The atrocities 
Goya depicts  will be found  there too.

--- Page 297 ---

284  Chapter 13
Does The Disasters of War , interpreted as a general comment on war, 
convey a historical understanding? Maybe. If it is true that wars generally 
instantiate the depicted atrocities, then the series is a schema. Each instance 
affords a historical understanding of a par tic u lar war. And if that is so, then 
it is reasonable to say that the schema figures in a historical understanding 
of war as such. According to Hempel (1965), lawlike generalizations about 
 human conduct figure in or are tacitly presupposed by explanations in his-
tory. Treated as a schema, The Disasters of War is akin to  those generaliza-
tions. If Hempel’s generalizations figure in an understanding of history, it is 
plausible that Goya’s prints do too.
I have been assuming that a work of history can be purely descriptive. 
It can pres ent a cogent account of what happened. It need not provide 
a causal explanation of why it happened. If this is right, then Hempel’s 
generalizations need be no more than statements of robust Humean regu -
larities. They may afford a basis for prediction, but need not contribute to 
explanations of how it came to pass that events played out in the way they 
did. So although Lin’s Memorial provides no explanation of the course of 
the Vietnam War, and Goya’s prints provide no explanation of why wars 
lead to the commission of atrocities, that is not by itself an argument against 
treating them as affording a historical understanding. Arguably they func -
tion like Lipton’s orrery or Feynman’s O- ring.
Maybe Not
Even so, we might want to resist the claim that a work of art, functioning 
as such, affords genuinely historical understanding. It is not implausible to 
think that aesthetic standards are too subjective to underwrite the epistemic 
standing history demands. Earlier I argued that aesthetic standards are not 
wholly subjective. As we have seen, in discussions about art, reasons are 
adduced and disputed. Still, the range of reasons aesthetic judgments can 
appeal to may seem too open ended to satisfy the disciplinary demands 
of history. Thus far, my discussion has appealed to loosely characterized 
touchstones. Perhaps we should tighten them, excluding symbols whose 
function turns on their displaying objectionable symptoms of the aesthetic.
One worry is that works of art often admit of multiple acceptable inter -
pretations. Written histories strive for and often achieve univocality. Dif fer-
ent histories may provide dif fer ent interpretations of a given event. But each

--- Page 298 ---

Borders and Crossings 285
individual work is apparently supposed to provide only one. We can accom-
modate this worry by saying that it is only  under an interpretation that a 
work of art functions as a work of history. This is a trivial concession, since it 
is only  under an interpretation that a paper in the Journal of American History 
functions as a work of history. Only interpreted symbols are about something.
Perhaps the point is that unlike the journal article, the work of art lacks 
a standard interpretation.  Every competent historian knows how to read 
the journal article, and they all pretty much agree about what it says. The 
same cannot be said for a work of art. Connoisseurs, such as Greenberg and 
Fry, may permanently disagree. If this is the worry, we could insist that only 
 under a relevant, accessible, nonidiosyncratic interpretation can a symbol 
function as a work of history. Except perhaps for the bit about the antiwar 
protests, my interpretation of the Vietnam Memorial satisfies this require -
ment. It is a standard, relevant, accessible, and nonidiosyncratic interpreta-
tion of the monument (see Lin, 2000). It is intersubjectively accessible and 
assessable. Reasons can be given for it and for the interpretation of the war 
that it provides. So the restriction would not exclude works of art that 
have standard interpretations from functioning as works of history  under 
 those interpretations. In any case, the restriction is ill advised. An account 
of the siege of Sta lin grad written in an obscure code would be nonstandard, 
but assuming it was duly researched it would be a work of history. The issue 
is not  whether a work has a standard interpretation, but  whether it has 
an intersubjectively accessible and assessable interpretation. Insofar as the 
code could be learned, an other wise historically creditable account of a past 
episode written in code would qualify as a work of history.
Maybe the worry is not semantic, but syntactic. Should we perhaps 
deny that works of art afford historical understanding  because they are 
not verbal?  There is, as far as I can see, no reason to privilege the verbal 
over other modes of symbolization. And if we do, we exclude not just prints, 
monuments, and documentary films, but also diagrams, charts, and maps. 
To restrict historical understanding to that which is captured in a language 
would be costly. We would have to deny, for example, that Minard’s map 
affords an historical understanding of the fate of Napoleon’s army in the 
Rus sian invasion. Semantic density seems both innocuous and unavoidable. 
Syntactic density is sometimes welcome.
I suggested earlier that the historian’s solution to the prob lem of se lection 
is a  matter of deciding what aspects of an episode are to be exemplified. He

--- Page 299 ---

286  Chapter 13
chooses events and event descriptions that highlight the features of the 
episode that he considers central to the sort of understanding he seeks to 
provide. This determines the items he includes, the vocabulary he uses to 
describe them, and the orientation he takes  toward them. Describing the 
construction of the first transcontinental railroad, Howard Zinn says this: 
The Central Pacific Railroad
spent $200,000 on bribes in Washington to get 9 million acres of  free land and $24 
million in bonds, and paid $79 million, an over payment of $36 million, to a con -
struction com pany which was  really its own. The construction was done by three 
thousand Irish and ten thousand Chinese, over a period of four years, working for 
one or two dollars a day. (Zinn, 1980, 254)
This description configures the facts in such a way that they exemplify the 
plutocrats’ venality, corruption, collusion, and callous indifference both to 
workers, who  were members of despised minorities, and to ordinary citi -
zens, who might reasonably object to their legislators being bribed, their 
land being given away, and bonds being sold to them at artificially inflated 
prices. It is hardly laudatory, but that does not discredit Zinn’s description. 
The passage exemplifies a pattern to be found in be hav ior of the plutocrats 
 behind the construction of the first transcontinental railroad. This is not 
the only pattern. A dif fer ent account might highlight the technological 
achievements, the logistical difficulties, the economic benefits the railroad 
supplied, or even cast the protagonists in a less unfavorable light. Then 
dif fer ent features of the construction of the railroad would be exemplified.
Some histories describe seemingly insignificant or irrelevant items in order 
to exemplify something of importance. Early in Lincoln at Gettysburg,  Wills 
describes the layout of the Gettysburg cemetery. The Union dead are buried 
according to the states they came from, with no recognition of differences in 
importance  either of the state or of the soldiers. “By considerable ingenuity 
in grading the cemetery’s incline, and by arranging the graves in  great curv-
ing ranks, [William Saunders, the cemetery’s architect] avoided preferential 
treatment of states or in equality in the ranks of the fallen” (1992, 22). The 
book’s central theme is that the Gettysburg Address changed Amer i ca’s self- 
conception from a  union of states to a  union of  free and equal citizens. The 
cemetery design and Lincoln’s speech,  Wills suggests (1992, 30), are mutually 
reinforcing  because they exemplify the same values.
Exemplification is thus critical to historical understanding. The histo -
rian juxtaposes events, agents, actions, and standard conditions so that

--- Page 300 ---

Borders and Crossings 287
collectively they exemplify a pattern or trajectory in the course of events. 
An understanding of an episode must make sense of it. To do that, it must 
highlight some features and ignore or downplay  others.
Written works of history typically deploy a variety of modes of refer -
ence. They denote the events and agents they concern. They exemplify 
features and patterns in the play of events. They refer indirectly to events, 
actions, and authorities that are not explic itly mentioned. They cite their 
sources and tacitly allude to what ever makes  those sources credible. They 
may also refer indirectly to other histories that support or clash with the 
position they are taking. This can be done by a variety of means, including 
the se lection of events deemed worthy of mention, the order of exposi -
tion, even word choice. Some indirect reference is unavoidable. A history 
of the Bogside Massacre must say where it took place. If it locates the event 
in Derry, it thereby implicitly slants  toward the Irish; if in Londonderry, 
 toward the British.  Either way, it indirectly refers to a history of animosity. 
Each name is freighted with significance, making partisan reference to Irish 
history. No neutral name is available. Complex and indirect reference too 
seem unavoidable.
Goodman’s remaining symptom is relative repleteness. A symbol is rela-
tively replete to the extent that it symbolizes along multiple dimensions. 
Goodman illustrates the difference between repleteness and attenuation by 
comparing a Hokusai drawing of Mount Fuji with an electrocardiogram 
(EKG). Even if we imagine the same configuration of ink on paper play -
ing both roles,  there is an enormous difference in the ways they symbol -
ize. Only two features  matter in the EKG— the shape of the wave and the 
frequency with which it repeats. In the drawing, any of a vast number of 
features might  matter: the size, shape, color, and intensity of the line; the 
weave, texture, and material of the paper; differences, however subtle, in 
shading, from one part of the picture to the next; and so on. The picture is 
inexhaustible.  There is always more to be found.
One might think the same holds for the EKG. In princi ple,  there may 
also be subtle, medically significant differences in wave patterns that cardi-
ologists have previously overlooked. So it too bears repeated inspection; but 
only up to a point. The number of dimensions along which it symbolizes 
is fixed in advance. The cardiologist does and should overlook the fact that 
the line gets paler as the test continues. That is an indication that the print-
er’s toner is  running low. It is not her prob lem. Moreover, the machine has

--- Page 301 ---

288  Chapter 13
an antecedently determined level of precision. Past a certain point, further 
wobbles in the curve are insignificant. They might be manifestations of 
background vibrations or noise in the system or fine- grained irregularities 
in the paper the graph is printed on. They should be disregarded. Perhaps 
one could glean a bit more information than we currently do from a given 
EKG, but cardiologists rightly think that the information the printout pro-
vides is exhaustible. If they want to learn more, they move on to dif fer ent 
tests.
What should we say about works of history? Written histories are, I sus-
pect, more replete than EKGs. But they are apt to be less replete than works 
of art. Although they symbolize along several dimensions, arguably at least, 
the number of dimensions is limited and intersubjectively agreed upon in 
advance. That a history includes or omits the names of the founding mem-
bers of the Royal Society may be significant. Even the order in which the 
names are listed may be significant. But it is doubtful that the omission of 
maiden names of the founding members’ maternal grand mothers is signifi-
cant. If we are loath to consider works of art to be works of history, perhaps 
the reason lies  here. When interpretation is too open- ended, intersubjective 
agreement is sacrificed. Scholars become permanently at odds as to what a 
par tic u lar work conveys about the past.
I have argued that a fundamental difference between scientific and aes-
thetic understanding lies in the fact that science puts a premium on inter -
subjective agreement; aesthetics does not. To attain such agreement, science 
limits precision and constrains repleteness. If only a few antecedently rec -
ognized dimensions of a symbol  matter, and only up to an antecedently 
recognized point, agreement among the knowledgeable is readily achieved. 
Scientists build on one another’s findings. It is therefore impor tant that 
they can tell exactly what  those findings are and why and to what extent 
they are to be trusted. They sacrifice repleteness and precision to achieve 
agreement.  Because artists do not build on one another’s works in the same 
way, they have no incentive to make such sacrifices. That connoisseurs 
never agree about  whether the weave in the paper of the Hokusai drawing 
or the direction of Le Compotier’s brush strokes contributes to its aesthetic 
function makes no difference. Artists who are influenced by Hokusai or 
Cézanne can decide for themselves  whether to take that feature of the work 
to be significant. Historians fall somewhere in between. They do not build 
on their pre de ces sors in the way that empirical scientists do. So agreement

--- Page 302 ---

Borders and Crossings 289
about what exactly a given historian accomplished is not mandatory. But it 
is not irrelevant  either. What has been done sets the stage for what comes 
next. So perhaps a reluctance to treat works like the Vietnam Memorial or 
The Disasters of War as works of history stems from a well- founded desire to 
achieve a mea sure of accord. In that case, we should say that although such 
works embody and convey something close to a historical understanding, 
that understanding remains beyond the bound aries of history proper.
The question is where to draw the line. We could decide that  because of 
their potentially unbounded repleteness and precision, works of art do not 
afford genuinely historical understanding. Or we could decide that replete-
ness and precision need not inhibit and may even enhance their capac -
ity to afford historical understanding. The decision turns not on the sort 
of information the items convey or on the accuracy or reliability of that 
information. It turns on how historians want to configure their discipline— 
what framing commitments they want to endorse, what restrictions they 
 will place on the accounts it sanctions, and so on. And that turns on how 
they want to use  those accounts. If historians want to be able to build on 
previous histories in the way that scientists build on previous science, they 
should limit precision and repleteness. If the growth of historical under -
standing takes a dif fer ent path, then perhaps not. The decision depends on 
the relation of scholars to one another, not on their relation to their object 
of study.

--- Page 304 ---

Skeptical worries often emerge from the recognition that the evidence for a 
contention does not ensure its truth.1 It might therefore seem that, having 
scuttled the truth requirement on epistemic acceptability, I can evade such 
worries. Sadly, I cannot. For the evidence for a contention typically does 
not ensure that it is true enough  either. In this re spect, veritists and nonverit-
ists are in the same boat. The way out might seem obvious. Acknowledging 
our epistemic vulnerability, we should endorse fallibilism, thereby evading 
skepticism.
I begin this chapter by investigating fallibilism with re spect to knowledge. 
On most construals, it seems to be a concession to epistemic frailty. Our 
evidence is almost inevitably too sparse to provide the level of justification 
we would like. We need to live with this. I suggest that such a position is 
less stable and more problematic than it might first appear. I go on to con-
sider fallibilism with re spect to understanding. I argue that, far from being a 
concession to frailty, it is a source of strength. It both prompts and enables 
us to deepen our understanding in ways that an infallibilist position would 
not. I urge that the capacity to make  mistakes is an epistemic achievement 
rather than a failing. I then discuss how  actual errors sometimes mark epis-
temic advances. Fi nally, I argue that a fallibilist theory of understanding is 
epistemically richer than an infallibilist one would be. Weaving in mecha-
nisms for detecting, correcting, and compensating for errors strengthens 
the fabric of understanding.
Fallibilism
Although many phi los o phers claim to be fallibilists, it is not entirely clear 
exactly what fallibilism amounts to. It teeters between skepticism and 
14 Fallibility’s Payoff

--- Page 305 ---

292  Chapter 14
dogmatism. To acknowledge that despite the evidence I could still be wrong 
seems an entirely appropriate confession of intellectual humility. It rec -
ognizes a gap between the support my reasons supply and what it would 
take to make me infallible. But an epistemic agent’s claim that she could be 
wrong is more complicated and less obvious than it first appears.
The contention that we are infallible seems unacceptably arrogant. 
But epistemologists who accept ‘When you know, you cannot be wrong’ 
and maintain that epistemic agents sometimes know are committed to the 
view that  those agents are infallible with re spect to what they know. What 
does it take to underwrite infallibility? Two candidates are plausible:  either 
the premises entail the conclusion or the premises give the conclusion a 
probability of 1. Both are si mul ta neously too weak and too strong. Entail-
ment alone cannot secure infallibility. What is required is entailment from 
known premises.  Unless the premises are known, they convey no right to 
be sure; for all an epistemic agent can tell, one of her premises might be 
false. Entailment from a false premise surely conveys no right to be sure. 
If the agent has to ensure that the premises are known, a regress looms. 
Something similar occurs if we seek to ground infallibility in probability. It 
is not enough that the evidence give the conclusion a probability of 1; that 
evidence must itself be epistemically secure. What justifies treating an item 
as evidence? Does each bit of evidence also have a probability of 1?  Here 
too a regress looms.
Luckily, we need not attempt to block the regresses. For the standards 
in question are too demanding in any case. To avoid skepticism about the 
external world, we must  settle for less. Evidentialists maintain that evidence 
must probabilify a conclusion (Adler, 2002); but  there is a threshold— 
perhaps a movable threshold (S. Cohen, 2014)— with a probability of less 
than 1. Reliabilists maintain that the belief that constitutes knowledge 
must be produced or sustained by a reliable process— just how reliable may 
vary with context (DeRose, 2011). But they admit that even an epistemically 
reliable pro cess sometimes fails.  There is always a gap between the justifiers 
and the conclusion they support.
A critical question concerns how to interpret the ‘might’ in ‘I still might 
be wrong’. The inability to secure an entailment shows that  there is a logical 
or conceptual possibility of error. Regardless of the strength of my evidence 
or the reliability of my method, it is still logically or conceptually pos si ble 
that I am wrong. This no doubt is true, but what should we make of it?

--- Page 306 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 293
Perhaps whenever  there is the remotest possibility of error, I should 
suspend judgment. If this is what fallibilism contends, it amounts to (or 
comes perilously close to) skepticism. If, on the other hand, fallibilism main-
tains that assuming the gap is not too broad, it makes no difference that I 
might be wrong, it is hard to distinguish fallibilism from dogmatism. The 
fallibilist and the dogmatist then treat the very same contentions as knowl-
edge, and for the very same reasons. Evidently, the only difference is that 
the fallibilist displays a sort of mock modesty, while still claiming to know.
If the fallibilist sides with the skeptic, her predicament may be worse. 
However reliable her methods and however solid her evidence, every one 
concedes that some chance of error remains.  Ought the agent therefore 
suspend judgment? To accept a contention is to be willing and able to use it 
as a premise in cognitively serious assertoric reasoning or as a basis for cog-
nitively serious action (L. J. Cohen, 1992). Suspension of judgment deprives 
the epistemic agent of that resource. Sometimes such deprivation is entirely 
reasonable; to refuse to use a contention as a premise in assertoric reasoning 
or as a basis for action is a mark of epistemic responsibility if the conten -
tion’s epistemic standing is doubtful. The detection of what appeared to 
be a distinctive sort of gravitational wave was taken in 2014 to support 
the hypothesis that the universe began with a Big Bang  ripple of cosmic 
inflation. But astrophysicists recognized that  there was a slight chance that 
the observed wave pattern was due to cosmic dust. (This turned out to be 
true.)  Because they thought the region where the wave was detected was 
relatively dust  free, the dust alternative was considered improbable. Still, 
it was probable enough that an epistemically responsible astrophysicist 
would have to suspended judgment. She could,  were she so inclined, use 
the cosmic inflation hypothesis in hy po thet i cal reasoning, but  until the 
controversy was resolved (should we say  until the dust settled?), she should 
use neither hypothesis assertorically. Suspending judgment in a case like 
this seems entirely reasonable. But widespread suspension of judgment is 
more difficult and costly than it first appears. Action requires assuming 
that  things are one way or another. Suspending judgment leaves a person 
para lyzed. She has no reason to  favor any par tic u lar course of action. She 
ceases to be an agent.
Many epistemologists urge that a mere logical, conceptual, or meta -
physical possibility does not put a contention in epistemic jeopardy (Adler, 
2002). So the mere logical, conceptual, or metaphysical possibility that we

--- Page 307 ---

294  Chapter 14
are wrong about p gives us no reason to suspend judgment about  whether 
p. The possibility that concerns us, they maintain, is epistemic. And some 
logical, conceptual, and metaphysical possibilities are not epistemic possi -
bilities. The question fallibilism poses, then, is  whether it is pos si ble to know 
that p, even though it is epistemically pos si ble that ~p. Some, such as David 
Lewis (1999b) and Fred Dretske (2000), argue that we need not and  ought 
not concede this. Our evidence, they contend, regularly supplies con -
clusive reasons for knowledge claims. When it does,  there is no epistemic 
possibility that we are wrong. In such cases, we are infallible. When we are 
infallible, we  ought to be dogmatic. For  there is no real (that is, epistemic) 
possibility of error.
The difficulty is that we are seldom if ever in a position to rule out all 
potential defeaters to a knowledge claim. As Lewis and Dretske recognize, 
to arrive at the position they advocate requires circumscribing the range 
of potential defeaters that we need to accommodate. We need only, they 
maintain, consider what occurs in ‘nearby’ pos si ble worlds or is among the 
relevant alternatives. Remote possibilities and irrelevant alternatives can be 
ignored. But a  little reflection on the fates of our peers— similarly situated 
epistemic agents who turned out to be wrong— undermines confidence in 
this conclusion (Adler, 1981).2 The most familiar examples are lottery cases. 
The holder of the winning ticket had as good reason to think that she would 
lose as the losers did. Her winning the lottery was surely a remote possibil-
ity.3 But she was wrong. Since she did not know she would lose, and the 
other ticket holders  were in the same epistemic position, it is hard to see how 
they could know that they would lose. Less fortunate cases include Vogel’s 
(1990) car theft victims. They had as good reason as their peers to think that 
they knew where their cars  were parked, but, their cars having been stolen, 
they  were wrong.  Those who  were wrong  were as justified as  those who  were 
right. That’s the lesson of the gap. We move too quickly when we dismiss 
some metaphysical, logical, or conceptual possibilities as too remote to qual-
ify as epistemically pos si ble, or as sufficiently epistemically pos si ble to  matter.
Dogmatism is hard to square with epistemic misfortune. Fallibilism rec-
ognizes that epistemic misfortune is always pos si ble. This suggests that we 
construe fallibilism as contending that an epistemic agent can know that p, 
even though her justification is fallible, where for justification to be fallible 
is for it to be the case  either that her justification for p is not conclusive, or 
that the justification for the evidence that p is not conclusive. According to

--- Page 308 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 295
fallibilism, Leite says, “it is appropriate to attribute knowledge to someone 
just in case you take that person to have decisive, specific evidence against 
 those possibilities of error which you take to have some reason in their 
 favor” (2004, 247).
Leite  here only characterizes what is required to appropriately attribute 
knowledge. More is needed. For the fact that an epistemically responsible 
ascriber has no reason to think that a possibility of error obtains does 
not guarantee that no such possibility obtains. Nor is  there any guaran -
tee that two epistemically responsible ascribers, surveying the same situ -
ation, would agree about what possibilities of error have some reason in 
their  favor. So it is not straightforward to infer from the appropriateness of 
ascribing knowledge to a subject to the fact that the subject actually knows 
(see Stroud, 1984).
Still, Leite’s characterization can be plausibly elaborated. We might say 
that an epistemic agent has knowledge that p just in case she in fact has 
decisive, specific evidence against the possibilities of error that have some 
reason in their  favor. To know, then, does not require eliminating all pos-
sibilities of error; it only requires eliminating  those possibilities that  there is 
some reason to believe obtain. Possibilities that  there is no reason to believe, 
although real, can simply be ignored.
The difficulty is that sometimes such possibilities are realized. Even if 
 there is just one chance in a million that p is false, when that chance is 
realized, p is false. So the agent’s claim to knowledge is defeated despite the 
fact that she had just as good evidence for her claim, had decisive, specific 
evidence for the possibilities of error that she takes to have some reason 
in their  favor, and used just as reliable methods as her epistemically luck -
ier peers. Rather than conclude that the existence of such situations casts 
doubt on the adequacy of their positions, many epistemologists simply 
consign them to the realm of epistemic misfortune. If they  don’t happen 
too often, such epistemologists maintain,  there’s no prob lem. Knowledge 
involves justification and truth. Where we have adequate justification and 
our belief is true, we know. Where we have adequate justification and our 
belief is false, we do not. It is regrettable that adequate justification does not 
ensure truth. But we can live with an ele ment of luck in our epistemology. 
In the absence of bad luck, we still know (see Pritchard, 2005).
Do the dogmatist and the fallibilist differ in anything other than self- 
presentation? Both set the level of justification required for knowledge as

--- Page 309 ---

296  Chapter 14
less than a probability of 1. Both are vulnerable to epistemic misfortune, 
but seem not to be daunted by that vulnerability. Still,  there are differences. 
Fallibilism, unlike dogmatism, is prey to a variant of Moore’s paradox 
(Moore, 1991); dogmatism, unlike fallibilism, is prey to Kripke’s dogmatism 
paradox (Kripke, 2011a).
Moore’s paradox is an assertion of the form
p but I do not believe that p
or
I believe that p, but ~p.
 There is a good deal of controversy concerning exactly what kind of infelic-
ity a Moore’s paradoxical assertion involves (see Green & Williams, 2007). 
It is, however, widely acknowledged that for Moore’s paradox to occur, the 
sentence must be asserted, not merely entertained or supposed; and the 
attitude the agent self- ascribes or disavows is belief.
The schema that concerns us,
I know that p, but it is pos si ble that ~p,
is a variant on ‘I believe that p but ~p’. Let us call this the knowledge vari-
ant. The first conjunct of the knowledge variant is stronger than its coun -
terpart in the canonical Moore’s paradox, since in asserting it, its utterer 
ascribes to himself truth and justification, as well as belief. Still, belief is 
a central component of what he self- ascribes. The second conjunct— ‘it is 
pos si ble that ~p’—is weaker than its counterpart in the canonical form of 
the paradox. It does not contend that p is false, only that it might be. But 
like the canonical version of Moore’s paradox, the knowledge variant gives 
epistemic assurance in one breath and takes it back in the next.
Canonical Moore’s paradoxes are first personal.  There is something 
deeply untoward about ‘I believe that p, but ~p’.  There is nothing untoward 
about ‘Meg believes that p, but ~p’. The knowledge variant is dif fer ent. 
 Because knowledge is factive, ‘Meg knows that p, but it is pos si ble that ~p’ 
is as problematic as its first- personal counterpart. Such statements are con-
cessive knowledge attributions (see Dougherty & Rysiew, 2009). The first

--- Page 310 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 297
conjunct attributes knowledge; the second concedes the possibility of error. 
The divergence from canonical cases may be reason to deny that concessive 
knowledge attributions are strictly instances of Moore’s paradox, but they 
are at least close cousins. Let us call Meg’s epistemic predicament quasi- 
Moore’s paradoxical.
To appreciate the difficulty, consider what an epistemic agent should 
do in a quasi- Moore’s paradoxical situation. If Meg knows that p, she can 
responsibly assert that p, give her full assurance to  others that p, and use 
p as a premise in any inference or as a basis for any action where it is rel -
evant, regardless of the stakes. If she knows that p, she has a right to be sure 
that p. But if  there is some chance that she is wrong in thinking that p, her 
situation is dif fer ent. If the chance is small enough, perhaps she need not 
suspend judgment, but minimally she should hedge her bets, refrain from 
relying on p in inferences or actions when the stakes are very high, and con-
vey her degree of uncertainty about p to her interlocutors. The prob lem is 
that she cannot do both.  There seems to be no coherent course of thought 
or action open to the subject in the knowledge variant of Moore’s paradoxi-
cal situations. If this is what fallibilism commits us to, we are in a bind.
It might seem, then, that we should revert to dogmatism. Maybe we 
should set a satisfiable threshold on the justification required for knowl -
edge, and declare that when that threshold is reached, our evidence is con-
clusive. We should simply deny that  there is any real (epistemic) possibility 
that we still might be wrong. But dogmatism  faces a (putative) paradox of 
its own (Kripke, 2011a).
If S knows that p, then p is true.
If p is true, then any evidence against p is misleading.
So to avoid being misled and to preserve her knowledge, S should disregard any 
evidence against p.
Therefore, S should be dogmatic about p.
By itself, this is not strictly a paradox. It is merely an unwelcome conclu -
sion. It becomes a paradox when we connect knowledge with rationality. 
Since rationality requires responsiveness to evidence, on the recommended 
approach, knowledge and rationality diverge. Dogmatism requires closing 
our minds to new evidence, lest knowledge  will be lost. Rationality requires 
keeping an open mind.
Neither fallibilism nor dogmatism with re spect to knowledge seems 
wholly satisfactory. Dogmatism is intellectually arrogant. Fallibilism’s alleged

--- Page 311 ---

298  Chapter 14
intellectual humility is hard to get a  handle on. The admission that, despite 
the evidence, an epistemic agent still could be wrong, seems correct. The 
prob lem is to see how to construe it as anything other than  either an invita-
tion to skeptical paralysis or an expression of mock modesty.  Here is where 
the move from a focus on knowledge to a focus on understanding pays 
dividends.
Intellectual Humility
Despite the ‘ism’, I suggest, fallibilism is not primarily a doctrine, but a 
stance— a stance of intellectual humility. The stance is not a passive con -
cession in the face of epistemic frailty. Rather, it is an active orientation 
 toward a domain of inquiry and our prospects of understanding it. Unlike 
the dogmatist, the fallibilist does not simply dismiss wholly justified or reli-
ably generated false beliefs as bad luck. To do so is to assume that  there is no 
insight to be gleaned from the failures. That is shortsighted.
Suppose a medi cation for multiple sclerosis is considerably more effec -
tive than any available alternative, but it has serious side effects in 2  percent 
of the cases. A physician would reasonably and responsibly prescribe the 
medi cation. She might even say that she knows that it is safe and effec -
tive. But she would not stop  there. She would also warn her patients about 
the potential side effects, how to recognize them, and what to do if they 
occur. That would improve their understanding of the treatment. This is 
so not only for the patients who actually experience the side effects. All 
the patients understand their medical situation better if they are aware 
that the effective medi cation exposes them to risks and learn the ways to 
recognize deleterious side effects for what they are. Moreover, if the side 
effects are severe, researchers would presumably attempt to figure out their 
cause, to identify the subset of MS patients whose members are vulner -
able to them, and to see  whether they can find a way to eliminate them or 
moderate their severity. They too understand the medi cation better if they 
recognize the risk. No one would simply say ‘Bad luck!’ or ‘Better luck next 
time!’ to members of the 2  percent and move on. Such a response would 
not only be heartless, it would sacrifice useful information. The recognition 
that they do not know why or to whom the side effects  will occur is epistemi-
cally valuable.

--- Page 312 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 299
It might seem that the entire payoff for exercising intellectual humility 
is that by  doing so we  either uncover previously undetected errors, close 
previously open gaps in our understanding, or provide additional assurance 
that our conclusions  were correct. This is surely one sort of payoff. But, I  will 
argue,  there is another impor tant epistemic benefit. In taking the possibility 
of error seriously, we treat it as itself worthy of attention. We put ourselves 
in a position to identify the potential fault lines in our currently accepted 
account. If current understanding of the phenomena is wrong, where is the 
error apt to be located? What are the weakest links in the argument? If  there 
is an error, what would show it? If  there is no error, what accounts for 
the gap? By addressing such issues, we learn more about the phenomena, our 
assumptions about the phenomena, and our methods for investigating such 
 things. One might think that this is simply changing the subject. Rather than 
asking about the epistemic status of p, we are now asking something  else. 
This is incorrect. To ascertain p’s epistemic status, we need to determine how 
it figures in a network of epistemic commitments. That depends on how, 
where, and why it is vulnerable. Before looking at the epistemic benefits of 
the possibility of error, let us consider the epistemic benefits of  actual error.
Error as a Mark of Success
According to Davidson (2001), the identity of a belief derives from its place 
in a rich, textured array of relevant, true beliefs. A person who lacks the req-
uisite background cannot have a par tic u lar belief. So, for example,  unless 
Paul understands a good deal of physics, he cannot rightly or wrongly 
believe that electrons lack mass. He would not know what an electron is 
or why the question of its mass even arises. It might seem that he could 
garner the relevant knowledge via testimony. But being ignorant of phys -
ics, although Paul can hear the words ‘electrons have mass’ and recognize 
the utterance as information- conveying testimony, the utterance is to him 
like testimony in a language he does not speak. He cannot draw nontrivial 
inferences, incorporate it into his picture of the world, or use it as a basis for 
action. At best, he can parrot the statement and perhaps draw trivial logical 
inferences from it.
Ordinarily, few if any specific beliefs are required to back a given conten-
tion. One can approach an issue from dif fer ent directions. So apart from

--- Page 313 ---

300  Chapter 14
very general beliefs, such as ‘an electron is some sort of subatomic particle’, 
no specific beliefs are required to equip the agent to form beliefs about a 
topic. Moreover,  there are bound to be undecidable cases. It is not clear 
how sparse a complement of relevant beliefs a person can have and still, 
rightly or wrongly, believe that p. Indeed, the answer might depend on 
what sort of belief is in question. If  little is known or reasonably believed 
about the topic, a relatively sparse constellation of relevant beliefs might 
suffice. If plenty is known, then the agent’s constellation of beliefs might 
have to be considerably denser. Nevertheless, a fairly wide and dense cluster 
of relevant beliefs is, Davidson maintains, required to anchor each par tic-
u lar belief.
Davidson’s point turns on the fact that most of a person’s beliefs about a 
topic are trivial. He recognizes that  there can be profound disagreements 
about such  matters as  whether electrons have sharply demarcated bound-
aries, with no resolution in sight. The assurance that the parties to the dis-
pute are all talking about the same  thing (and that that  thing is the electron) 
is based on their believing a lot of the same electron- relevant trivia. They 
believe, for example, that electrons are subatomic particles, that they are 
small, that somehow they are constituents of material objects, that they 
are more plentiful than artichokes, that they are not cats, and so forth. The 
number of a person’s trivial true beliefs about a topic swamps the number 
of her controversial beliefs about it.
Davidson insists that most of the beliefs that constitute the background 
must be true. I disagree. Rather, sufficiently many of the agent’s relevant 
beliefs must be at least true enough and reasonably accepted. If we insist 
that for Fred to have beliefs about quarks, most of his beliefs about quan -
tum mechanics must be true, we ask too much. Perhaps most (or, at least, 
enough) of what is currently accepted in quantum mechanics is true 
enough. But it would be unsurprising if many of the contentions of current 
theory turn out to be not exactly true.
I suggest that truth per se is not required. One reason is that at the cutting 
edge of inquiry, and often well inside the cutting edge, an epistemic agent’s 
opinions may be at best true enough— true in the ways that  matter and to 
the extent that they  matter for their effective functioning in her cluster of 
epistemic commitments. Another reason is that truth is the wrong currency 
for assessing the opinions of babies and nonhuman animals, as well as for 
assessing adult opinions whose modes of repre sen ta tion are not truth apt.

--- Page 314 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 301
Still, the idea that the identity conditions of beliefs and opinions depend 
on their place in a cluster of reasonably accurate cognitive commitments 
seems right. If Paul is ignorant of physics, he has no idea what an electron 
is or what it takes for a particle to have or lack mass. Too  great an ignorance 
of a topic leaves a person out of touch with its subject  matter. He can have 
no views about it. If Paul cannot tell an electron from a quark, then noth -
ing in his cognitive system equips him to have views about the one but not 
the other.
It follows that to be in a position to make a  mistake marks a significant 
epistemic achievement. Only someone who has some understanding of a 
topic has the resources to have mistaken beliefs about it. Only someone 
who understands a good deal about it has the resources to make a significant 
 mistake. Only  because Fred is cognizant about quantum mechanics can he 
harbor the erroneous opinion that quarks and antiquarks exchange charms. 
(They exchange muons.) Being in a position to have erroneous beliefs about 
a topic requires a significant mea sure of understanding of that topic.
Learning from Our  Mistakes
From early childhood,  we’re advised to learn from our  mistakes. Perhaps 
this means that we should learn not to make a par tic u lar  mistake again. 
Once  you’ve discovered that you get burned when you touch a hot stove, 
you should permanently refrain from touching hot stoves. Karl Popper 
(2002) considers this the key to science. Science, he urges, can never prove 
anything. It can only disprove. Thus, he concludes, scientific pro gress con-
sists in formulating theories and attempting to disprove them. Each time we 
generate a disproof, we make pro gress. We know that that par tic u lar theory is 
false. If we do not make that  mistake again, we get closer to the truth. What 
we learn from our  mistake, then, is that  things are not the way the mistaken 
theory says they are.
Where the  mistake concerns an isolated fact, with few and weak connec-
tions to the agent’s other epistemic commitments, that the proposition is 
false may be all that is available to learn. Joe’s mistaken opinion that King 
Philip I of Spain was King Philip II of Portugal is a  mistake of this kind. 
(Philip II of Spain was Philip I of Portugal.) Similarly when  mistakes are 
wild guesses. When a student discovers that he is mistaken in thinking that 
the value of Avogadro’s number is 17, he is not much closer to knowing the

--- Page 315 ---

302  Chapter 14
 actual value of Avogadro’s number. Still, learning from  mistakes through a 
pro cess of elimination is exceedingly labor- intensive, and unlikely to get 
very far.  There are in def initely many ways the world might be. So the idea 
that we  will get to the truth by sequentially eliminating hypotheses that 
have shown themselves to be mistaken is not promising. Neither individu-
ally nor as a species  will we survive long enough to eliminate all the false 
alternatives.
This characterization of the issue treats  every error as a stab in the dark. 
When we understand  little about a topic, we are not in a position to learn 
much from a  mistake. But our situation is rarely so bleak as this suggests. 
Usually, we understand enough that the range of plausible alternatives is 
restricted. If Maria realizes  there are only three configurations in which a 
par tic u lar protein might fold, eliminating one of them yields considerable 
information about the protein—it folds in one of the remaining two ways. 
If Bill is aware that only five candidates are  running for office, the news 
that one has withdrawn again yields considerably more information than 
if he thought that any one of the nearly 7 billion  people on earth might be 
elected.
But even if we grant that our cognitive situation is frequently better than 
that of the student who is wildly guessing values for Avogadro’s number, it 
might seem that our prospects of learning much from a  mistake are bleak. 
The prob lem is a consequence of holism. Quine argues, correctly I believe, 
that “statements about the external world face the tribunal of experience 
not individually, but only as a corporate body” (1961, 41). This means, as 
Walden says, “We never properly get evidence for a proposition; we get evi-
dence for a proposition relative to methodological prescriptions about what 
counts as evidence for what. . . .   These methodological prescriptions are 
also part of our theory, and thus . . . they are actively confirmed or denied 
along with the rest of the theory” (2007). The entire cluster of factual and 
methodological commitments is confirmed or disconfirmed together. It fol-
lows that what we learn when we discover that we have made a  mistake is 
that something in a wide constellation of commitments is wrong. But the 
discovery of the error alone does not target any par tic u lar member of the 
constellation.
What this bleak assessment overlooks is that typically not all of the ele-
ments of the constellation are equally vulnerable. Since constellations of 
epistemic commitments overlap, some ele ments of the constellation that

--- Page 316 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 303
contains a  mistake may be in de pen dently supported by their roles in other 
constellations that have been confirmed. Then we have prima facie rea -
son to believe that they are not the locus of error. The more solidly sup -
ported our background assumptions, the more precise the focus a  mistake 
can provide.
At the opposite extreme from random guesses are cases where we are 
quite confident that we know what  will happen, but turn out to be wrong. 
In such cases, our mistaken conviction is a telling error. An experiment that 
to our surprise fails to confirm a seemingly well- established theory is such 
a case. Let me briefly describe such an experiment (Suzuki et al., 2007). 
A plasmid is a circular DNA molecule found in bacteria. Inserting muta -
tions into plasmids is a common technique in ge ne tic engineering. Bacte-
ria containing  those plasmids then transfer the mutation to other bacteria 
through conjugation, a pro cess by which bacteria exchange nuclear mate-
rial. That is the established, well- confirmed background against which the 
following experiment took place. A bacteriologist in Marcin Filutowicz’s 
laboratory attempted to insert two dif fer ent mutations into a single bac -
terial plasmid. Given the previous successes and the then current under -
standing of bacteriology, he had good reason to believe he would succeed. 
Introducing mutations into plasmids is a boringly routine task. But his 
belief was mistaken. No  matter how often he tried, and no  matter how care-
fully he proceeded, he could not produce a live bacterium containing the 
two mutations. This constituted a surprising experimental failure. In light 
of the then current understanding of bacteriology, the procedure  ought to 
have worked.
A Popperian might conclude that what we learn from this  mistake is 
that one cannot introduce the two mutations into the same plasmid and 
obtain a live bacterium. A Quinean might conclude that  there is a  mistake 
somewhere in the cluster of assumptions that led bacteriologists to believe 
that two mutations could be introduced at once. Both would be right. We 
do learn  these  things. But, I suggest, we learn something more.
Introducing  either mutation alone did not produce the untoward result. 
The background assumptions and methodology  were the same  whether 
one or two mutations  were introduced. So rather than simply concluding 
that something must be wrong somewhere in the vast constellation of sub-
stantive and methodological assumptions, Filutowicz was in a position to 
zero in on the error—to recognize that it arose from thinking that if you can

--- Page 317 ---

304  Chapter 14
successfully introduce each of the mutations, you can successfully intro -
duce both. That is, given the depth and breadth of the well- established 
background commitments, he could use the  mistake to probe the current 
understanding of plasmids.
The  mistake put him in a position to consider more carefully what occurs 
within a plasmid when mutations are introduced. Having evidence that the 
two mutations together did something that neither did alone, he hypoth -
esized that when the two mutations  were introduced together, they caused 
the plasmid to overreplicate and destroy the containing bacterium. He con-
firmed the hypothesis and went on to devise a bacterium that suppressed 
the overreplication, thereby creating a ‘Trojan Horse’. The new bacterium 
contains the normally overreplicating plasmid. In conjugation, it passes on 
the propensity to overreplicate to bacteria that cannot survive the pro cess. 
This yields an antibacterial agent that evidently does not trigger antibiotic 
re sis tance.
 Because so much was understood about bacteriology and about the pro-
cess of introducing mutations into plasmids, once the error was discov -
ered, the mistaken assumption was extremely informative. Filutowicz and 
his associates did not just learn that you cannot introduce the two muta -
tions at once, or that  there is something wrong somewhere in the clus -
ter of assumptions that led them to think that they could do so.  Because 
the  mistake focused attention on the replicating be hav ior of plasmids, it 
opened the way to new and fruitful insights. If it turns out that pathogenic 
bacteria are incapable of or less prone to developing re sis tance to the ‘Tro-
jan Horse’, then the fruits of the scientist’s mistaken belief  will be far more 
valuable than the insights that would have been gained had his original 
expectation about the experimental outcome been true.
One other case worth mentioning is the Michelson— Morley experiment. 
At the end of the nineteenth  century, physicists recognized that light con-
sists of waves. They assumed that waves require a medium of propagation. 
Since light waves travel through space, they posited that space was filled 
with a medium, the luminiferous ether. The objective of the experiment 
was to mea sure the flow of ether across the Earth as the Earth travels around 
the sun. Although the experiment was designed and conducted with exqui-
site care, the result was null. No ether drift was detected. Over a period of 
years, the experiment was redesigned and ever more sensitive inferometers

--- Page 318 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 305
 were used, to no avail. The belief that light consists of waves in an ethereal 
medium is mistaken.
This familiar story may seem to have the same moral as the previous one. 
But the payoff is dif fer ent. The cognitive consequences of the mistaken belief 
that Filutowicz and his colleagues shared  were local and limited.  Because 
the tightly woven web of commitments they relied on consisted in large 
part of in de pen dently confirmed strands, they could reasonably quickly 
identify the erroneous belief and see what routes of inquiry it opened up. 
The rest of the commitments largely held firm when the  mistake was cor -
rected. The Michelson— Morley experiment was dif fer ent.  There too, scien-
tists had a tightly woven fabric of established cognitive commitments that 
led them to believe that the experiment would succeed. Their failure even-
tually convinced them that luminiferous ether does not exist. But this did 
not, and could not, lead to a local and limited revision of their understand-
ing. It tore the fabric of cognitive commitments apart. For if light waves do 
not require a medium of propagation, light is radically dif fer ent from what 
science supposed. And if that is so, then many of their other assumptions 
about  matter and energy had to be revised as well. I do not claim that the 
Michelson— Morley experiment was a ‘crucial experiment’ that by itself fal-
sified Newtonian physics. Rather, its effect was Socratic. It made manifest 
to the scientific community the extent to which they did not understand 
what they thought they understood.
If an opinion is supported by a tightly woven tapestry of reasons, and 
the opinion turns out to be erroneous, more than that par tic u lar opinion 
must be revised or rejected. The question arises: How could it be wrong? 
What have we been missing, or overlooking, or underestimating, or miscon-
struing? The realization that this is not the way  things are in a par tic u lar 
area can often afford ave nues of insight into the way  things are. At the very 
least, it enables us to focus attention on par tic u lar aspects of our system 
of commitments. It not only motivates us to ask questions we would not 
other wise ask, it often also provides the resources for answering them.
The  human propensity for error is typically regarded as a regrettable 
weakness. Certainly the propensity to make careless  mistakes is a weakness. 
So is the propensity to jump rashly to erroneous conclusions. But, I have 
suggested, the propensity to make thoughtful, educated  mistakes may be 
a strength. This is not to say that  every error is felicitous. Some, like wild

--- Page 319 ---

306  Chapter 14
guesses, provide virtually no information beyond the fact that  things are 
not the way we supposed. Some, although well grounded, are simply off the 
mark. Some are cognitively (and often morally) culpable. They fail to take 
account of available information and therefore lead us in the wrong direc-
tion. But sometimes, we get  things wrong in epistemically fruitful ways. 
Once discovered, such errors provide not just incentives but resources 
for serious, focused, effective inquiry. By revealing not only that but 
also where we have got  things wrong, they point us in the direction of 
advancing our understanding. We are lucky we are disposed to make such 
 mistakes.
The Possibility of Error
We have seen that the capacity to be mistaken about something is an 
epistemic achievement and that  actual errors can embody and engender 
insights that investigators would other wise miss. But the issue for fallibil -
ism is  whether  there is any epistemic value to recognizing the possibility of 
error. Let us grant that  little is to be gleaned from the unfocused possibil -
ity of error that global skepticism pres ents. That Fred would be wrong in a 
demon world shows only that the content of his belief is not an obviously 
necessary truth. He prob ably recognizes that anyway. But the capacity to 
identify local fault lines—to see where, even if skepticism is false, errors 
might creep in—is a valuable epistemic asset.
Suppose that rather than simply taking a test result at face value, investi-
gators seriously entertain the possibility that it is a false positive. They may 
already know the probability of its being a false positive. Let’s say that it 
is 3  percent. The issue before them is  whether the case before them is one 
of the 3  percent. How might they tell? In focusing on this question, they 
put themselves in a position to learn more about what the test detects and 
how exactly it does so, what range of conditions it is sensitive to, what the 
probabilities of the vari ous conditions are,  whether  there are circumstances 
in which the test is particularly likely to yield false positives or subjects for 
whom it is particularly likely to give misleading results. Answering such 
questions does not always require amassing additional evidence. Sometimes 
the answers can be found simply by reexamining the data at hand. By, for 
example, using sophisticated regression techniques to focus on what the 
data discloses about the 3  percent, they may be able to extract additional

--- Page 320 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 307
information. The idea that the only  thing the evidence for p discloses is 
 whether p is the case is shortsighted. It blinds epistemic agents to additional 
information embedded in the evidence.
It is fash ion able to interpret modal claims as truths about other pos-
si ble worlds. So to contend that a hypothesis could be false is to say that 
 there exists a pos si ble world where it is false. For our purposes, this inter-
pretation is unhelpful. Rather, we should recognize that the possibility of 
error is a property the hypothesis has in the  actual world. That property— a 
vulnerability— derives from the nature and strength of the support the 
hypothesis gets from the account and the evidence for it. What it portends 
depends on the weave of the fabric of commitments that constitute the 
account and on the contribution of the hypothesis to the strength of the 
fabric. If an erroneous contention is tightly woven into a fabric of epistemic 
commitments, an epistemic agent could be wrong about it only by being 
wrong about many other  things. The contention that species evolved is 
supported not just by biological evidence (from ge ne tics, anatomy, physiol-
ogy, ecol ogy,  etc.) but also by the findings of other sciences. If it  were false, 
geology would have to be badly wrong about how fossils are formed and 
embedded in sedimentary rock, chemistry would have to be badly wrong 
about organic compounds, and physics would have to be badly wrong about 
carbon dating. Not easily could science be so wrong as to discredit the claim 
that species evolved. If, on the other hand, a contention is a mere tassel, 
loosely dangling from a fabric of understanding, it could easily be wrong. 
Urban legends are a case in point. It is said that alligators, having been 
brought from Florida as babies and flushed down the toilets when they 
grew too big, now roam the New York City sewers. We would not have to 
be wrong by much to be wrong about that. Our only reason for believing 
it is that we had it from a putatively reliable source. On learning that it is 
wrong, we readily give it up and perhaps downgrade our assessment of the 
reliability of our source.
The value of recognizing where we might be wrong is not only, or even 
mainly, prudential. It is not just that an agent attuned to the possibilities 
of error can buttress her defenses. For possibilities of error disclose aspects 
of the topography of the space of reasons. We appreciate how the network 
of commitments hangs together when we recognize how it might fall apart, 
how easily it might fall apart, and what the consequences of its  doing so 
would be.

--- Page 321 ---

308  Chapter 14
Appreciating the possibility of error is not just ruefully admitting, ‘Well, 
despite my evidence, I could still be wrong’. It involves recognizing the 
ramifications of potential errors— the damage they would do to a network 
of epistemic commitments. That recognition provides incentives to double 
check results, shore up findings, hedge bets. It also provides incentives to 
develop methods for  doing such  things. A first stab at double checking is to 
rerun the same test, redo the same calculation, reexamine at the same evi -
dence. This yields a mea sure of assurance, for it functions as a stay against 
carelessness. But to run the same test twice does not protect against 
under lying misconceptions. So investigators do well to address their con -
clusion from dif fer ent perspectives: do dif fer ent tests, perform dif fer ent 
calculations, run dif fer ent regressions, scrutinize the data from dif fer ent 
perspectives. Granted, a result that withstands such reconsideration might 
still be incorrect. But if investigators demonstrate that a finding stands up 
to diverse forms of testing, they ensure that they would have to be wrong 
about a lot to be wrong about it.  Because they have woven it into their 
fabric of commitments, such a result is stronger than the result they would 
obtain by simply amassing more evidence using the original method.
If we recognize that intellectual humility is an epistemic asset,  don’t we 
still face a variant of Moore’s paradox? The understanding variant is:
My understanding of φ embeds my accepting that p, but it is pos si ble that ~p.
Is this a prob lem? Let us temporarily set aside the worry that in uttering the 
understanding variant I give my assurance with one breath and take it back 
with the next. Still  there is the question of what I should do. We saw that the 
subject in the quasi- Moorean predicament brought on by the knowledge 
variant was in a bind.  There seemed to be no coherent course of reason -
ing or action available to her. The subject in the situation described by the 
understanding variant has no such prob lem. Since she accepts that p, she 
can use p in inference and action when her ends are cognitive. But  because 
her understanding of φ embeds an appreciation of her epistemic vulner -
ability in accepting that p, it also gives her reason to double check, to hedge 
her bets, to be sensitive to intimations of error, and to convey her level of 
epistemic insecurity to her interlocutors. To say that she can use p for infer-
ence and action does not entail that she can or should do so blindly.
A consequence of fallibilism is that concessive knowledge attributions 
are often true. When I know that p,  there remains some possibility that ~p. 
When my understanding of φ embeds a commitment to p,  there remains

--- Page 322 ---

Fallibility’s Payoff 309
some possibility that ~p. If we disregard the possibility of error, we lose valu-
able information. So why are concessive knowledge attributions untoward? 
I suggest that the reason is Gricean. The second maxim of quantity is “Do 
not make your contribution more informative than is required” (Grice, 
1989, 26; see also Dougherty & Rysiew, 2009). If every one knows, and 
every one knows that every one knows that empirical claims are fallible, then 
the fallibility of an empirical claim goes without saying. To mention that I 
might be wrong is to highlight the possibility of error—to make it salient. 
I  ought only say that I might be wrong in circumstances where I consider 
p’s epistemic standing especially vulnerable. But in such a case, I  ought not 
claim to know that p. What goes without saying  ought not be said.
I have argued that fallibilism is not a higher- order stance  toward our 
understanding of a topic. It is, or should be, woven into the fabric of under-
standing. By recognizing the possibility of error, we can exploit our epistemic 
vulnerability and gain insight into our understanding of a topic. Rather than 
being a weakness, our vulnerability to error is a strength.

--- Page 324 ---

2 Distancing from Truth
1.  Although I harbor Quinean qualms about propositions, I set them aside  here to 
characterize mainstream epistemology in its own terms.
2.  An ‘account’ is what in Considered Judgment I called a ‘system of thought’. I use 
the bland term ‘account’ to avoid getting involved in disputes about the relation 
between theories, evidence, and models.
3.  I do not have strong intuitions about this case, but I do not think it is clearly 
wrong to say that the cat has such a belief.
4.  As we  will see, the issue is not so straightforward as Williams thinks.
5.  I  will argue  later that some falsehoods that purport to be true are nonetheless 
successful  because they are felicitous falsehoods. For now, however, the focus is on 
sentences that manifestly play a non- truth- telling role.
6.  I call them falsehoods out of re spect for classical bivalence. One might equally 
argue that they are neither true nor false. All that I require is that that they are epis-
temically felicitous although not true.
7.   Whether so- called ceteris paribus laws are  really laws is a subject of controversy. 
See, for example, Erkenntnis 57 (2002), for a range of papers on the issue. Although 
for brevity I speak of them as laws, for my purposes, nothing hangs on  whether 
the generalizations in questions  really are laws, at least insofar as this is an onto -
logical question. I am interested in the role such generalizations play in ongoing 
science.  Whether or not they can (in some sense of ‘can’) be replaced by general -
izations where all the caveats and restrictions are spelled out, in practice scien -
tists typically make no effort to do so. Nor, often, do they know (or care) how to 
do so.
8.  i and r are the  angles made by the incident beam to the normal and n1 and n2 are 
the refractive indices of the two media.
Notes

--- Page 325 ---

312 Notes
9.  “The profit rate is the level of profits in the economy relative to the value of capi-
tal stock” (Bannock, Baxter, & Davis, 1998, 397).
10.  The veritist might attempt to soften the blow by arguing that we should be 
expressivists about science. But it is implausible in the extreme to maintain that 
natu ral science is just an expression of our attitudes rather than a discipline whose 
success depends on the way  things actually are.
11.  Conceivably, of course, the equations in question  will be superseded by some 
other understanding of the subject, but the fact that the equation we consider true 
does not have an analytical solution provides no reason to think so. Nor does it 
provide reason to think that the considerations that supersede it  will be mathemati-
cally more tractable, much less that in the long run science  will be  free of all such 
irksome equations.
3 From Knowledge to Understanding
1.  The parenthetical caveats are included to allow for the possibility that some 
knowledge— e.g., perceptual knowledge—is direct knowledge and not in need of 
justification. I do not believe that this is so, but at this point in the argument it is 
advisable to leave this possibility open.
2.  This maneuver is modeled on the ‘corrected doxastic system’ in Lehrer’s (1974) 
epistemology.
3.  Although it is undeniably a cognitive accomplishment, I also bracket understand-
ing a language and related feats like understanding a concept or a passage of prose. 
Understanding a language is a  matter of being capable of interpreting and, perhaps, 
speaking, reading, and/or writing it correctly. It is integral to understanding in gen-
eral. But on the face of it, it is not the same as understanding a topic, so for now I set 
it aside.
4.  ‘Hardly more secure’ rather than ‘no more secure’,  because a mea sure of addi -
tional support is supplied by the fact that military strategists agree that such a strat-
egy might work.
5.  The restriction to cases where her ends are cognitive is crucial. Depending on the 
topic and her attitude  toward the topic, she may be unwilling all  things considered 
to use the information in reasoning or in action.
6.  I owe this example to Kent Bach.
4 The Fabric of Understanding
1.  One might won der  whether the contents of a novel qualify as deliverances. Argu-
ably, they do not pres ent themselves as candidates for epistemic ac cep tance. If this

--- Page 326 ---

Notes 313
is right, the objection does not get off the ground. In chapter 11 I discuss the epis -
temic functions of fiction.  Here I am willing to treat the contents of a novel as deliv-
erances, and let the nineteenth- century novel serve as a challenge to theories that 
take coherence to be conducive of tenability.
2.  I say ‘direct claims’  because I believe that novels play a significant role in the 
advancement of understanding. Just how they do so  will emerge in chapter 11. See 
Elgin (1996), 183–200.
3.  I thank Fred Feldman for this objection.
4.  Which I think is prob ably an unintelligible claim.
5 Epistemic Normativity
1.  This chapter was made pos si ble through the support of a grant from the Intellec-
tual Humility Proj ect at St. Louis University, the Va ri e ties of Understanding Proj ect 
at Fordham University, and the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions 
expressed  here are  those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Intellectual Humility Proj ect, the Va ri e ties of Understanding Proj ect, or the John 
Templeton Foundation.
2.  Agents are responsible for actions they perform when drunk or  under the influ -
ence of recreational drugs. As Aristotle (1985) argues, even if they are out of control 
when they perform the par tic u lar actions in question,  because they  were in control 
when they imbibed to the point where they lost control, they are responsible for 
their drunken be hav ior. And in general, if x  ought to φ, then x is ceteris paribus 
obliged to refrain from putting herself in a position where she cannot φ. The bearing 
of this point on my argument is this: if someone irresponsibly neglects to acquire or 
exercise an epistemic virtue, he can be held responsible for the epistemic defects 
that result.
3.  Such heteronomy is character of what Sosa (2007) calls animal knowledge. It is 
plausible that animals cannot reflectively endorse or criticize their attitudes, and are 
subjectively vulnerable in just the way I suggest. On the other hand, they presum -
ably do not go in for, and do not need to go in for, self- reflection. So the vulnerabil-
ity is not a subjective prob lem for them.
4.  I think that epistemic agents can hone their perceptual, repre sen ta tional, and 
imaginative capacities. So they are not entirely passive even with re spect to inputs. 
But I  will not argue that  here.
5.  I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for this example.
6.  I am grateful to Michael Ashooh for this example.
7.  I am grateful to Jonathan Adler for this point.

--- Page 327 ---

314 Notes
8.  I am grateful to Alvin Goldman and Sanford Goldberg for pressing me to clarify 
this point.
9.  In the cases Kitcher is concerned with, rival theories might be approximately 
equal in predictive success, and/or each might best the other across some part of the 
domain. Then their predictive track rec ords compare favorably with one another. 
Moreover, since scientific acceptability involves multiple desiderata,  there are trade- 
offs. A mea sure of predictive success might be sacrificed for an increase in preci -
sion or scope. In such cases, the practices as  wholes compare favorably with one 
another.
10.  I am grateful to Thomas Kelly for raising this issue.
6 Intellectual Integrity
1.  This chapter was made pos si ble in part through the support of a grant from the 
Spencer Foundation and in part through a grant from the Intellectual Humility Proj-
ect of St. Louis University and the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions 
expressed  here are  those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the Intellectual Humility Proj ect, the John Templeton Foundation, or the Spencer 
Foundation.
2.  As noted, the upper- case letters indicate that as Williams uses them ‘Sincerity’ and 
‘Competence’ are quasi- technical terms that diverge slightly from their standard 
meanings. I follow his lead. The main deviation of ‘Well- Intentioned’ as I use the 
term is that it is role specific. An agent can be a Well- Intentioned auto mechanic or 
in for mant, while being Ill- Intentioned when it comes to paying all the taxes he owes.
3.  Bernard Williams distinguishes between the ethical and the moral. Ethics is a 
broader category concerned with the question how should we live. Morality is con -
cerned specifically with issues pertaining to rights, duties, and obligations. If we 
follow Williams, what the act calls ‘the ethical conduct of research’ is more properly 
called the ‘moral conduct of research’. For my purposes, it does not  matter which 
term we use.
4.  Kuhn (1970) denies that science is cumulative. In scientific revolutions, much 
that has been accepted is called into question. This does not undermine my conten-
tion that scientists build on one another’s findings. For even a revolutionary scien -
tist draws on evidence, methods, and instruments that  others contrived.
5.  Although I doubt that this is pos si ble, my point  here is weaker. Science as we 
know it could not be so generated.
6.   There are gray areas  here. It may not be obvious  whether a failed investigation 
rises to the level of significance to make it worth publishing. As a result, journals 
may be more reluctant to publish failed studies than successful ones. (I thank

--- Page 328 ---

Notes 315
Jonathan Adler for this point.) But  there are also cases where scientists and the insti-
tutions they work for suppress failed studies  because they have a vested interest in a 
research program that is undermined by the failure, or  because they consider the 
failure a fluke, or both.
7.  It may of course do more. When a phar ma ceu ti cal com pany suppresses results 
that show a drug to be dangerous or in effec tive, it illicitly conveys assurance that 
the drug is safe and effective or at least not known to be unsafe or in effec tive. In 
emphasizing the epistemological consequences for the scientific community, I do 
not mean to deny that  there are other serious consequences, not only for the scien-
tific community but also for the public at large.
8.  This is not just an ‘in princi ple’ worry. One study showed that pharmaceutical- 
industry- funded  trials  were far more likely to report positive outcomes (85.4%) than 
 either government- funded  trials (50%) or nonprofit- funded  trials (71%). This does 
not demonstrate that the industry- funded  trials  were biased. Possibly phar ma ceu ti-
cal companies do not run clinical  trials  unless they are pretty sure that the drugs 
being tested are effective. But in light of the industry’s financial interest in the out -
come,  these statistics give one pause. See Bourgeois, Murthy, and Mandl (2010).
9.  It might seem that at least the methodology section of an acceptable research 
paper needs to be true. Even if scientists cannot guarantee the truth of their results, 
they can, and therefore should, provide a true description of how the result was 
arrived at. But a true history of the path to the conclusion is not what the methodol-
ogy section is supposed to provide. The history of investigation leading to a par tic u-
lar result is typically a circuitous path, with numerous false starts, missteps, and 
dead ends. How they actually arrived at the result— the precise meandering path 
they took—is of no interest. The question the methodology section is supposed to 
answer is not ‘How did we come by our result?’ but ‘Why should you accept our 
result?’ Much of the  actual history of the investigation is irrelevant to the answer to 
the latter question. So scientists provide a sanitized, streamlined description of a 
method that is grounded in and justified by the investigation they carried out and 
that, if followed, would yield their result. Rather than a true description of what 
they did, it is a rational reconstruction. To vindicate the open invitation requires 
supplying assurance not that the conclusion is true but that, in light of current stan-
dards, the evidence warrants it. The methodology section is written to show how 
the evidence conveys warrant.
10.  Competence is field based. The idea is that anyone with the appropriate knowl-
edge and training in a specific branch of science could have done the work. It is not 
that a competent ge ne ticist could have performed or interpreted an experiment in 
plasma physics, or even that the bench scientist could do the statistical analy sis 
provided by another member of his team.
11.  I thank Jonathan Adler for this point.

--- Page 329 ---

316 Notes
12.  For example, Jan Schön’s misconduct was discovered when it was noticed that 
supposedly distinct experiments  were reported to all have identical background 
noise. (See Goodstein, 2010, 98–100.)
7 Objectivity: A Bulwark against Bias
1.  This chapter was made pos si ble through the support of a grant from the Va ri e ties 
of Understanding Proj ect at Fordham University and the John Templeton Founda -
tion. The opinions expressed  here are  those of the author and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Va ri e ties of Understanding Proj ect or the John Templeton 
Foundation.
2.  I say ‘purportedly’ and ‘putatively’  because some of the pictures have religious 
subjects. I am not remotely qualified to say  whether heaven, if it exists, is three 
dimensional, or  whether angels, if they exist, are vis i ble. But it is plain that the art-
ists represented heaven as a three- dimensional physical space, and angels as vis i ble 
in such a space.
3.  Initially, I suppose, the several judges negotiated  until their assessments 
 converged.
8 Irreconcilable Differences
1.   There are exceptions. If a speaker knows that her interlocutor holds a position 
that she does not, she can responsibly say, ‘Given your commitments, p is a reason 
for you. Since I do not share  those commitments, it is not a reason I share. But you 
should take it seriously’.
2.   Here I use the term ‘paradigmatically factual’ for cases that are uncontroversially 
factual  because I want, at least for now, to leave open the question of  whether aes-
thetic judgments are or are not judgments of fact.
3.  My focus on well- known critics may suggest that I am committed to something 
like Dickie’s (2007) contention that the art world determines what counts as art and 
what counts as good art. This is not so. I am concerned with the ways that and rea -
sons why  people who engage seriously with works of art provide reasons for their 
claims. I appeal to a dispute between well- known critics  because they are sufficiently 
focused and articulate that the points they raise readily strike us as reasons. The 
same considerations arise in discussions on blogs devoted to heavy metal  music or 
Game of Thrones.
4.  Caveat: although Greenberg is clearly responding to Fry’s discussion of Le Compo-
tier, he casts his discussion as about Cézanne in general. He does not specifically 
mention Le Compotier . Both  because of the context of his discussion and  because

--- Page 330 ---

Notes 317
of the utility of the assumption for my purposes, I take him, like Fry, to be discuss -
ing Le Compotier.
5.   There is nothing about the gustatory realm that excludes it from aesthetic judg -
ment.  There are food critics, just as  there are critics of painting,  music, and dance. 
Food critics, like other art critics, give reasons for their judgments. They point to 
 factors, like the slightly metallic aftertaste or a soupçon of lemon, which  others 
may not have noticed, to back up their claims. In this they differ from folks like Jim 
and Kim who simply do not find the same food tasty.
9 Exemplification in Understanding
1.  This chapter was made pos si ble through the support of a grant from the Va ri e ties 
of Understanding Proj ect at Fordham University and the John Templeton Founda -
tion. The opinions expressed  here are  those of the author and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Va ri e ties of Understanding Proj ect or the John Templeton 
Foundation.
2.  See McGowan (2003) on metaphysical privileging.
3.  I am grateful to Sean Parker for this example.
4.  This is not to say that any account that exemplifies some deleterious feature of 
lying is an adequate understanding. If impor tant features are omitted or underrated, or 
if the relations among the features are confused, the understanding may be skewed.
5.   Here I draw heavi ly on Jullien (2006, 158–164), both for the example and the 
discussion of the role of exemplification in mathe matics. She takes the example from 
G. H. Hardy.
11 Casting in Bold Relief
1.  I am grateful to Georg Brun and Christoph Baumberger for raising this 
objection.
2.  This is consonant with Platonism, but does not require it. Perhaps abstract prop-
erties and patterns exist only if instantiated, but instantiations,  whether material or 
virtual, can be created or can naturally emerge.
3.  I originally found reference to Boswell’s column in Snyder (2012), 55.
4.  Carroll discusses but does not endorse this objection.
5.  Carroll discusses but does not accept this argument.
6.  I am grateful to Jonathan Adler, Geordie McComb, Amélie Rorty, and Michael 
Stuart for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this chapter.

--- Page 331 ---

318 Notes
12 Chekhov’s Gun
1.  A variant of this quote is regularly misattributed to  Virginia Woolf. I am grateful 
to John Kulvicki for giving me the correct wording and the correct reference.
2.  This use of ‘denote’ is slightly tendentious, both  because denotation is usually 
restricted to language and  because even within language it is usually distinguished 
from predication. As I use the term, predicates and generic nonverbal repre sen ta-
tions denote the members of their extensions. See Elgin (1988), 19–35.
3.  I am grateful to Roman Frigg for this example.
13 Borders and Crossings
1.  Both Grimm (2008) and Lipton (2009) require that the agent who understands is 
not acting by rote. Her capacity to perform correctly must be stable across a range of 
counterfactual circumstances.
2.  I am grateful to Kenneth Walden for this point.
3.  I am indebted to Ajume Wingo for this interpretation of the Mall.
4.  This is not to say that all works of art that afford historical understanding do so 
only or primarily for the inexpert. Some works— for example,  those with religious 
themes— convey understanding only to  those with considerable expertise.
14 Fallibility’s Payoff
1.  This chapter was made pos si ble through the support of a grant from the Intellec-
tual Humility Proj ect of St. Louis University and the John Templeton Foundation. The 
opinions expressed  here are  those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the Intellectual Humility Proj ect or the John Templeton Foundation.
2.  Adler’s position evolved. So the skepticism he evinces in Adler (1981) is not pres-
ent in his  later theory.
3.  Pritchard disagrees. But to get the result that the probability of winning a fair 
lottery with long odds is not remote, he relies on a very strong safety princi ple. 
“Safety III: For all agents . . . if an agent knows a contingent proposition φ, then in 
nearly all (if not all) nearby pos si ble worlds in which she forms her belief about φ in 
the same way as she forms the belief in the  actual world, that agent only believes 
that φ when φ is true” (2005,163). If knowledge requires Safety III, we have very  little 
knowledge. Moreover, it seems at least odd to say that although winning the lottery 
is very improbable, it is also very pos si ble. To make such a claim seems to unduly 
downplay the force of the evidence.

--- Page 332 ---

References
Abel, G. (2012). Knowing- how: Indispensable but inscrutable. In S. Tolksdorf (Ed.), 
Conceptions of knowledge (pp. 245–267). Berlin: De Gruyter.
Adler, J. (1981). Skepticism and universalizability. Journal of Philosophy, 78, 143–156.
Adler, J. (2002). Belief’s own ethics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Adler, J. (2009). Why fallibility has not mattered and how it could. In H. Siegel (Ed.), 
Oxford handbook of the philosophy of education  (pp. 83–103). Oxford: Oxford Univer -
sity Press.
Alberti, L. B. (2011). On painting. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Alston, William (1988). The deontological conception of epistemic justification. In 
J. Tomberlin (Ed.), Philosophical Perspectives  (Vol. 2): Epistemology (pp. 257–299). 
Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview.
Ankeny, R. (2014). The overlooked role of cases in causal attribution in medicine. 
Philosophy of Science, 81, 999–1011.
Aristotle. (1973). Poetics. In Introduction to Aristotle.  Ed. Richard McKeon. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press.
Aristotle. (1985). Nicomachean ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Austen, J. (1814). Letter to her niece, Anna Austin Lefroy, September 9, 1814. In Let-
ters of Jane Austen.  Bradbourne Edition, http:// www . pemberley . com / janeinfo / brablt 
16 . html.
Ball, P. (2005). Elegant solutions. Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry.
Banes, S. (2003). Gulliver’s hamburger: Defamiliarization and the ordinary in the 
1960s avant garde. In S. Banes (Ed.), Reinventing dance in the 1960s (pp. 3–5). Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press.
Bannock, G., Baxter, R., & Davis, E. (1998). Dictionary of economics. New York: John 
Wiley.

--- Page 333 ---

320 References
Bealer, G. (1998). Propositions. Mind, 107, 1–32.
Bennett, J. (1974). The conscience of Huckleberry Finn. Philosophy, 69, 123–134.
Berkeley, G. (1957). A treatise concerning the princi ples of  human knowledge. Indiana-
polis: Bobbs Merrill.
Berker, S. (2013). The rejection of epistemic consequentialism. Philosophical Issues, 
23, 363–387.
Bokulich, A. (2001). Rethinking thought experiments. Perspectives on Science , 9, 
285–307.
BonJour, L. (1985). The structure of empirical knowledge . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Boswell, T. (2011). Penn State Coach Joe Paterno reaches a sad conclusion. Washing-
ton Post, Nov. 9.
Bourgeois, F. T., Murthy, S., & Mandl, K. (2010). Outcome reporting among drug 
 trials registered in ClinicalTrials . gov. Annals of Internal Medicine , 153(3) (Aug. 3): 
158–166.
Brewer, S. (1998). Scientific expert testimony and intellectual due pro cess. Yale Law 
Journal, 107, 1535–1682.
Brogaard, B. (2005). I know, therefore I understand. Unpublished MS.
Burge, T. (1993). Content preservation. Philosophical Review, 102, 457–488.
Capdev ila, R. (2009). Construing architecture, constructing philosophy. Dissertation pre-
sented to the Deparatment de Filosofia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.
Carr, D. (1979). The logic of knowing how and ability. Mind, 88, 394–409.
Carroll, N. (2002). The wheel of virtue: Art, lit er a ture, and moral knowledge. Journal 
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 60, 3–26.
Cartwright, N. (1983). How the laws of physics lie. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cartwright, N. (1999). Aristotelian natures and modern experimental method. In 
The dappled world (pp. 77–104). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavell, S. (1987). Disowning knowledge in six plays of Shakespeare . Cambridge: Cam -
bridge University Press.
Chang, H. (2004). Inventing temperature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chisholm, R. (1973). The prob lem of the criterion. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette Univer-
sity Press.
Cohen, L. J. (1992). An essay on belief and ac cep tance. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

--- Page 334 ---

References 321
Cohen, S. (2014). Contextualism defended. In M. Steup, J. Turri, & E. Sosa (Eds.), 
Con temporary debates in epistemology (pp. 69–75). Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Comfort, N. C. (2001). The tangled field: Barbara McClintock’s search for the patterns of 
ge ne tic control. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cunningham, Merce. (1986). Interview. Points in space (CD).
Davenport, E. (1983). Lit er a ture as thought experiment (on aiding and abetting the 
muse). Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 13, 279–306.
David, M. (2005). Truth as the primary epistemic goal: A working hypothesis. In M. 
Steup & E. Sosa (Eds.), Con temporary debates in epistemology (pp. 296–312). Malden: 
Blackwell.
Davidson, D. (2001). Rational animals. In Subjective, intersubjective, objective  (pp. 
95–106). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davies, D. (2010). Learning through fictional narratives in art and science. In R. 
Frigg & M. C. Hunter (Eds.), Beyond mimesis and convention  (pp. 51–70). Dordrecht: 
Springer.
DeRose, K. (2011). The case for contextualism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education. New York:  Free Press.
Dickie, G. (2007). What is art? An institutional analy sis. In J. Adler & C. Elgin (Eds.), 
Philosophical inquiry (pp. 852–862). Indianapolis: Hackett.
Dougherty, T., & Rysiew, P. (2009). Fallibilism, epistemic possibility, and concessive 
knowledge attributions. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 78, 123–132.
Douglas, H. (2004). The irreducible complexity of objectivity. Synthese, 138, 
453–473.
Doyle, Y., Egan, S., Graham, N., & Khalifa, K. (2015). Non- factive understanding: A 
statement and a defense. Unpublished MS.
Dretske, F. (2000). Conclusive reasons. In Perception, knowledge, and belief. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Elgin, C. Z. (1988). With reference to reference. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Elgin, C. Z. (1996). Considered judgment. Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
Elgin, C. Z. (2002). Art in the advancement of understanding. American Philosophical 
Quarterly, 39, 1–12.
Elgin, C. Z. (2007a). The laboratory of the mind. In J. Gibson, W. Huemer, & L. Pocci 
(Eds.), A sense of the world: Essays on fiction, narrative, and knowledge  (pp. 43–54). 
London: Routledge.

--- Page 335 ---

322 References
Elgin, C. Z. (2007b). Emotion and understanding. In G. Brun, U. Dogouglu, & D. 
Kunzle (Eds.), Epistemology and emotions (pp. 33–50). London: Ashgate.
Elgin, C. Z. (2011). Making manifest: Exemplification in the sciences and the arts. 
Principia, 15, 399–413.
Federal Register. 2009. Aug. 20 (Vol. 74, No. 160), http:// edocket . access . gpo . gov 
/ 2009 / E9 - 19930 . htm.
Feldman, R. (2008). Modest deontologism in epistemology. Synthese, 177, 41–66.
Feynman, R. (2001). What do you care what other  people think?  New York: W. W. 
Norton.
Fine, A. (1998). The viewpoint of no- one in par tic u lar. Proceedings and Addresses of 
the American Philosophical Association, 72, 9–20.
Firth, R. (1981). Epistemic merit: Intrinsic and instrumental. Proceedings and Addresses 
of the American Philosophical Association, 55, 5–23.
Folkman, J. (1996). Fighting cancer by attacking its blood supply. Scientific American, 
275(3), 50–54.
Fricker, E. (1994). Against gullibility. In B. K. Matilal & A. Chakrabarti (Eds.), Know-
ing from words (pp. 125–161). Amsterdam: Kluwer.
Fricker, M. (2007). Epistemic injustice: Power and the ethics of knowing. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Frigg, R. (2010). Fiction and scientific repre sen ta tion. In R. Frigg and M. C. Hunter 
(Eds.), Beyond mimesis and convention (pp. 97–138). Dordrecht: Springer.
Fry, R. (1952). Cézanne. London: Hogarth.
Fumerton, R. (2010). Foundationalist theories of epistemic justification. In E. Zalta 
(Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Summer 2010 Ed.), http:// plato . stanford 
. edu / archives / sum2010 / entries / justep . foundational.
Gendler, T. (2010). Galileo and the indispensability of scientific thought experi -
ment. In Intuition, imagination, and scientific methodology (pp. 21–41). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Giere, R. (1999). Science without laws. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ginsborg, H. (2010). Primitive normativity and skepticism about rules. Journal of 
Philosophy, 108, 227–254.
Goldman, A. (1986). Epistemology and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Goldman, A. (1999). Knowledge in a social world. Oxford: Clarendon.

--- Page 336 ---

References 323
Goodman, N. (1968). Languages of art. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Goodman, N. (1977). The structure of appearance. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Goodman, N. (1978). Ways of worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Goodman, N. (1984). Fact, fiction, and forecast. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Goodstein, D. (2010). On fact and fraud. Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
Greco, J. (2014). Episteme: Knowledge and understanding. In K. Timpe & C. Boyd 
(Eds.), Virtues and their vices (pp. 285–302). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Green, M., & Williams, J. N. (Eds.). (2007). Moore’s paradox. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Greenberg, C. (1961). Art and culture. Boston: Beacon.
Greenberg, C. (1966). Modernist painting. In G. Battcock (Ed.), The new art (pp. 100–
110). New York: Dutton.
Grice, P. (1989). Logic and conversation. In Studies in the way of words . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Grimm, S. (2006). Is understanding a species of knowledge? British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, 57, 515–535.
Grimm, S. (2008). Explanatory inquiry and the need for explanation. British Journal 
for the Philosophy of Science, 59, 481–497.
Grimm, S. (2014). Understanding as knowledge of  causes. In Abrol Fairweather (Ed.), 
Virtue epistemology naturalized: Bridges between virtue epistemology and philosophy of sci-
ence. New York: Springer.
Habermas, J. (2001). Truth and society: The discursive redemption of factual claims 
to validity. In On the pragmatics of social interaction  (pp. 85–104). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Hacking, I. (1982). Experimentation and scientific realism. Philosophical Topics, 13, 
71–88.
Hacking, I. (1983). Representing and intervening . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Hardwig, J. (1991). The role of trust in knowledge. Journal of Philosophy , 88, 
693–708.
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Studies in the logic of explanation. In Aspects of scientific 
explanation (pp. 245–295). New York:  Free Press.
Herodotus. (1985). The histories. New York: Penguin.
Hetherington, S. (2011). How to know. Malden, MA: Wiley- Blackwell.

--- Page 337 ---

324 References
Hills, A. (2015). Understanding why. Noûs, 50, 661–688.
Hughes, R. I. G. (1996). Models and repre sen ta tion. In PSA 1996 (Vol. 2, pp. S325–336). 
Philosophy of Science Association.
Hume, D. (1928). A treatise of  human nature. L. A. Selby- Bigge (Ed.). Oxford: Claren-
don Press.
Hume, D. (1977). An enquiry concerning  human understanding. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Hume, D. (2007). On the standard of taste. In J. Adler & C. Elgin (Eds.), Philosophical 
inquiry (pp. 815–824). Indianapolis: Hackett.
James, W. (1951). The  will to believe. In A. Castelli (Ed.), Essays on pragmatism  
(pp. 88–109). New York: Harner.
James, W. (1983). Princi ples of psy chol ogy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jullien, C. (2006). Esthetique et modes Operatoires en Mathématiques. PhD dissertation, 
Nancy- Université.
Kant, I. (1981). Grounding for the metaphysics of morals. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Kant, I. (1987). Critique of judgment. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Keller, E. F. (1983). A feeling for the organism. New York: Henry Holt.
Khalifa, K. (2012). Inaugurating understanding or repackaging explanation? Philoso-
phy of Science, 79, 15–37.
Kipling, R. (1978). The elephant’s child. In Just so stories  (pp. 49–63). New York: 
Weathervane Books.
Kitcher, P. (1990). The division of cognitive  labor. Journal of Philosophy, 87, 5–22.
Klein, P. (1999).  Human knowledge and the infinite regress of reasons. Philosophical 
Perspectives, 13, 297–325.
Korsgaard, C. (1996a). The sources of normativity.  Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Korsgaard, C. (1996b). The reasons we can share. In Creating the kingdom of ends (pp. 
249–274). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kripke, S. (1982). Wittgenstein on rules and private language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Kripke, S. (2011a). On two paradoxes of knowledge. In Philosophical trou bles (pp. 
27–49). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kripke, S. (2011b). A puzzle about belief. In Philosophical trou bles (pp. 125–161). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- Page 338 ---

References 325
Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Kvanvig, J. (2003). The value of knowledge and the pursuit of understanding. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Kyburg, H. (1997). The rule of adjunction and reasonable inference. Journal of Phi-
losophy, 94, 109–125.
Lehrer, K. (1974). Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lehrer, K. (1986). The coherence theory of knowledge. Philosophical Topics, 14, 5–25.
Leite, A. (2004). Is fallibility an epistemological shortcoming? Philosophical Quarterly, 
54, 232–251.
Lewis, C. I. (1946). An analy sis of knowledge and valuation. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Lewis, D. (1983). Truth in fiction: Postscript. In Philosophical papers  (Vol. 1, 
pp. 276–280). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1999a). New work for a theory of universals. In Papers in metaphysics and 
epistemology (pp. 8–55). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, D. (1999b). Elusive knowledge. In Papers in metaphysics and epistemology  
(pp. 418–445). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lin, M. (2000). Making the memorial. New York Review of Books, Nov. 2.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the best explanation. London: Routledge.
Lipton, P. (2009). Understanding without explanation. In H. de Regt, S. Leonelli, & 
K. Eiger (Eds.), Scientific understanding: Philosophical perspectives (pp. 43–63). Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Lo, Bernard, & Fields, Marilyn J. (Eds.). (2009). Princi ples for identifying and assess-
ing conflicts of interest. In Conflict of interest in medical research, education, and prac -
tice (pp. 44–61). Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Locke, J. (1894). An essay concerning  human understanding. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Longino, H. (1990). Science as social knowledge: Values and objectivity in scientific 
inquiry. Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
Lopes, D. (1996). Understanding pictures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mazur, J. (2014). Enlightening symbols: A short history of mathematical notation and its 
hidden powers. Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
McClintock, B. (1973). Letter to J. R. S. Finchman, May16, 1973. http:// profiles . nlm 
. nih . gov / LL / Views / Exhibit / documents / biographical . html.

--- Page 339 ---

326 References
McGowan, M. K. (2003). Realism, reference, and grue. American Philosophical Quar-
terly, 40, 47–57.
McGowan, M. K. (2009). On silencing and sexual refusal. Journal of Po liti cal Philoso-
phy, 17, 487–494.
Metropolis, N. (1987). The beginning of the Monte Carlo Method. Los Alamos Sci -
ence, 15 (Special Issue dedicated to Stanislaw Ulam), 125–130.
Mill, J. S. (1978). On liberty. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Moore, G. E. (1991). Russell’s theory of descriptions. In P. A. Schilpp (Ed.), The phi-
losophy of Bertrand Russell (pp. 177–225). La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Moore, G. E. (1993). A defence of common sense. In G. E. Moore: Selected Writings . 
London: Routledge.
Morrison, M., & Morgan, M. S. (1999). Models as mediating instruments. In M. S. 
Morgan & M. Morrison (Eds.), Models as mediators (pp. 10–38). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Morrison, M. (1999). Models as autonomous agents. M. S. Morgan & M. Morrison 
(Eds.), Models as mediators (pp. 38–65). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nagel, T. (1986). The view from nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nersessian, Nancy (1993). In the theoretician’s laboratory: Thought experimenting 
as  mental modeling. In PSA 1992  (Vol. 2, pp. 291–301). Philosophy of Science 
Association.
Nersessian, N. (2007). Thought experimenting as  mental modeling: Empiricism with-
out logic. Croatian Journal of Philosophy, 7(20), 125–161.
Nersessian, N. J. (2008). Creating scientific concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nozick, R. (1981). Philosophical explanations . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Oxford dictionary of science. (1999). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pascal, B. (2007). The wager. In J. E. Adler & C. Z. Elgin (Eds.), Philosophical inquiry 
(pp. 784–786). Indianapolis: Hackett.
Plato. (1997). Plato: The complete works. J. Cooper (Ed.). Indianapolis: Hackett.
Popper, K. (2002). The logic of scientific discovery. London: Routledge.
Porter, T. (1995). Trust in numbers: The pursuit of objectivity in science and public life . 
Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
Pritchard, D. (2005). Epistemic luck. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- Page 340 ---

References 327
Pritchard, D. (2010). Knowledge and understanding. In D. Pritchard, A. Millar, & A. 
Haddock, The nature and value of knowledge: Three investigations  (pp. 1–88). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Quine, W. V. (1961). Two dogmas of empiricism. In From a logical point of view  
(pp. 20–46). New York: Harper & Row.
Rainer, Y. (1995). Some retrospective notes on a dance for 10  people and 12 mat -
tresses called parts of some sextets. In M. R. Sandford (Ed.), Happenings and other acts. 
London: Routledge.
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Riggs, W. (2003). Balancing our epistemic goals. Noûs, 37, 343–352.
Rowling, J. K. (1999). Harry Potter and the prisoner of Azkaban. New York: Scholastic.
Russell, B. (1968). On denoting. In Logic and knowledge. New York: Capricorn.
Russell, W. (1783). The tragic muse: A poem addressed to Mrs. Siddons. London: Printed 
for G. Kearsley.
Ryle, G. (1949/2009). The concept of mind. New York: Routledge.
Sarkar, S. (2014). Ecol ogy. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Spring 
2014 Ed.), http:// plato . stanford . edu / archives / spr2014 / entries / ecology / .
Scanlon, T. M. (1998). What we owe to each other. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Schwartz, R. (1985). The power of pictures. Journal of Philosophy, 82, 189–198.
Sellars, W. (1963). Science, perception, and real ity. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sellars, W. (1968). Science and metaphysics. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Shah, N. (2002). Clearing space for doxastic voluntarism. Monist, 85, 436–445.
Sigman, J. (1998). Ordinary  people: Trio A and how dances signify. In Bodies, souls, 
and ordinary  people: Three essays on art and interpretation. Dissertation presented to the 
Department of Philosophy, Prince ton University.
Sklar, L. (1999) Philosophy of science. In R. Audi (Ed.), Cambridge dictionary of phi -
losophy (pp. 700–704). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Snyder, M. (2012). Teaching Jo Pa. Academe, 98, 55.
Sosa, E. (2007). A virtue epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stadler, I. (1982). The idea of art and of its criticism. In T. Cohen and P. Guyer (Eds.), 
Essays in Kant’s aesthetics (pp. 195–220). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- Page 341 ---

328 References
Strevens, M. (2008). Depth: An account of scientific explanation. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Strevens, M. (2010). Va ri e ties of understanding. Unpublished manuscript.
Strevens, M. (2012). Ceteris paribus hedges: Causal voodoo that works. Journal of 
Philosophy, 109, 652–675.
Strevens, M. (2016). How idealizations provide understanding. In S. Grimm, C. 
Baumberger, & S. Ammon (Eds.), Explaining understanding: New essays in epistemology 
and the philosophy of science (pp. 37–49). New York: Routledge.
Stroud, B. (1984). The significance of philosophical scepticism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Suárez, M. (2003). Scientific repre sen ta tion: Against similarity and isomorphism. 
International Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 17, 225–243.
Suzuki, H., et al. (2007). Novel strategy to treat multi- drug- resistant gram- negative 
pathogens using bacterial conjugation. Plasmid, 57, 237–238.
Szabó, Z. G. (2001). Fictionalism and Moore’s paradox. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 
31, 299–300.
Teller, P. (2001). The twilight of the perfect model model. Erkenntnis, 55, 393–415.
Treanor, N. (2013). The mea sure of knowledge. Noûs, 47, 577–601.
Tufte, E. R. (1997). Visual and statistical thinking: Displays of evidence for decision 
making. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
USA Diving. (2013). Official technical rules 2015–2017. http:// usadiving . org.
Van Cleve, J. (2005). Why coherence is not enough: A defense of moderate foun -
dationalism. In M. Steup & E. Sosa (Eds.), Con temporary debates in epistemology  
(pp. 168–180). Malden: Blackwell.
Van Fraassen, B. (2008). Scientific repre sen ta tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Venter, J. C., et al. (2001). The sequence of the  human genome. Science, 291(5007), 
1304–1351.
Vogel, J. (1990). Are  there counterexamples to the closure princi ple? In M. D. Roth 
& G. Ross (Eds.), Doubting (pp. 13–27). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Walden, K. (2007). A practico priori. Unpublished MS.
Weatherson, B. (2008). Deontology and Descartes’ demon. Journal of Philosophy, 105, 
540–569.
Wedgwood, R. (2002). The aim of belief. Noûs, 16 (supplement), 267–297.
Weisberg, M. (2013). Simulation and similarity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- Page 342 ---

References 329
West, R. (1928). The strange necessity. Garden City: Doubleday.
White, M. (1965). Foundations of historical knowledge. New York: Harper & Row.
Williams, B. A. O. (1973). Deciding to believe. In Prob lems of the self (pp. 136–151). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, B. A. O. (1978). Descartes: The proj ect of inquiry. New York: Penguin.
Williams, B. A. O. (1985). Ethics and the limits of philosophy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Williams, B. A. O. (2002). Truth and truthfulness. Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University 
Press.
Williamson, T. (2000). Knowledge and its limits. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Wills, G. (1992). Lincoln at Gettysburg: Words that remade Amer i ca. New York: Simon 
& Schuster.
Wilson, M. (2006). Wandering significance. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1961). Tractatus logico- philosophicus. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Zimba, J. (2009). On the possibility of trigonometric proofs of the Pythagorean theo-
rem. Forum Geometricorum, 9, 275–278.
Zinn, H. (1980). A  people’s history of the United States. New York: Harper & Row.

--- Page 344 ---

Abel, Gunter, 48–57
Abstract, 37, 185, 216, 231–232, 236, 
243, 249, 258, 264, 278, 283
Abstract general ideas, 194–195
Acceptance, passim
definition of, 19
Access, epistemic, 2, 23, 56, 79–81, 83, 
88–89, 101–102, 118, 137, 153, 
158–159, 181, 187–188, 192, 193, 
208, 217–218, 231–243, 256–267, 
274, 279
Account, 2, 12–16, 20–24, 28, 34–37, 
58–60, 64–68, 71–90, 97–99, 113, 
274–275, 299, 311n2
Adjudication, 64–66, 82–90, 116–117, 
121, 148–149, 177–178
Adler, Jonathan, 18, 22, 68, 74, 95, 
141–142, 292
Aesthetic, Goodman’s symptoms of, 245
A fortiori arguments, 27–28
Agency, epistemic, 4, 6, 12–14, 18–19, 
22, 34, 39–41, 50–57, 74–75, 83, 
91–123, 127, 136, 139, 148, 157, 
181, 235, 291–301, 306–307, 
313n2, 314n2, 318n3
Agreement, 71–73, 80, 107, 109, 114, 
117–118, 139, 165–166, 228, 270, 
288
interrater, 163, 166, 167
test-retest, 163, 167
Alberti, Leon Battista, 153
Alston, William, 10
Ambiguity, 270, 280. See also 
Interpretation
Ankeny, Rachel, 115
Anomaly, 14, 31, 35–36, 219
Approximation, 3, 26, 27, 29–30
Argument, 44, 52–53, 84–85, 99, 
114–115, 173, 177, 181, 182
banality, 245
Aristotle, 50–52, 55, 231–233, 238–239, 
242, 244, 259, 313n2
Artifact, epistemic, 135, 225–227
Assertion, 9, 18, 20, 21, 88–89, 206–207, 
296–297
Assurance, 140–144, 149, 299–300, 308
Austen, Jane, 237–238, 258–259
Autonomy, 92–94, 98, 99, 106, 120–121, 
217
Ballet, 208, 211–214, 217–218
Bealer, George, 208
Belief, 3, 9–14, 16–22, 34, 40–41, 85.  
See also Moore’s paradox
will to, 95–99
Berkeley, George, 194–195
Berkeleyan world, 85–87, 92
Berker, Selim, 10, 97
Boetti, Alighiero, 185–186, 194–195
Bokulich, Alisa, 234–235
BonJour, Laurence, 10, 77, 161
Boswell, Thomas, 242
Index

--- Page 345 ---

332 Index
Conﬂict of interest, 136–137
Confound, 221–222, 229, 232, 257–259, 
263, 267
Consequentialism
epistemic, 10, 97
moral, 198
Consistency, 71, 83–84, 98, 106, 109, 
113, 179, 247
Constraint, 6, 30, 77, 92, 96, 109, 
113–114, 118, 129, 230, 236
Context, 19–21, 28, 100, 118, 145, 
187–189, 193–194, 226, 236, 238, 
244, 247, 250–251, 261, 269–270, 
292
Control, 5, 10, 27, 84–85, 91–92, 96–97, 
144, 162, 165, 168, 196, 222–229, 
237, 244
Conviction, 19–20, 22, 34, 65, 67, 77, 
97–98
Correction, 26, 53–54, 167, 261
Counterexample, 206–207
Credibility, 3, 70–77, 112, 137, 197
tampering, 117–118, 197
Cunningham, Merce, 206, 208–213, 
217–218
Curve smoothing, 14, 23–24
Dance, 205–220, 275
Davenport, Edward, 241
David, Marian, 9
Davidson, Donald, 299–300
Davies, David, 242–245
Defamiliarization, 209
Deliberation, 4, 91, 94, 99–121, 
165–166, 240
Delusion, 74–75
Denial, being in, 215. See also 
Self-deception
Denotation, 89, 152, 206, 251–257, 
260–261, 263, 279, 282, 287, 318n2
Density, symbolic, 208, 245, 282, 285
Dependency, 40–43, 57
DeRose, Keith, 292
Brewer, Scott, 149
Brogaard, Berit, 40
Burge, Tyler, 81
Calibration, 104, 129, 160, 164–165, 
167–168
Capdevila, Remei, 185–187, 224
Carelessness, 96, 125, 130, 138–142, 
148, 160, 305, 308
Carr, David, 47
Carroll, Noel, 242, 245
Cartwright, Nancy, 25, 102, 153–154, 
166, 225, 227, 229
Cavell, Stanley, 241
Ceteris paribus claims, 25–26
Cézanne, Paul, 174–182, 288
Chang, Hasok, 164–165, 266–267
Chisholm, Roderick, 87
Claptrap, 44–45, 83–84, 112
Coding, 167–168
Coercion, 117
Cohen, L. Jonathan, 3, 18–21, 293
Cohen, Stewart, 292
Coherence, 14, 45–46, 57–58, 71–79, 
83–85, 98, 106–107, 109, 113, 183, 
277, 281, 297, 308, 312–313n1
Collaboration, 128–131, 137–138
Collusion, 117
Commitment, epistemic, 2–4, 12–16, 
18, 36–37, 44–47, 56–57, 64–121, 
184, 233–235, 268, 299, 300–304, 
305, 307, 308, 316n1
epistemic/moral, 123–151
framing, 273–274, 289
Community, epistemic, 66, 98, 100, 
104–119, 129, 131–150, 165, 166, 
169, 178, 184, 230, 305. See also 
Ends, realm of epistemic
Concepts, thick and thin, 123–127
Concessive knowledge, 6, 296–297, 
308–309. See also Moore’s paradox
Confabulation, 73–74
Conﬁrmation bias, 108–109, 138–139

--- Page 346 ---

Index 333
113–120, 130–132, 136–144, 169, 
191, 199–200, 223–229, 232–233, 
239–244, 277–278, 291–298, 
306–308, 315n9
Evidentialism, 93, 292
Exempliﬁcation, 5–6, 26, 142, 153, 168, 
176, 179, 183–203, 222, 247
in dance, 208–220
in ethics, 196–199
in fictions, 237–247
in history, 286–287
instantiation requirement, 185, 211, 
213, 224, 226, 231, 257–258
in laboratory experiments, 222–228, 
244
in mathematics, 199–203
in models, 249, 253, 257–272, 278
in thought experiments, 231–233
in visual arts, 256–257, 259, 280–285
Experiment. See also Thought experiment
laboratory, 5, 10–11, 15, 20, 84–86, 
129, 133–134, 138, 140, 143–144, 
158, 165, 192–193, 222–229, 
303–305
natural, 227–228
Expertise, 41, 102, 114–117, 120, 
129–130, 140, 169, 194, 291
Explanation, 27, 41–44, 71, 75–76, 225, 
275–276
Fabrication of ﬁndings, 131–135, 145
Factivity, 3, 31, 33–34, 37–40, 45, 
57–62, 296–297
Fallibilism, 6–7, 103, 134
Fallibility, 89, 128, 141, 224–225, 
291–310
Falsehood, felicitous, 1–5, 23–32, 58, 85, 
88–89, 97, 121, 126, 141, 171, 277, 
311n5
fictions as, 235–247
infelicitous, 4, 125, 131–132
models as, 257–271
thought experiments as, 229–335
Dewey, John, 114, 181
Dickie, George, 316n3
Difference maker, 25, 28, 58–59, 143, 
225
Disagreement, 107, 108, 110, 114–117, 
169, 171–182, 285
Discipline, 4–6, 13–14, 16, 33, 41, 113, 
123, 127–128, 135–137, 140, 141, 
149–150, 159, 245, 273–290
Discursiveness, 275–279
Disposition, 19, 37, 46–48, 51–52, 56, 93
Dogmatism, 6, 87, 103, 292–298
Dougherty, Thomas, 296–297, 309
Douglas, Heather, 159–160, 166
Doyle, Yannick, 267–268
Dretske, Fred, 294
Dutch book, 106–107
Education, 4, 59, 147–149, 239–240, 
305–306
Emotion, 47, 92, 173, 197, 207, 213, 
215–216, 240
Endorsement, reﬂective, 4–6, 37, 45, 56, 
62, 66–67, 83–84, 88–94, 98–99, 
102–113, 118–121, 129, 135, 
141–150, 229–230, 273–274, 289, 
313n3
Ends, epistemic, 3, 10–11, 14–15, 19, 
46, 56–57, 65, 80, 96–97, 99, 
103–104, 106, 123, 129, 132, 140, 
147, 152, 205, 250, 308
Ends, realm of epistemic, 4–6, 105–121, 
132, 135–136, 140, 145, 160, 173
Episode, historical, 273–281, 285–287
Equilibrium, reﬂective, 4, 63–69, 86–90, 
91, 98, 102–104, 121
Error, 291–306
possibility of, 6–7, 52–53, 108, 115, 
133–135, 138–139, 306–309
Ethics, Kantian, 92, 105–106, 196–198, 
239–240
Evidence, 6, 12–13, 34–36, 63–66, 
72–73, 83–84, 92–93, 95–103,

--- Page 347 ---

334 Index
Hempel, Carl, 274, 284
Herodotus, 38–39, 43
Heteronomy, 92–94, 97, 99, 313n3
Hetherington, Stephen, 12, 56
Hills, Alison, 41
History, 38–40, 43–44, 135–136, 
273–289
Holism, 1, 3–5, 12–16, 31, 35, 43–46, 
63–81, 83, 102, 106, 302
Hughes, R. I. G., 6, 252–256, 262, 269
Hume, David, 81, 173–175, 215
Humility, epistemic, 111, 292, 297–299, 
308
Hyperintensionality, 207–208
Idealization, 2, 14–15, 27–28, 31, 35, 
61–62
Imagination, 229–235
Impartiality, 5, 110–111, 113, 162, 
166–168, 175
Imperative, epistemic, 105–106, 110, 
112, 120–121, 137
Impersonality, 162–166, 168
Impute, 249, 253, 258, 259–260, 262, 
265–268, 271
Individualism, epistemic, 107
Infallibility, 291–294
Injustice, epistemic, 117–118
Integrity, epistemic, 127–141, 144–150, 
159–160
Interdependence, epistemic, 103–108, 
120, 129–131, 135, 144, 217, 220
Internalize, 49–56, 109, 148
Interpretation, 109–110, 114, 130,  
134, 155–173, 185–194, 218–228, 
234–235, 245–247, 252–253, 265, 
270, 284–285
Irresponsibility, epistemic, 6, 14, 78, 80, 
135–136, 139
James, William, 10–13, 95, 97–98, 
115–116, 198
Jullien, Caroline, 317n5
Falsiﬁcation, 131–135, 145
Feature, 1–2, 5–6, 154–155, 158, 
180–204
Feldman, Richard, 96
Feynman, Richard, 275–276, 278, 284
Fickleness, 138–139
Fiction, 5, 75–77, 206, 213, 222, 
235–247, 250–251, 258–259
Fine, Arthur, 159–160, 166
Firth, Roderick, 10, 97
Folkman, Judah, 20
Forgery, 135
Free and equal, 4, 114–121, 123, 137
Fricker, Elizabeth, 81
Fricker, Miranda, 117–118
Frigg, Roman, 252
Fruitfulness, 10–11, 20, 30, 114–115, 306
Fry, Roger, 174–182, 285, 316n4
Fumerton, Richard, 12
Galileo, 231–233, 258, 275–276, 278
Gambler’s fallacy, 106–107
Gendler, Tamar, 233
Gettier, Edmund, 40
Giere, Ronald, 261–262
Ginsborg, Hannah, 54–56
Goldman, Alvin, 9, 10, 80. See also 
Veritism
Goodman, Nelson, 23, 89–90, 175–176, 
184, 191, 206, 208, 226, 245, 
251–252, 256, 266, 282–287
Goya, Francisco, 283–284
Grasp, 33, 38–39, 41–43, 46, 57–59
Greco, John, 37, 40
Greenberg, Clement, 174–182, 285, 
316n4
Grice, Paul, 25–26, 189, 269, 309
Grimm, Stephen, 37, 40–41, 275–276
Gullibility, 125, 139
Habermas, Jürgen, 119
Hacking, Ian, 104, 166, 225
Hardwig, John, 130–131

--- Page 348 ---

Index 335
McGowan, Mary Kate, 117
Measurement, 5, 24, 142, 153, 157–159, 
162–165, 175, 266–267
Mill, John Stuart, 119
Miller–Urey experiment, 225–226
Mind–body problem, 215–216
Misconduct, scholarly, 127–128, 
131–139
Model, 1–6, 14–15, 23–31, 62, 88, 
152–153, 155–157, 180–182, 
251–271
fit of, 175, 260–261, 266
Modern dance, 208, 211–216
Monte Carlo method, 105
Monument, 279–281, 283
Moore, G. E., 200
Moore’s paradox, 207, 296–297, 308
Morrison, Margaret, 30
Mutual support, 3, 12, 36, 45, 66, 
69–71, 84, 98–99, 110
Nagel, Thomas, 5, 151–152
Narrative, 226–228, 233–247, 277–281
Nersessian, Nancy, 225–226, 265
Newton, Isaac, 60–61, 89, 264
Noncommitment, 154, 156
Normativity, epistemic, 2, 31–32, 48, 
50–54, 91–95, 99–121
Objectivity, 2, 5, 99, 151–169, 171, 
181–182
Obligation, 123, 128, 132–141, 144, 149
Occlusion, 154, 156–157, 180, 191
Omission, epistemically culpable, 
135–136a
Open-mindedness, 110, 173, 297
Other minds, problem of, 241
Pascal, Blaise, 96
Pattern, 24, 165, 184, 207, 216, 220, 
222, 236, 237, 239–240, 242–243, 
258, 263
Peer review, 113, 114–115, 142–145, 167
Kant, Immanuel, 4, 50, 91–94, 105–109, 
111, 146, 173, 197–198, 229, 239
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 118
Kepler, Johannes, 30–31, 60, 67, 89, 
265, 269
Khalifa, Kareem, 275–276
Kipling, Rudyard, 243–244, 247
Kitcher, Philip, 110, 116, 169, 314n9
Klein, Peter, 12
Know how, 9, 46–57
Knowledge, propositional, 6–7, 9–14, 
17–18, 33–37, 39–41, 57–58, 
199–200, 291–298
Korsgaard, Christine, 99–100, 172
Kripke, Saul, 6–7, 54–55, 208, 296–297
Kuhn, Thomas, 168, 314n4
Kvanvig, Jonathan, 3, 37, 39, 41, 57–58, 
59–61, 281
Labor, division of cognitive, 111–114, 
127, 129–131
Lehrer, Keith, 10, 76, 312n2
Leite, Adam, 294–295
Lewis, C. I., 69
Lewis, David, 87–88, 243, 294
Likening, 256–257, 263–266
Lin, Maya, 279–283, 285, 289
Lipton, Peter, 40, 44, 70, 275–276, 284
Locke, John, 194
Logical space, 155
Longino, Helen, 114, 119
Lopes, Dominic, 156
Luck, epistemic, 16, 40–41, 87, 109, 
294–295, 298
Lying, 125, 135, 196–199
Magnitude, 5, 144, 162–164, 266–267
Match, 168, 188–189, 228
Mathematics, 40–42, 54–55, 199–202, 
253, 274. See also Proof
Maxwell, James Clerk, 265
Maxwell’s demon, 233–234, 244, 246
McClintock, Barbara, 118, 121

--- Page 349 ---

336 Index
Reliability, 12, 16, 18, 35–36, 41, 48, 
79–81, 92–93, 99–101, 160–162, 
292, 298
Repleteness, 245–246, 282, 287–289
Replicability, 10, 86, 147, 218, 228
Representation, 3, 5–6, 14–16, 22, 
23–32, 37, 85, 131, 151–159, 201, 
206, 247, 249–256
mode of, 195
Representation as, 252–256, 258, 
259–262, 264–271
Resemblance. See Similarity
Respect, 113, 119–121, 146, 274
Responsibility, epistemic, 2, 4–6, 14,  
53, 91–94, 98–105, 110, 112, 116, 
119–121, 123, 125–126, 127, 
134–135, 137–141, 143–144, 172, 
293–295, 297–298, 313n2
Riggs, Wayne, 115–117
Risk, epistemic, 6, 10, 99, 101, 116, 117, 
132, 133, 137, 147, 169
Roman numerals, 202–203
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 236
Rowling, J. K., 112–113
Rule following, 48–57, 96
Russell, Bertrand, 251
Ryle, Gilbert, 46–48, 51, 56
Rysiew, Patrick, 296–297, 309
Sarkar, Sahotra, 42
Scanlon, T. M., 100–101, 110
Schwartz, Robert, 256–257
Second nature, 49–53, 148
Self-correcting, 4, 66, 86, 103, 111, 119, 
132, 134, 163, 291
Self-deception, 22, 73–75, 240–241
Sellars, Wilfrid, 29–30, 31, 56, 61–62, 
89
Shah, Nishi, 96
Sigman, Jill, 210, 218
Silencing, 117–118
Similarity, 249, 254–255, 261–262
Simpson’s paradox, 102, 154
Perception, 68, 76–82, 92–94, 98, 108, 
161, 256–257, 266
Perfectionism, moral, 198
Perspective, 97, 104, 114, 117–119, 
153–159, 180–181, 206–207, 240, 
246–247, 270–271, 308
Plagiarism, 131, 133–135, 145
Plato, 45, 183–184, 192, 236
Popper, Karl, 301–303
Porter, Theodore, 162–163
Portrait, 6, 255–257
Postmodern dance, 208–212, 214–217, 
220
Practice, 48–56, 106–107, 118–121, 
129–135, 140–141, 153, 181–182, 
202, 214, 250
Prediction, 112–113
p-representation, 251–252, 254–256, 
278
Pretending, 20–21, 214
Pritchard, Duncan, 11, 16, 40–41, 295, 
318n3
Privilege, epistemic, 76–80, 88, 89, 183, 
241, 285
Professing, 9, 20–21, 46, 106, 111
Proof, 42, 104–105, 109, 194–195, 
199–203, 274
Proxy, 163–165
Publication, scientiﬁc, 137–138, 
140–141, 149
Quine, W. V., 2–3, 13, 64, 82–83, 
302–303
Rainer, Yvonne, 205–206, 209–211, 213, 
216, 217
Rawls, John, 27–28, 29. See also 
Equilibrium, reﬂective
Reasons, 12, 44, 64–65, 69, 72–73, 
80–81, 99–105, 171–182
accessible, 100
available, 100
Reliabilism, 4, 92, 292

--- Page 350 ---

Index 337
Tufte, Edward, 196, 207, 262
Typify, 188–190, 192, 245
Understanding, passim
objectual, 33, 39, 44–46, 57–58, 63
propositional, 33, 39–41
Univocality, 245–246, 270, 284. See also 
Interpretation
Van Fraassen, Bas, 152–159, 169, 
206–207, 270–271
Veritism, 1, 3, 9–17, 24–31, 93, 106, 
115–116, 312n10
Virtue, 4, 50–57, 63–64, 110–111, 
124–126, 238–239, 245, 250,  
313n2
Vogel, Jonathan, 294
Voluntarism, 95–99
Walden, Kenneth, 302
Warrant, 76–77, 141–144
Weatherson, Brian, 92
Wedgwood, Ralph, 17–18
Weisberg, Michael, 258
West, Rebecca, 250
White, Morton, 276–277
Will, 22–23, 95–99, 188, 222
Williams, Bernard, 22, 95–98, 123–127, 
146, 151–152, 266, 277, 283, 
314n2, 314n3
Williamson, Timothy, 18
Wills, Gary, 277, 286
Wilson, Mark, 82–83
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 49, 54, 207
Zimba, Jason, 202
Zinn, Howard, 286
Skepticism, 6, 17, 54, 76, 88, 89–90, 
291–293. See also Berkeleyan world
Sklar, Lawrence, 25
Snow, John, 195–196, 207, 227–228
Socratic insight, 219–220, 305
Sosa, Ernest, 11, 313
Stability, 85, 103, 130, 139, 164, 190, 
192, 291
Stadler, Ingrid, 177
Strevens, Michael, 25, 28, 40, 41–43, 
58–59, 197, 202
Stroud, Barry, 295
Stylized facts, 26–27
Suárez, Mauricio, 254
Suppression of results, 131–136
Szabo, Zoltan, 21
Teller, Paul, 270–271
Tenability, 1, 2, 13–16, 23, 44, 64–76, 
78–91, 97–99, 114, 119, 176, 183, 
221, 276
Testimony, 6, 19, 41, 70–71, 73, 80–83, 
112, 117–118, 277, 299
Thought experiment, 1–2, 5, 14–15, 
121, 221–222, 229–235, 244–247, 
251, 278
Thucydides, 277
T-monism, 11
Trade-offs, 85, 87, 115–117, 314n9
Treanor, Nicholas, 11, 13
Trustworthiness, 4–5, 34, 69, 73, 78–81, 
83, 99, 103, 118, 120, 123–149, 
157, 159–161, 197, 227–229, 288
Truth, 1–4, 9–18, 88–89, 124–127
conduciveness, 1–4, 9–10, 86–87, 
92–93, 97
Truthfulness, 124–127
