=== PAGE 1 ===

Real Patterns in Physics and Beyond
David Wallace*
September 8, 2024
Abstract
I apply Dennett’s ‘real patterns’ idea to the ontology of physics, and
specifically to the puzzle of how to relate the very different ontologies one
finds at different scales in physics (e.g. particles vs continua, or fields vs
particles). I argue that real patterns provide part but not all of the answer
to the puzzle, and locate the rest of the answer in the structural-realist
idea that ontology in general is secondary to (mathematically-presented)
structure. I make some suggestions for the application of these ideas out-
side physics, including in the philosophy of mind context that motivated
Dennett’s original proposal.
This is a preprint version of a chapter to appear in a forthcoming volume
on real patterns, edited by Tyler Millhouse, Steve Petersen, and Don Ross, to
be published by MIT Press.
1 Introduction
Dennett’s seminal “Real Patterns” (Dennett 1991) is first and foremost an inter-
vention in the philosophy of mind: its goal is to defend Dennett’s (1981, 1987)
intentional-stance theory of content from the supposed dilemma that either be-
liefs are real (in which case there had better be some concrete things in the
world, some collections of neural tissue or similar, with which they can be iden-
tified) or they are not (in which case they don’t exist and so cannot play a role
in any science of the mind worth the name). In ‘Real Patterns’, beliefs are real
patterns in the behavioral dispositions of believing systems, discernible through
the intentional stance: abstracta to be sure, but useful abstracta, abstracta that
earn their keep through the predictive and explanatory work they do and the
shortcuts they allow us to take compared to the impossibly demanding and in
any case uninformative task of working out what those systems would do qua
systems of concrete matter. Abstracta that useful ought to be considered along
with paradigm physical entities like electrons as part of what science tells there
is in the world.
* Department of History and Philosophy of Science, and Department of Philosophy, Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh; david.wallace@pitt.edu
1


=== PAGE 2 ===

But science — even physics — is not a monolith, and once we dig deeper
into physics, these ‘paradigm’ physical entities start looking more problematic,
and ‘concrete’ matter starts looking less concrete. Physics describes the world
on many levels, from quantum field theory, through the quantum-mechanical
descriptions of nuclei and electrons, up to the quasi-classical world of molecular
physics and thence to the comparatively familiar world of fluids and solids. And
at those different levels, its ontology looks very different — at one point fields,
at another particles, at still another continuous matter. How those various
ontologies are related — how ontology at one level might be emergent from
different ontology at a lower level —is not at all obvious or simple, and over
the last twenty years I and others 1 have deployed the real-patterns idea inside
physics itself, to elucidate how an ontology of one kind can be emergent from
an ontology of a quite different kind.
This paper is about that project, and its relation to another major theme in
recent philosophy of physics: ontic structural realism, the proposal (at least as
I read it) that the Quinean project of reading ontological content off our best
scientific theories assumes that those theories can be faithfully understood as
sets of claims in natural language, and that once this claim is abandoned, the
very idea of looking for the ontology of a theory becomes at best a second-order
activity. In section 2 I spell out the ontological puzzle physics poses, and in
section 3 I explain how the real-patterns idea transforms but does not fully
resolve the puzzle. In section 4 I describe (my version of) structural realism,
and then in section 5 I relate it back to real patterns and to the project of
ontology. In section 6 I briefly consider how these ideas might find application
beyond physics.
The physics I discuss in this paper is well established and I do not attempt
to give original references.
2 Emergence of ontology in physics: molecules
and fluids
My concern in this paper is with inter-theoretic relations within physics, and
that might seem puzzling, even perverse. Don’t the more interesting questions
concern the reduction of other sciences to physics? And insofar as there are
reductions inside physics — of atoms to electrons and nuclei, of thermodynamics
to statistical mechanics — aren’t they supposed to be the paradigm cases of well-
understood reduction, to contrast with the knottier cases in the special sciences?
But if what makes a science ‘special’ is that it lacks universality of scope, almost
all of physics is a special science — physicists study stars, or metals, or plasmas,
1See, e.g., (Wallace 2003, 2010, 2012); (Seifert 2023); (Franklin 2024); (Franklin and
Robertson 2021); (Ladyman and Ross 2007); (Ross 2000). (Not all these authors agree:
Ladyman and Ross, in particular, interpret real patterns not as a between-levels relation from
lower-level to higher-level ontology, but as a within-levels relations between ontology and
phenomena.)
2


=== PAGE 3 ===

or lasers — and much of the work of physics is constructing one inter-theoretic
relation or another.
Those relations are far harder to understand philosophically than is some-
times recognized in philosophy: the reduction of thermodynamics to statistical
mechanics, in particular, is hugely controversial and comprises one of the cen-
tral problems of modern philosophy of physics. 2 But for all that they are the
simplest inter-theoretic relations we find in the sciences, and for that reason
they serve as test beds for any general account of inter-theoretic relations. If
we cannot understand how theories are related even within physics, we have
little hope of understanding the more complex cases; if we can understand the
physics case, perhaps we can learn wider lessons.
Let’s consider a comparatively simple example. 3 Our system will just be a
sealed box, a few centimeters across, containing some fluid - chlorine gas, water,
molten iron, the details will not matter. We can distinguish (at least) two levels
of description of that system:
The interatomic level: The system is a collection of order 10 24 atoms (or
molecules), characterized by the masses of those atoms and by the func-
tional form of the fairly-short-range forces by which neighboring atoms
interact with one another. In some cases we might need to engage with
the substructure of the atoms, but in many cases the interactions between
atoms occur at a sufficiently different energy scale from the interactions
within atoms that we can get away with treating them as elementary. A
full description of the system requires the 6 × 1024 real numbers which
represent the positions and velocities of each atom; the evolution of the
system is governed by Newton’s laws, supplemented by the details of the
particular interatomic interactions that apply. 4
The fluid level: The system is a continuous fluid, characterized by parameters
like specific heat capacity and viscocity and by how its density, pressure
and temperature vary across the box. A full description of the system
requires several smooth functions, encoding those variation; the evolution
of the system is governed by the Navier-Stokes equation of fluid dynamics.
For the moment, let’s pretend that the interatomic-level description is the most
fundamental description we have, and disregard the realms of atomic and nuclear
and particle physics.
This is about as simple a case of an inter-theoretic relation as we can imag-
ine. If we can’t understand how fluids emerge from atoms, our prospects for
2See, e.g., (Sklar 1993; Albert 2000; Frigg 2007; Myrvold 2022; Wallace 2023).
3For technical discussion of the relevant physics, see, e.g., (Balescu 1997) and references
therein.
4I assume here that the system can be understood classically, without the use of quantum
mechanics except perhaps to calculate the form of the interatomic interaction. This is not
always valid technically and is conceptually subtle even when it is technically permissible, for
reasons connected to the quantum measurement problem (see (Wallace 2016) for discussion),
but including those subtleties would if anything strengthen the points I wish to make here, so
I disregard them for simplicity.
3


=== PAGE 4 ===

understanding how beliefs emerge from them look dismal. And yet already there
are subtleties. Consider: what’s in the box? ‘Atoms’, is the obvious answer:
our best theory of the box quantifies over atoms, asserts that atoms exists,
so (following Quine (1948)) if we accept that theory, we accept that there are
atoms.
But isn’t it also true that there is a fluid in the box? In the interatomic-level
description there are no fluids to be found: only atoms and the void. Fluids
are not quantified over according to the interatomic theory, and that (we’re
pretending) is our fundamental theory of the box, so (again following Quine)
there is no fluid in the box. That seems absurd: the empirical evidence for water
is pretty conclusive. Indeed, the empirical evidence for the theory of fluids is
pretty solid, and that theory does quantify over fluids. So how do we reconcile
this with the absence of fluids at the interatomic level? The metaphysics-of-
science literature has offered three main answers.
The first is disunity: there is the fluid theory, valid for fluids, and the inter-
atomic theory, valid for the interactions of molecules; both are well evidenced
by the data; both apply in their particular domains; perhaps there are overlaps
in their applicability but there is no hierarchy of fundamentality, no reason but
prejudice to regard the ‘lower-level’ theory as any more of a guide to ontology
than the higher-level theory. Theses of this kind (of varying strengths) have
been quite popular in the philosophy of the special sciences, for instance in the
work of Cartwright (1999), Dupr´ e (1983) (and often drawing inspiration from
Fodor (1974) though Fodor’s own thesis is less ontologically radical): they are
tied to the denial of reductionism, of the idea that the generalities and models of
the special sciences could in any feasible way be derived from those of physics.
For myself, I find those claims overstated, and based on an overly reductive
understanding of reductionism itself (cf (Dennett 1995, pp.80-83)). Among other
observations, the special sciences are replete with physics ideas: biochemists
discuss molecular bonds (cf. Hermida and Ladyman 2022); biophysicists study
the physics of animal movement; organic chemists rely on thermodynamics;
doctors use CT scans and positron emission tomography. But what makes
them even plausible is that reduction between physics and the special sciences
is at best incomplete and in general aspirational. We may or may not have good
reasons to think that cognition, say, reduces to physics in principle, or even that
we will someday obtain that reduction ourselves, but today we have, at most,
suggestive fragments of that reduction.
The project of reducing fluid dynamics to interatomic physics, however, is
far from aspirational: huge parts of it have actually been completed. We know
how to derive the Navier-Stokes equations from the microdynamical equations;
we know in principle how to calculate quantities like specific heat capacity and
viscosity from the microdynamics; in many cases (dilute gases most completely,
but not only there) we have actually done those calculations and got answers
that match the data. It’s not easy, and the devil is sometimes in the details, 5
5See (Batterman 2021) for philosophical discussion of some of the subtleties, and of the need
in many cases to establish a robust ‘mesoscale’ understanding of a continuum system. It is also
4


=== PAGE 5 ===

but there is not a lot of room to deny the claim that the fluid-level physics is
derivable, in the appropriate regime, from the atomic description. And then
it seems inexplicable how, if we actually have a well-controlled account of the
mathematical relation between the two theories, it could still be the case that
their ontologies are just disconnected.
The second answer, composition, embraces reduction in the fullest sense: the
fluid actually is present in the lower-level description, because the fluid just is
all of the atoms together. At the formal level, this means supplementing our
lower-level theory with a mereology, a logic of whole and part, so that as well as
quantifying over the individual atoms we quantify over the various mereological
sums of atoms. The fluid is then identified with one of those mereological sums
— the sum of all the atoms — and the spatial parts of the fluid with the
mereological sums of subsets of the atoms.
Composition meshes naturally with the traditional (Nagelian) approach to
reduction. There (Nagel 1961), intertheoretic reduction is logical deduction of
one theory from another with the aid of “bridge laws”, auxiliary axioms whcih
coordinate the terms of one theory with those of another — for instance, “the
mass of the fluid in region R is N m iff there are N atoms each of mass m
in region R”. For that notion of reduction genuinely to reduce one theory to
another, those bridge laws have to be more than mere contingencies: they must
be something like identities. ((Lewis 1970) is perhaps the best-known working
out of this idea.) And then something like mereological composition seems
unavoidable: there need to be things in the ontology of the microscopic theory
that we can treat as identical to the fluid and its parts, and an austere ontology
of particles alone contains no candidates. The overall package is undeniably
elegant, and meshes well both with the formal methods of analytic philosophy
and with our intuitive understanding of composition.
Its mesh with actual physics is less impressive. We might expect to find
mereology — or some rough-and-ready version of it — in the actual mathematics
by which fluid dynamics was derived, but it is not at all apparent there. (In
the clearest derivations I know, the fluid gets identified with some subcollection
of the lowest-frequency Fourier modes of the particle distribution.) And the
mereological sum of the molecules seems quite different in nature from the fluid
posited by fluid dynamics — the former consists of isolated points scattered
through empty space, the latter is a smooth continuum. The situation only
gets worse in more esoteric regimes of physics. The statement that a proton
is composed of three quarks, for instance, is somewhere between a forgivable
heuristic in popular science and a story we tell children; quarks themselves are
identified with certain excitations of an underlying field, very roughly in the way
that an ordinary wave is identified as a moving disturbance of a fluid. There
is no obvious logic of composition identifiable here that transcends the messy
generally the case that the higher-level theories are irreversible in the statistical-mechanics
sense, whereas the lower-level theories are reversible, so that somewhere a time-asymmetric
assumption has to be introduced; a full understanding of the reduction therefore also requires
some engagement with the vexed question of the arrow of time; see, e.g., (Albert 2000; Price
1996; Wallace 2013).
5


=== PAGE 6 ===

details of the specific cases; indeed, those specific cases often mix up ontological
categories, ‘identifying’ a higher-level object with something like a property of
the lower-level objects.
If neither disunity nor composition offer a scientifically appropriate account
of higher-order ontology, that brings us to the third answer: instrumentalism.
Perhaps there is no higher-order ontology: it is just convenient to pretend that
there is. The instrumentalist need not worry about establishing some precise
connection between higher-level and lower-level ontology, because really there
is only lower-level ontology — but it is sometimes pragmatically helpful to pre-
tend, to act as if there is high-level ontology. That pretense can make it simpler
to carry out various scientific tasks, to predict and explain the phenomena, but
ultimately those phenomena are only phenomena at the high level. The instru-
mentalist about fluids will say that ‘fluid’ is just a convenient way of talking, but
that really there are just atoms in certain configurations — ‘arranged fluid-wise’,
to borrow a term from the metaphysics literature.
Applied to intentional states, this is already radical. Applied to physics, it
becomes dizzying. Once we drop our pretense, we remember that the theory of
classical atoms and molecules is not fundamental either. It rests on the quantum
mechanics of the subatomic, which rests on the layered quantum field theories
of particle physics. Even the deepest of those is not fundamental: the Stan-
dard Model of Particle Physics is an effective theory, a low-energy, large-scale
approximation to something about which we can only speculate (string theory
being the furthest developed of those speculations). To be an instrumentalist
about ‘higher-level’ physics is to be an instrumentalist about every scientific
entity ever described in an empirically-confirmed theory. Indeed, it is to be an
instrumentalist about scientists themselves, about their — our — experiments
and language. Even space and time are generally expected to be emergent con-
sequences of a deeper, non-spatio-temporal physics — to the instrumentalist,
they too don’t really exist.
At this point, instrumentalism about the high level starts to look incompre-
hensible, if not incoherent, and we seem forced to admit at least some higher-
level ontology. But how much? Suppose two theories agree that atoms exist,
but disagree about whether fluids do; what, actually, is the form of the disagree-
ment? It cannot be stated using the vocabulary of the interatomic theory: that
theory, in itself, requires no mereology. It cannot make a difference to anything
stated in the language of interatomic ontology, for the same reason. Whatdoes it
make a difference to? The question cannot be answered naturalistically: science
is silent on whether fluids really exist or are just an indispensable-in-practice
fiction.6 We seem to have been led from a quintessentially naturalistic prob-
lem — given that systems are described on various levels by various different
theories, how do we think about the relation between those theories’ respective
ontologies? — step by step into the deepest jungles of analytic metaphysics.
6If you doubt this, try asking a few fluid dynamicists whether fluids really exist or are just a
useful way of talking about atoms. Then try the analogous question about atoms themselves.
6


=== PAGE 7 ===

3 Real patterns and Dennett’s Criterion
The last section is a sort of Rorschach test for philosophers. For some, they
illustrate exactly why metaphysics is indispensable, for all that neo-positivists
and other philistines might claim otherwise: think clearly enough about any
deep problem in philosophy of science and eventually you will have to get your
metaphysics straight, and in doing so will have to engage in the practice of
metaphysics. For others — like myself and, I imagine, Dennett — the fact that
we seemed to be led so deeply away from anything naturalistic is an indication
that something went badly wrong in our setup of the problem, and we should
work out what it is. 7
At this point ‘Real Patterns’ comes as a breath of fresh air. In Dennett’s pro-
posal, higher-level entities are not literally composed of lower-level entities, but
nor are they simply instrumentalist fictions: rather, they are patterns — or, in
terms more natural to a philosopher of physics,structures — in the distributions
and dynamics of the lower-level entities. The fluid is not a mereological sum of
the atoms in the box: it is a pattern in their behavior, a pattern elucidated by
the mathematical derivation of fluid dynamics from interatomic physics, and it
is a real pattern, and not just a ‘mere’ pattern, because it is such a powerful,
explanatory, predictive pattern. There is a flexibility, a situation-dependence,
to the notion of pattern not shared by something as rigid as composition: a
fluid can be truthfully described as continuous simply because a continuum is
the best way to describe the pattern that fluid dynamics discerns in the micro-
physics. Similarly, pattern need not respect ontological categories: the pattern
(an object) might be realized not in the objects of the lower-level theory but in
its properties and quantities.
Once you understand the idea, and once you learn a little physics, you begin
to see real patterns everywhere. Light is a traveling pattern in the excitations
of the electromagnetic field (just as, in ‘Real Patterns’, a glider is a travelling
pattern in the excitations of the cells in the Game of Life). Physicists describe
the vibrations in a crystal by treating it as a gas of phonons, the quanta of
sound: these phonons are patterns in the movements of the atoms in the crystal.
Electrons are patterns in the excitations of the quantum fields of the Standard
Model.
In previous work (Wallace 2003, 2012) I called the general principle here
Dennett’s Criterion: A macro-object is a pattern, and the existence of a
pattern as a real thing depends on the usefulness — in particular, the
explanatory power and predictive reliability — of theories which admit
that pattern in their ontology.
The theory of fluids, for example, is de facto indispensable in studying large-
scale features of certain molecular systems — various of their features would be
7To avoid being misunderstood: I don’t want to suggest that naturalistically inclined
philosophers cannot benefit from engagement with modern metaphysics. My own development
of these ideas has been greatly helped by (admittedly critical) engagement with it: I’ll note
in particular the influence of Sider (2020, 2023).
7


=== PAGE 8 ===

in principle inexplicable and in practice impossible to calculate without using
fluid dynamics — and so fluids are real. 8
A real-patterns approach does drastically better at capturing the way physi-
cists themselves talk about ontology than do theories based on composition or
disunity (while avoiding the nihilism of a thoroughgoing instrumentalism to-
wards physics). In physics as in philosophy of mind, real patterns offer the
promise of a middle way between instrumentalism and realism, which closely
fits the practice of physics. Physicists are extremely permissive about introduc-
ing new higher-level ontology, and then talking about it as robustly as they did
their old ontology: they are not concerned about any particular way that the
new ontology is related to the old but they do require it to be part of a theory
derived or constructed from the lower-level physics, and they do require it to be
useful.
(In my own original use of Dennett’s criterion, I used physics practice to
justify the claim that ontology in general works this way in physics, and then
applied it to one specific controversial case: the ‘branches’ or ‘worlds’ that
appear in the Everett (Many-Worlds) interpretation of quantum mechanics. The
idea was that the ‘worlds’ are real patterns in the evolving quantum system, so
that according to the general ontological criteria which physicists tacitly use,
the worlds really exist, as higher-order, non-fundamental ontology.)
That said, while I think something along the lines of the real-patterns ap-
proach is correct, by itself it still leaves some metaphysical questions unan-
swered. For one, while the idea of a pattern is certainly intuitive, it is harder
to pin down what it means to quantify over patterns in an underlying ontology,
especially when that underlying ontology is as alien and unintuitive as some of
those found in physics. For another, Dennett distinguishes between real pat-
terns and mere patterns, as (in effect) does my phrasing of Dennett’s criterion.
But then what does it actually add to say that a pattern isreal? It doesn’t mean
that it exists, in the Quinean sense: all the patterns exist, in the sense that we’re
quantifying over them when we identify some as mere and some as real. Nor
will it do to get pragmatic and say that it is useful to treat some patterns as
real: nothing in scientific practice will distinguish the scientist who does this
from the scientist who simply uses the “real” patterns without applying the
label ‘real’ to them.
Perhaps we should instead read Dennett’s criterion as some sort of abstrac-
tion principle: “Pattern X exists iff the underlying objects are arranged X-wise
and positing X is . . . ”. (In my own version of Dennett’s criterion, the. . . is filled
in by some statement of explanatory and predictive power). If so, what is the
status of that principle? It is tempting to read it pragmatically, as a statement
about when it is useful to use language that way — but that gets us to quite
8There is a close analogy here to Dennett’s discussion of the indispensability of the in-
tentional stance in (Dennett 1987, pp.225-27): in practice it is infeasible for us to predict
what intelligent agents will do except through the intentional stance, but even if alien super-
scientists did have the ability to make atom-by-atom predictions of what a human being would
do, they would still be missing something explanatory if they didn’t know that the intentional
stance licensed much simpler predictions.
8


=== PAGE 9 ===

an instrumentalist conception of higher-order ontology, one that becomes even
more uncomfortable when it is not just beliefs and desires but solid matter itself
that is to be understood as a real pattern. If we try to read it realistically, we are
in the uncomfortable position of having a criterion for real ontology which itself
turns to some degree on pragmatic considerations. If there are alien physicists 9
with quite different pragmatic goals from ours, would quite different patterns
not be real to them? Does that kind of interest-relative ontology even make
sense? And where does it leave scientific realism?
Worries along these lines lead real-pattern advocates like Ladyman and Ross
(2007) to fill in the . . . with something a little more objective: informational
compressibility from a physically possible perspective. But then what is the
status of that principle — is it some metaphysical a priori truth, and if so,
how do we come to know it? If two fans of the real-patterns idea fill in the
blanks a little differently, how is that disagreement to be resolved? Most of
all, what really distinguishes the person who holds the abstraction principle
to be true from the person who regards it as a mere fiction? The impasse
between compositional and instrumentalist approaches to higher-order ontology
threatens to recur in more naturalistic guise.
There is something frustrating about this whole dialectic. Again: our start-
ing point is as naturalistic a philosophical question as one could wish — what
is the world like, given that we describe it with different physical theories at
different scales — but our attempts to answer it keep ensnaring us in meta-
physical tangles that naturalistic methods cannot straighten out. There must
still be something wrong with how we are thinking about the problem; the real
pattern idea is a major step forward but it can’t be the whole of the solution.
4 Mathematics and the world
Let’s step back a moment. We are trying to understand the relation between
what some system, some part of the world, is like according to a higher-level
theory (in our example, fluid dynamics) and what it is like according to a lower-
level theory (like interatomic physics) that purports to describe the same system
on different scales. But at least in the context of physics, it is odd that there
can even be a substantive question — after all, ex hypothesi we understand
how interatomic physics describes the system, and we understand how fluid
dynamics does, and we understand the mathematical relation between the two
systems. How can there be anything substantive left to understand?
To answer this, we need to look more closely at what these theories of physics
actually are. So far I have been writing as if a scientific theory was something
like a description of the world (or a part of it) in language: that is, a theory
says what things there are in the world, and what properties they have and
relations they stand in, and how all this changes over time. (It’s clear that
this is the notion of theory that Quine, at least, has in mind: something given
in the first instance in a natural language like English, but which at least in
9Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this nice example.
9


=== PAGE 10 ===

idealization we can imagine being reformulated in the predicate calculus.) But
at least in physics, scientific theories aren’t like that any more, if indeed they
ever were. Physics theories are highly mathematized, and the relation they bear
to the systems they describe is not best thought of through linguistic notions
of truth and reference and satisfaction but by some more general notion of
representation.
Why does this matter? Because the description of the system given in the
mathematics is typically more coarse-grained than a purely linguistic description
would be. Consider again the fluid: it is characterized in part by a function that
represents the density at each part in the fluid, but there are two ways to think
about density:
Density fundamentalism: Density is just a primitive feature of pointlike
parts of a fluid; integrating it over regions of the fluid gives a derivative
quantity, mass.
Mass fundamentalism: The real primitive is mass: every 10 nonzero-volume
part of the fluid has a mass; the mass of a disjoint sum of parts is the
sum of their separate masses; it is density that is the derivative quantity,
defined as the limit of the ratio of mass to volume as the latter approaches
zero.
Try to formalize the theory of the fluid in predicate logic and you will have
to make a call on questions like this: the two choices lead to different logical
vocabulary and, indirectly, to different metaphysical commitments. But math-
ematically they are interchangeable: fluid dynamics doesn’t care, and neither
do fluid dynamicists. Or more precisely: they might care about which way of
describing density is clearer and more useful, but not about which is true.
Examples like this multiply and become more radical as we move to parts of
physics further from the manifest image. Consider a classical field theory like
electromagnetism. Mathematically (and in the absence of charged matter) the
theory represents the electromagnetic field by a pair of vector field, assigning an
electric and a magnetic field vector to every point in space. Should we interpret
this as saying that there is an extended entity — a field — whose parts occupy
regions of space and have field strengths as their fundamental properties? Or is
‘field’ just a facon de parler : are ‘field strengths’ new properties of the points
of space? The two interpretations differ radically in ontology: according to one,
there are continuum many new entities, the various parts of the field; according
to the other, there are no non-spatial entities at all — and yet the mathematics
of electromagnetism makes no distinction between them.
Following (Wallace 2022), a predicate precisification11 of a mathematically-
stated theory of physics is an accountin natural language of what a system is like
10Here I elide some measure-theoretic technicalities: it is not possible to define a volume
measure on every subset of the continuum. See, e.g., (Halmos 1950).
11I concede that this is not a beautiful phrase. I welcome suggestions for improvement,
but there are false friends lurking: ‘predicate description’ sounds more elegant, but unavoid-
ably suggests that what we describe in natural language is the theory itself (a mathematical
structure) rather than the system that the theory represents.
10


=== PAGE 11 ===

according to that theory. Precisifications need to commit on various questions of
ontology and ideology that the theory itself is silent on, but ‘precise’ here is not
a virtue term: a predicate precisification commits to more about they system
than physics itself licenses. That is: a theory of physics underdetermines its
own description in natural language. 12
It is tempting to think that some predicate precisification of a successful the-
ory must be true, so that scientific theories represent the world by virtue of con-
straining, though not fixing, the real description of the world in object-property
language. If so, science would underdetermine reality, and there would be truths
about the physical world invisible to the scientific method — perhaps perma-
nently opaque to us, perhaps accessible through the methods of metaphysics.
(The former position is one form of epistemic structural realism (Worrall 1989;
Ladyman 1998), the view that science determines structure but not nature;
the latter position characterizes the approach of metaphysicians of physics like
Sider (2011, 2020), Maudlin (2018), and North (2021).) It is equally tempting
to think that an interpretation of a formalized physical theory is a predicate
precisification of a theory, telling us how uninterpreted mathematics is to be
related to the concrete world.
Both temptations should be resisted. To make a mathematically stated
theory subordinate to a natural-language description is to privilege natural lan-
guage over other representational tools, and there is no non-question-begging
reason to do so, and centuries of evidence from physics to the contrary (going
back at least to Galileo’s famous observation that mathematics is the language
of nature). Language is an exceptionally good representational tool, but it is
not our only such tool: even prior to considering scientific theories themselves,
think of maps or diagrams, of Kant’s thesis of the centrality of the intuition of
space, and of the manifold non-linguistic forms of representation theorized in
cognitive science13).
Nor can an ‘interpretation’ be a predicate precisification, at least if under-
standing requires interpretation, and if physicists understand their own theo-
ries: physics practice is not committed to any particular choice of precisification.
What it is to learn a new physics theory, in practice, is not to be told how it
maps to a world of objects and properties: it is to coordinate that theory with
other theories, often mathematically presented, that are antecedently under-
stood, to learn through those coordinatizations how the theory is to be used,
and in due course to bootstrap one’s way to an understanding of the theory that
is not purely parasitic on previous theories. Much the same is true of learning a
new language, or a new word in an old language, and if the process of doing so
cannot be fully described except in terms of already-understood representations,
12There is an interesting analogy with Dennett’s (1987, ch.5) distinction between beliefs
(intentional states characterized through the intentional stance, applicable to any system
which can usefully be ascribed them) and opinions (commitments made in language, available
only to language users). Opinions are much more finely grained than beliefs, but that fineness
of grain does not necessarily reflect anything factive — sometimes it is just an artifact of the
sharp edges that language requires.
13See, e.g., (Pitt 2022) and references therein.
11


=== PAGE 12 ===

that is just the familiar Neurath/Quine observation that we must rebuild our
ship while sailing in it (Quine 1969, pp.126-127).
This approach to scientific (or at least physics) theories might be called
“mathematics-first realism”. (It is a form of ontic structural realism (Ladyman
1998), though that term has been used in wildly different ways by different
authors. I understand it broadly in the sense of (McKenzie 2024).) Much more
could be said in its explication and defense (I give my own version in much more
detail in (Wallace 2022; Wallace 2024)). For now, I will take as read that it is
along the right lines and consider its implications for scientific ontology.
5 Ontology as secondary
If the deep theories of physics do not represent the world in terms of objects
and properties, does that mean that fundamentally there are no objects and
properties? No, for two reasons. The first is shallowly semantic: to say that
objects do not exist is already to concede the fundamentality of the framework
for describing the world that does so in terms of objects, and then to advance
a radical metaphysical thesis within that framework. (‘There are no objects’ is
a claim in natural language.) The second is more substantive: object-property
talk is useful, even in deep physics. Giving accounts of a physical system in lan-
guage is heuristically and pedagogically helpful; it builds intuition, and helps
coordinate different partial descriptions of the world with one another; it aids
understanding and suggests new directions for work. A good predicate precisi-
fication of a theory is a valuable ‘tool for thinking’, to borrow another term
from Dennett (2013a). But it is not fundamental: its claims are true, insofar
as they are true, in virtue not of its correspondence with the world but of it
being a predicate precisification of a representationally successful mathematized
theory.
This makes the pursuit of ontology into a second-order activity: it tells us
not directly what the world is like but how best we can describe it with the
tools of natural language. The benefit of this somewhat deflationary account
of ontology is that it liberates us methodologically. If we seek fundamental
truth, then appeals to simplicity, to intuition, to fit with the manifest image,
all seem question-begging: why think that the world is simple, or that our
intuitions are correct about it. But if we want that description in language of a
mathematized theory that is most helpful to us, then of course these are virtues:
who would choose a complicated, unintuitive predicate precisification when a
simple, intuitive one is at hand? (It also permits agnosticism, even pluralism,
when different, nominally-incompatible predicate precisifications are tied for
first place: just use whichever one is more suitable for the task at hand. 14)
The approach to ontology I suggest here has much in common with Den-
nett’s (2013b) proposal for metaphysics as “sophisticated na¨ ıve anthropology”,
aimed at delivering a “metaphysics of the manifest image”, without supposing
14Compare Feynman (1967, p.162): “every theoretical physicist who is any good knows six
or seven different theoretical representations for exactly the same physics”.
12


=== PAGE 13 ===

that in doing so we are “limning the ultimate structure of reality”. I am unsure
quite how playfully Dennett intends his suggestion, but I intend mine entirely
seriously: it is valuable to have clear predicate precisifications of theories in
physics, and developing them is one (not the only) way philosophers of physics
can contribute.15
And with this account of ontology in hand, we can finally sort out the meta-
physical tangles that occupied us for the first half of the paper. Consider once
again our fluid, and for now assume (unrealistically) that we start off knowing
only the lower-level theory, the mathematically-presented theory of interacting
atoms. That theory has a (very natural and obvious) predicate precisification:
the objects are the atoms; their essential properties are their masses and per-
haps charges; their spatial location can be understood as an additional primitive
property, or a relation between particles and spacetime points (observe that even
in this paradigm case we have underdetermination, invisible to physics).
That theory also, given certain auxiliary assumptions about dynamics and
initial state, mathematically instantiates (approximately) the Navier-Stokes the-
ory of fluid dynamics: that is, some subcollection of its degrees of freedom,
appropriately coordinatized, can be well approximated as having self-contained
and autonomous dynamics described by that equation. There is nothing prag-
matic about this claim: it is simply a piece of mathematics, a theoretical dis-
covery about the theory which we might be led to through surprising empirical
data or just work out theoretically. And because of that piece of mathematics,
among the scientifically interesting facts about the system are facts about those
autonomous high-level dynamics, facts better studied via the Navier-Stokes
equation than via interatomic physics. In studying those facts, it will often
be helpful to have a description of fluid dynamics in object-property terms, and
again there is a very natural and obvious choice of predicate precisification: the
objects are the parts of the fluid, the properties include densities (or perhaps
masses) and temperatures, and parts of the fluid occupy parts of space.
What makes it true that, at atomic scales, there are atoms, is that we quan-
tify over atoms in the predicate description we use for the system at those scales.
What makes it true that at larger scales there are fluids and their parts is that we
quantify over those parts in our large-scale description. And in each case our use
of the description is legitimated by a combination of not-at-all-pragmatic facts
about the mathematical representation of the system and somewhat-pragmatic
facts about the best predicate precisification of that representation. Note that
our ontology is scale-relative (Ladyman and Ross 2007, ch.4): we quantify over
fluids (when talking about large-scale physics) and we quantify over atoms (when
talking about smaller-scale physics) but we don’t quantify over both at once. 16
15A few examples of philosophy of physics that fairly self-consciously fits that framework:
Simon Saunders’ (2013, 2016) work on individuality of particles; Eleanor Knox’s (2013, 2014)
spacetime functionalism (see also the discussion in Knox and Wallace 2023); Chris Timpson
and my spacetime state realism (Wallace and Timpson 2010, Wallace 2012, ch.8).
16Not normally, anyway. Separation of scales is an important but not inviolate rule in
physics: ‘the subatomic particle left a trail in the vapor in the cloud chamber’ is an example
of a scientifically-legitimate use of mixed ontology.
13


=== PAGE 14 ===

This perspective on ontology also defuses the worry raised in section 3 about
alien physicists with quite different pragmatic goals: those aliens might disagree
with us about ontology, which is a partially pragmatic matter, but (assuming
both our and their science has been sufficiently successful) they will not disagree
with us about mathematically-expressed structure, which is not pragmatic at
all. Sentient excitations of the magnetic fields in the stellar corona might not
conceptualize particle physics in terms of object-like ‘electrons’ and ‘protons’ —
indeed, the whole language-based idea of ‘object’ and ‘property’, grounded as
it presumably is in the persistent and stable assemblies of matter that Earth’s
surface supports might be alien to them. But they can still agree with us about
the mathematical structure of quantum electrodynamics and its representational
accuracy to describe systems at appropriate length and energy scales.
What is the relation between the low-level and high-level ontology on this
view? There need be no self-contained way of stating it, beyond the known rela-
tions between theory and ontology at each level and the equally-known relation
between theories.17 Those relations, collectively, leave no metaphysical residue
in need of explication. That said, there might be, in specific cases, and indeed
the lack of any metaphysical requirement of a relationship gives us latitude to
cash out those relationships in approximate or heuristic terms. There is clearly
some sense in which a fluid is made up of atoms — the part of a fluid in region
X has properties which supervene on the properties of the atoms in region X,
and some of those properties (like mass) are simply additive functions of the
properties. Is that a mereological relation. . . sorta (cf. Dennett 2013a, pp.96-7.)
It’s got a lot in common with the idea that mereology formalizes, for sure. Can
we sharpen things up so that the relation is really-and-truly mereological, for
some particular version of mereology? Maybe. . . but it’s not entirely clear what
would be gained in doing so.
Similarly, a hydrogen atom is sorta made up of a proton and an electron:
there’s a lower-level subatomic theory whose natural ontology is electrons and
nuclei, a higher-level interatomic theory whose natural ontology is atoms, and a
well-understood mathematical relation between the two, giving rise to a relation
between the two ontologies that looks quite a lot like composition. A proton is
sorta made up of quarks, but now there is a lot more heuristic and metaphor
in that claim. In each case something like composition is happening, but the
place to look if you want sharp and exact details is the mathematics, not the
ontology, and when you look, you find the composition metaphor gets filled in
and corrected very differently in different cases.
And in some cases composition does not even approximately capture the
intertheoretic relation. Waves, and their quantized particles, are not even sorta
made up of the medium that is waving: the right form of words is something
closer to ‘moving disturbance’. But still there will be some relation between
lower and higher level ontology: differences in high-level ontology reflect dif-
ferences in high-level structure, which must result from differences in low-level
17Cf Guo (2023), who contrasts this ‘theory-first’ sense of reduction with the ‘ontology-first’
approach presupposed in much metaphysics of science.
14


=== PAGE 15 ===

Figure 1: Theory and ontology in intertheoretic reduction
High-level theory High-level ontology
Low-level theory Low-level ontology
predicate precisification
instantiates
predicate precisification
real pattern
structure, differences that are reflected in differences in low-level ontology. It
would be good to have a general name for this relation, one that does not
presuppose composition and reflects the structural, dynamical nature of the in-
tertheoretic relations underlying it. I have a suggestion, one that I hope reflects
the spirit of Dennett’s own proposal: in this case, the higher-level ontology
consists of real patterns in the lower-level ontology.
6 Closing the circle
Physics is atypical of the sciences: the systems it studies are more alien and un-
intuitive, and yet comparatively more simple, and its theories are mathematized
to a far higher degree. The uncritical use of physics as a model for science more
broadly has caused much confusion in philosophy of science. So I am hesitant to
draw broader lessons about scientific metaphysics from my observations here.
Yet my theme has been how ideas first developed in the philosophy of mind
have found purchase in philosophy of physics, so it seems a shame not to try
returning the favor. What follows should be taken in an appropriately tentative
spirit, as an invitation to those who know the territory better. 18
To begin with: scientific theories outside physics are for the most part 19
not plausibly thought of purely as mathematical structures. Natural language
runs much more deeply through these theories, far too deeply to be understood
merely as a heuristic-but-dispensible predicate precisification.
18As an anonymous reviewer reminds me, theories of physics are also atypical in that the
notion of cause plays a much more attenuated role in physics than in the rest of science.
An account of scientific theories broad enough to cover (e.g.) evolution, or medicine, or
economics, clearly would need to consider the role of cause (as recognised by Ladyman and
Ross’s extensive discussion of cause in their (2007)), but any such considerations lie beyond
the scope of this article and I leave them again to those with greater expertise.
19There are exceptions, for instance: some parts of economics, of quantum chemistry, of
population genetics. Even here, though, the theory is usually to be seen as a mathematized
chunk of some larger, more pluralistically-formulated, representation.
15


=== PAGE 16 ===

I find this unsurprising, for two reasons. The first, and most obvious, is
that most scientists study systems far more complicated than physicists do: no
system in the institutional purview of physics has a fraction of the complexity
of a bacterium, far less a human mind or an ecosystem or economy. To some
degree, the mathematization of physics reflects the fact that precisely because
physics is simpler, physicists have had much greater quantitative success in
modeling the world.
But there is a deeper reason: language as a representational tool evolved to
help us get by on human scales, dealing with phenomena on scales of centimeters
to kilometers, from milliseconds to decades. On those scales, the mismatch
between even a physics description of the world and the description given in
natural language is not that bad, especially if we are generous in how we construe
‘natural language’ and allow it to include geometric concepts like angle or length,
and certain abstracta like collections. It is only when we leave the regime of
the macroscopic that linguistic descriptions show their limitations, and much
of the special sciences is concerned with that macroscopic regime. So I would
expect even a hypothesized ‘completed’ biology or psychology (even supposing
that makes sense) to be much more language-like than physics is.
But if most scientific theories are not collections of mathematical models, nor
are they simply collections of natural-language sentences. I suspect the right
way to describe them is a messy mixture of interconnected representational
practices: pieces of mathematics, chunks of natural language equipped with ad-
ditional resources, concepts and tools and models borrowed from physics, and
of course the large amount of tacit knowledge that one learns from experiment
and observation and fieldwork and cannot losslessly describe. Much of how rep-
resentation functions in this context will be at most partially and imperfectly
described through the truth-satisfaction-reference. If so, supposing that ‘ontol-
ogy’ is the right fundamental tool to describe the world according to that theory
may be as unwise as in physics, and we may do better, as in physics, to treat
our fully-linguistic descriptions of phenomena at least partially as a pedagogical
and heuristic tool rather than the full and literal truth.
(Doing so, among other virtues, may help us to recognize that certain
apparently-legitimate questions arise because of the artificially sharp distinc-
tions that language forces us to draw. I’ll risk some tentative examples: ‘Is a
fetus a human being?’, ‘are viruses alive’, and ‘are wolves and dogs the same
species’ are in each case grammatically well-posed questions, yet in each case it
seems that we can have a perfectly satisfactory understanding of the underlying
science without having an answer to that question.)
I’ll finish by considering again the original question in the ontology of mind
that provoked ‘Real Patterns’ in the first place: on Dennett’s account of inten-
tionality, do people really have beliefs or is that just a useful fiction? Recall the
context: we assume a person’s behavior is pretty well, but very complicatedly,
described by some comparatively low-level theory of the brain and body: some
‘sub-personal cognitive psychology’ (Dennett 1981). 20 But we also assume that
20A complication is that Dennett expects intentionality to recur, in simpler but robust form,
16


=== PAGE 17 ===

same person can be quite well, and much less complicatedly, described, through
the intentional stance: through attributing to them beliefs and desires that are
updated according to their informational environment and according to which
their actions are rational. And the intentional-stance description does not float
free of the sub-personal explanation: it had better be the case that we can
understand the lower-level mechanisms that make it the case that the inten-
tional stance holds (and which in some circumstances, like brain damage or
LSD, qualify or invalidate it).
Does the person have beliefs? In the account of ontology I’ve offered (and
throwing caution to the wind by applying it far outside physics), the answer is a
clear YES: an ontology of beliefs and desires is the most helpful ontological de-
scription of the intentional-system theory, and that theory is correct, in the sense
that it does indeed give a fairly-robust, fairly-reliable account of the person’s
behavior. To be is to be the value of a bound variable; our best predicate pre-
cisification of intentional-systems theory quantifies over beliefs; so, at the scales
and in the circumstances where we apply that theory, beliefs exist. Maybe it
will turn out that those beliefs can be identified, exactly or approximately, with
some sub-personal bit of ontology, but that’s an additional scientific hypothesis
not relevant to the higher-level ontology. The qualifiers on our ontological claim
— ‘beliefs exist at certain scales and certain circumstances’ — do not mark
beliefs off as having some second-class status: all ontology works this way, and
all higher-level ontological claims are claims about real patterns in lower-level
ontology, and everything posited in physics outside the most extreme regimes
of quantum gravity is ‘higher-level’ in this sense. If beliefs don’t really exist,
then fluids don’t really exist; atoms and electrons don’t really exist; most likely
space and time don’t really exist.
There appears to be room for doubt about the reality of the beliefs and de-
sires revealed by the intentional stance because there appears to be a contrast
between abstracta, mere patterns in physical matter, and concrete things actu-
ally comprised of physical matter. But from the perspective of modern physics
this contrast is an illusion, caused by the fact that composition gives a reason-
able — but far from perfect — account of inter-theoretic relations at scales not
too far from human imagination. Step back and look at the bigger picture, and
it’s real patterns all the way down.
at the sub-personal level; I put this aside for simplicity.
17


=== PAGE 18 ===

Acknowledgements
In developing the ideas in this paper I have benefited greatly from conversations
with Neil Dewar, Alex Franklin, Bixin Guo, Eleanor Knox, James Ladyman,
Kerry McKenzie, Tushar Menon, Katie Robertson, and Simon Saunders, and
from discussions at the 2024 Santa Fe Institute workshop “Investigating Reality
– A Philosophical, Mathematical, and Scientific Exploration”. I am also grate-
ful to Katie Robertson, Don Ross, and an anonymous reviewer for thoughtful
comments on the manuscript.
I had hoped to use the opportunity of this paper to thank Dan Dennett
for the tremendous influence his work has been on my own, and for providing
so compelling a model of how to do philosophy as a contribution to, and in
communication with, science. As it is, I can only hope that in a small way it
develops his ideas in ways that he would have approved of, in spirit if not in
detail. Ars longa, vita brevis.
References
Albert, D. Z. (2000). Time and Chance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Balescu, R. (1997). Statistical Dynamics: Matter out of Equilibrium . London:
World Scientific.
Batterman, R. W. (2021). A Middle Way: A Non-Fundamental Approach to
Many-Body Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cartwright, N. (1999). The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of
Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1981). Three kinds of intentional psychology. In R. Healey
(Ed.), Reduction, Time, and Reality . Cambridge University Press.
Reprinted and expanded in Dennett (1987), pp. 43–81.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Real patterns. Journal of Philosophy 87 , 27–51.
Reprinted in Brainchildren, D. Dennett, (London: Penguin 1998) pp.
95–120.
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings
of Life. Simon and Schuster.
Dennett, D. C. (2013a). Intuition Pumps and other Tools for Thinking . New
York: W.W.Norton.
Dennett, D. C. (2013b). Kinds of things — towards a bestiary of the man-
ifest image. In D. Ross, J. Ladyman, and H. Kincaid (Eds.), Scientific
Metaphysics, pp. 96–107. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dupr´ e, J. (1983). The disunity of science.Mind XCII , 321–346.
18


=== PAGE 19 ===

Feynman, R. P. (1967). The Character of Physical Law . Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1974). Special sciences (or: The disunity of science as a working
hypothesis). Synthese 28 , 97–115.
Franklin, A. (2024). Incoherent? no, just decoherent: How quantum many
worlds emerge. Philosophy of Science 91 , 288–309.
Franklin, A. and K. Robertson (2021). Emerging into the rainforest: Emer-
gence and special science ontology. Forthcoming; online at http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/19912/.
Frigg, R. (2007). A field guide to recent work on the foundations of ther-
modynamics and statistical mechanics. In D. Rickles (Ed.), The Ashgate
Companion to the New Philosophy of Physics , pp. 99–196. London: Ash-
gate.
Guo, B. (2023). Ontology-first vs. theory-first approach to reduction: A
case study from statistical mechanics. Philosophy of Science , forthcom-
ing; preprint at https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/22733/.
Halmos, P. R. (1950). Measure Theory. New York: Litton Educational Pub-
lishing.
Hermida, M. and J. Ladyman (2022). Living objects. https://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/21430/.
Knox, E. (2013). Effective spacetime geometry. Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 44 , 346–356.
Knox, E. (2014). Newtonian spacetime structure in light of the equivalence
principle. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 65 , 863–880.
Knox, E. and D. Wallace (2023). Functionalism fit for physics. https://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/22655/.
Ladyman, J. (1998). What is structural realism? Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science 29 , 409–424.
Ladyman, J. and D. Ross (2007). Every Thing Must Go: Metaphysics Natu-
ralized. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1970). How to define theoretical terms. Journal of Philosophy 67 ,
427–446. Reprinted in David Lewis, Philosophical Papers, Volume I (Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, 1983).
Maudlin, T. (2018). Ontological clarity via canonical presentation: Electro-
magnetism and the aharonovˆ a¿ “bohm effect. Entropy 20, 465.
McKenzie, K. (2024). Structuralism as a stance. Philosophy of Physics 2 , 1.
Myrvold, W. (2022). Philosophical issues in thermal physics. Oxford Research
Encyclopedia in Physics . doi: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190871994.013.42.
Nagel, E. (1961). The Structure of Science . New York: Harcourt.
19


=== PAGE 20 ===

North, J. (2021). Physics, Structure, and Reality . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Pitt, D. (2022). Mental Representation. In E. N. Zalta and U. Nodelman
(Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 ed.). Meta-
physics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Price, H. (1996). Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Quine, W. (1948). On what there is. Review of Metaphysics 2 , 21–38.
Quine, W. (1969). Natural kinds. In Ontological Relativity and Other Essays ,
pp. 114–138. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ross, D. (2000). Rainforest realism: a Dennettian theory of existence. In
D. Ross, A. Brook, and D. Thompson (Eds.), Dennett’s Philosophy: a
comprehensive assessment, pp. 147–168. Cambridge, Massachusets: MIT
Press/Bradford.
Saunders, S. (2013). Indistinguishability. In R. Batterman (Ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Philosophy of Physics, pp. 340–380. Oxford University Press.
Saunders, S. (2016). The emergence of individuals in physics. In A. Guay
and T. Pradeu (Eds.), Individuals Across the Sciences , pp. 165–192. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Seifert, V. (2023). The chemical bond is a real pattern. Philosophy of Sci-
ence 90, 269–287.
Sider, T. (2011). Writing the Book of the World . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sider, T. (2020). The Tools of Metaphysics and the Metaphysics of Science .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sider, T. (2023). 3D in high-D. Journal of Philosophy , forthcoming; preprint
at https://tedsider.org/papers/3D in high-D.pdf.
Sklar, L. (1993). Physics and Chance: Philosophical Issues in the Foundations
of Statistical Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wallace, D. (2003). Everett and Structure. Studies in the History and Philos-
ophy of Modern Physics 34 , 87–105.
Wallace, D. (2010). Decoherence and ontology: Or: How I learned to stop
worrying and love FAPP. In S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent, and D. Wal-
lace (Eds.), Many Worlds? Everett, Quantum Theory, and Reality , pp.
53–72. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2012). The Emergent Multiverse: Quantum Theory according to
the Everett Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2013). The arrow of time in physics. In H. Dyke and A. Bardon
(Eds.), A Companion to the Philosophy of Time . Chichester: John Wiley
and Sons.
20


=== PAGE 21 ===

Wallace, D. (2016). Probability and irreversibility in modern statisti-
cal mechanics: Classical and quantum. To appear in D. Bedingham,
O. Maroney and C. Timpson (eds.), Quantum Foundations of Statis-
tical Mechanics (Oxford University Press, forthcoming). Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.11223.
Wallace, D. (2022). Stating structural realism: mathematics-first approaches
to physics and metaphysics. In J. Hawthorne (Ed.),Philosophical Perspec-
tives Volume 36: Metaphysics , pp. 345–378. Wiley-Blackwell.
Wallace, D. (2023). Thermodynamics with and without irreversibility. To ap-
pear in Olimpia Lombardi and Cristian Lopez (eds.), The Arrow of Time:
From Local Systems to the Whole Universe (Cambridge University Press,
forthcoming). Preprint at https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/22273/.
Wallace, D. (2024). Learning to represent: Mathematics-first accounts
of representation and their relation to natural language. Preprint:
https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/23224/.
Wallace, D. and C. Timpson (2010). Quantum mechanics on spacetime I:
Spacetime state realism. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 61 ,
697–727.
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural realism: the best of both worlds? Dialectica 43,
99–124.
21
