=== PAGE 1 ===

Why Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics 
Works: Universality and the 
Renormalization Group* 
Robert W. Battermantl 
Department of Philosophy, Ohio State University 
Discussions of the foundations of Classical Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics (SM) 
typically focus on the problem of justifying the use of a certain probability measure 
(the microcanonical measure) to compute average values of certain functions. One 
would like to be able to explain why the equilibrium behavior of a wide variety of 
distinct systems (different sorts of molecules interacting with different potentials) can 
be described by the same averaging procedure. A standard approach is to appeal to 
ergodic theory to justify this choice of measure. A different approach, eschewing ergo- 
dicity, was initiated by A. I. Khinchin. Both explanatory programs have been subjected 
to severe criticisms. This paper argues that the Khinchin type program deserves further 
attention in light of relatively recent results in understanding the physics of universal 
behavior. 
1. Introduction. In the introduction to his important book Mathemat- 
ical Foundations of Statistical Mechanics, A. I. Khinchin (1949) pro- 
vides a "methodological characterization" of statistical mechanics 
(SM). He remarks on what many before and many since have noted: 
namely, that the successes of SM are due in large part to its abstraction 
from the details of the systems it purports to describe. The aim of SM 
*Received March 1997. 
tSend reprint requests to the author. Department of Philosophy, 350 University Hall, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210. 
:This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation 
under Award No. SBR-9529052. I would like to thank Roger Jones, David Malament, 
and Abner Shimony for helpful comments and encouragement. A version of this paper 
was read at the 1997 APA Central division meetings in Pittsburgh. I would especially 
like to thank Yuri Balashov for his insightful criticisms as commentator there. I hope 
I have been able to address some of his worries. 
Philosophy of Science, 65 (June 1998) pp. 183-208. 0031-8248/98/6502-0001$2.00 
Copyright 1998 by the Philosophy of Science Association. All rights reserved. 
183 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 2 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
is to explain the properties and behaviors of a wide class of systems 
(mechanical systems) by considering only the most fundamental me- 
chanical properties common to these systems. 
Those general laws of mechanics which are used in statistical me- 
chanics are necessary for any motions of material particles, no mat- 
ter what are the forces causing such motions. It is a complete ab- 
straction from the nature of these forces, that gives to statistical 
mechanics its specific features and contributes to its deductions all 
the necessary flexibility. This is best illustrated by the obvious fact 
that if we modify our point of view on the nature of the particles 
of a certain kind of matter and on the character of their interaction, 
the properties of this kind of matter established by methods of 
statistical mechanics remain unchanged by these modifications be- 
cause no special assumption was made in the process of deduction 
of these properties. (Khinchin 1949, 8) 
Khinchin's book, in essence, attempts to provide an explanation for 
why the prescriptions of equilibrium SM (particularly, the so-called 
Gibbs phase averaging method) work for computing equilibrium val- 
ues of various thermodynamical quantities. That is, he is concerned to 
justify the computation of phase averages using Gibbs' method in 
which observed values for thermodynamic quantities are computed us- 
ing the microcanonical measure. (To be explained below.) 
Ergodic theory has been thought by many to play a fundamental 
role in justifying Gibbs' method. In particular, numerous attempts both 
before and after Khinchin's work have tried to justify the use of the 
microcanonical measure for computing phase averages by appealing 
to the ergodic nature of the dynamical motions of the systems under 
consideration. 
On the other hand, it is well-known that Khinchin's program for 
explaining the success of equilibrium SM largely avoids an appeal to 
ergodicity. The features of his proposal which do most of the explana- 
tory work are (i) the special nature of the functions representing themac- 
roscopic observables and (ii) the large number of degrees of freedom 
characteristic of systems exhibiting thermodynamic behavior. These two 
features are primarily responsible for the applicability of the formalism 
of the theory of probability. In particular, they allow for the use of the 
Central Limit Theorem (CLT) as a means for determining the disper- 
sions of values for the macroscopic observables about their average val- 
ues. Nevertheless, Khinchin's program has been criticized, primarily for 
failing to justify the use of the microcanonical distribution. 
My concern in this paper is to re-examine the Khinchin type pro- 
gram for equilibrium SM. In particular, I want to ask why equilibrium 
184 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 3 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
SM should work virtually independently of the details of the micros- 
tructure of the systems. What accounts for the fact, noted by Khinchin 
in the passage quoted earlier, that statistical mechanical arguments 
work because of, and not just in spite of, its "complete abstraction" 
from the nature of the forces and types of interactions responsible for 
the actual motions of the systems being studied? These are questions 
concerning the explanation of a kind of universality. One wants to 
know why the method of equilibrium SM-the Gibbs' phase averaging 
method-is so broadly applicable; why, that is, do systems governed 
by completely different forces and composed of completely different 
types of molecules succumb to the same method for the calculation of 
their equilibrium properties. I shall propose a framework within which 
these explanatory why-questions may profitably be discussed. 
As I see it, the ergodic accounts and the Khinchin type program 
both seek to address the question of why equilibrium SM works. How- 
ever, they differ somewhat in how that question is to be understood. 
The ergodic approaches construe the question rather narrowly, asking 
for a justification of the use of the microcanonical measure for com- 
puting phase averages. On my view Khinchin's program should be seen 
as providing the beginning of a answer to the question more broadly 
construed: Why do the prescriptions of equilibrium SM yield proper 
results virtually without regard for any of the microscopic details of 
the systems being investigated? As the argument develops, I hope this 
distinction will come more clearly into focus. 
In the next section I shall present a few of the details of the ergodic 
theory "explanation" for why equilibrium SM works, and then briefly 
consider some powerful objections to the account. Section 3 outlines 
the essential features of Khinchin's program for SM and discusses its 
limitations. In particular, Khinchin provides arguments that apply di- 
rectly only to systems of noninteracting components; whereas, the sys- 
tems treated in SM are of necessity composed of energetically inter- 
acting components. I call this the "paradox of interaction." Section 4 
focuses on two further problems with the proposal. First, thermody- 
namic systems can undergo phase transitions even with weakly inter- 
acting components. Second, Khinchin's proposal does not seem to ad- 
dress the question that is the primary concern of the ergodic approach, 
namely, justifying the use of the microcanonical measure. In addition, 
this section presents the details of an objection to the ergodic proposal 
due to Earman and Redei which has the virtue (or so I shall argue) of 
indicating an avenue through which one might approach the entire 
question of accounting for the success of equilibrium SM. This avenue 
is explored in the final section where I outline the renormalization 
group framework and the explanation of universality it offers. I argue 
185 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 4 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
that this framework can fruitfully be employed to investigate the ex- 
planatory question with which we are concerned. 
2. The Ergodic Proposal. The traditional approach to explaining why 
equilibrium SM works appeals to ergodicity. Let me briefly sketch the 
simplest proposal-one that can be criticized on many different fronts 
but which nevertheless clearly provides the main motivation for the 
appeal to ergodicity. To begin we need a definition of this key concept. 
Consider a dynamical system to be a triple (F, 4, /u). F is a phase 
space-a space of possible states of the system. 4' : F -- r is a one 
parameter group of automorphisms (the flow) with time t the param- 
eter. 4t(x) is the state of the system at time t if the state at t = 0 was 
x for x E r. Finally, u is a normalized measure on F that is invariant 
under the flow. Invariance means that for any measurable set A C F, 
u(ut(A)) = u (A) for all t. 
One useful characterization of ergodicity is the following: A dynam- 
ical system is ergodic if and only if it is metrically transitive or metri- 
cally indecomposable. This means that it is not possible to partition 
the phase space F into two or more regions A and B of nonzero measure 
which are invariant under the flow. In other words, the system is met- 
rically transitive (and hence ergodic) just in case for any two regions 
A, B such that A n B = 0 and A U B = F which are invariant under 
the flow (for all t, 4,(A) C A and ,t(B) C B) either u(A) = 0 and u(B) 
= 1 orju(A) = 1 andt(B) = 0. 
The so-called ergodic theorem asserts the equality of infinite time 
averages with phase averages if and only if the system is ergodic. More 
precisely, we define the infinite time average of a functionf(x),f(x), as 
follows: 
f(x)lim 
1 
0to+ T 
f(x) = lim O+f(kt(x))dt. 
T-> oo T to 
The phase average off(x) is given by 
f(x) = ff(x)d(x). 
The ergodic theorem states the equivalence of the following two claims: 
(i) For any integrable phase functionfand for almost all x E F, 
f(x) = f(x). 
(ii) The system (F, 4), u) is ergodic. 
For Hamiltonian systems the flow ,t in the phase space F = S22N is 
generated by Hamilton's equations of motion. If the system is conser- 
186 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 5 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
vative, the motion is confined to a 2N - 1 dimensional hypersurface 
of constant energy, FE. There is a normalized, 0,-invariant measure 
which corresponds to a uniform distribution over this energy surface 
called the microcanonical measure. Let this measure be denoted by u. 
Ergodicity guarantees that the microcanonical measure, ,u, is the unique 
stationary measure on the energy surface that is absolutely continuous 
with the Lebesgue measure.' 
On what I'm calling the "ergodic" proposal, one assumes that equi- 
librium values of macroscopic thermodynamic quantities can be iden- 
tified with infinite time averages of appropriate phase functions. One 
tries to justify this assumption by appeal to the fact that the measure- 
ment of the thermodynamic quantity will typically take a long time 
relative to the time scale on which the microscopic processes (e.g., col- 
lisions between molecules) are occurring; and so macroscopic mea- 
surements can be nicely approximated by infinite time averages. Since 
calculating the infinite time averages involves completely solving the 
equations of motion for an N-component system (where for a typical 
gas N is on the order of 1023), this, by itself, is a hopeless task. On the 
other hand, ergodicity guarantees that such time averages f are equal 
almost always to microcanonical phase averages f, and the latter are 
easy to calculate. Since ergodicity also guarantees, as we have seen, the 
uniqueness of the microcanonical measure u, we have the beginning of 
an explanation for why the Gibbs' averaging method works. Ergodicity 
clearly plays a central role in this account. 
As already noted, this explanation can be criticized at a number of 
points. First, since we do often witness systems that are not in equilib- 
rium, it is difficult to maintain the identification of thermodynamical 
values with infinite time averages. Second, there is a serious problem 
with interpreting the "almost always" or "almost everywhere" quali- 
fication in the identification of f with f given ergodicity. This is, in 
effect, equivalent to asking why the measure ji should be taken to rep- 
resent physical probability. The uniqueness of,u as an invariant mea- 
sure on FE takes us some way towards answering this question, but the 
extent to which it succeeds remains a matter of debate.2 
A recent paper by Earman and Redei (1996) continues the critique 
of the explanatory efficacy of ergodic theory. They too hold that er- 
1. A measure, ,u, is absolutely continuous (a.c.) with another u' iff for any measurable 
set A C r,,u'(A) = 0 [only if t(A) = 0]. In other words, u' agrees with,u on assignments 
of zero measure to sets in F. 
2. See Malament and Zabell 1980 for the positive argument and Sklar 1993 for a detailed 
critique. 
187 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 6 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
godic theory is irrelevant for explaining the success of equilibrium SM. 
They offer two main reasons for this claim. First and foremost, they 
point to the fact that the systems typically treated by SM have not been 
demonstrated to be ergodic (Earman and Redei 1996, 69-70). Only 
very idealized models of systems, e.g., an ideal gas modeled as a system 
of perfectly hard spheres in a box, have been proven to be ergodic. 
Real gas molecules do not interact as perfectly elastic spheres. As they 
say, "the evidence for the applicability of ergodicity where it is required 
is non-existent. Furthermore the evidence against the applicability is 
strong" (Earman and Redei 1996, 70). This latter evidence comes from 
the so-called KAM theorem which leads one to expect, for molecules 
interacting with more realistic potentials, that the systems will not be 
ergodic: There will be invariant regions in the phase space (for a wide 
range of energies) where trajectories remain confined. The existence of 
these regions (called "invariant tori") allow for the decomposition of 
the system's phase space into disjoint regions in which a trajectory 
beginning in one such region will remain forever within that region. 
Such a phase space will not be metrically transitive and, hence, neither 
will the system be ergodic. Given this fact about most systems treated 
by SM, it does indeed seem like ergodicity is a red herring. 
Earman and Redei reiterate an argument of Sklar's to express their 
second major complaint concerning the explanatory significance of er- 
godic theory. Even for systems that are ergodic, ergodicity is neither 
necessary nor sufficient for explaining the success of equilibrium SM. 
Ergodicity is not sufficient, since a system with few degrees of free- 
dom-three hard spheres in a box-can be ergodic. But, it is quite clear 
that it makes no sense to speak of such a system as possessing ther- 
modynamic properties; in particular, it makes no sense to maintain that 
it can be in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium. Somehow, the fact 
that the systems treated by SM possess large numbers of components 
or many degrees of freedom must play an essential role in the expla- 
nation we seek. Ergodicity is not necessary according to Earman and 
Redei because they buy Sklar's argument that there is a correct, full 
explanation which makes no reference whatsoever to ergodicity. Here, 
as do Earman and Redei, it is best to quote Sklar himself. 
Ergodic theory considers the question: Why does the natural prob- 
ability distribution [the microcanonical measure] work? The an- 
swer it gives is the proven equality of phase-averages to infinite 
time averages. But there is a much simpler answer. And it is correct. 
And it is the full answer. And it is totally independent of any er- 
godic results. It goes like this: How a gas behaves over time de- 
pends on (1) its microscopic constitution; (2) the laws governing 
188 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 7 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
the interaction of its micro-constituents; (3) the constraints placed 
upon it; (4) the initial conditions characterizing the microstate of the 
gas at a given time. (Sklar 1973, 210) 
Sklar emphasizes the importance of this last clause. 
The actual distribution of initial states is such that calculations 
done by the Gibbs method, with the natural probability distribu- 
tion over the ensemble and the natural reduction to phase average, 
'works.' This is a matter of fact, not of law. These 'facts' explain 
the success of the Gibbs method. In a clear sense they are the only 
legitimate explanation of its success. (Sklar 1973, 210) 
So the explanatory value of ergodicity, and ergodic theory in gen- 
eral, has been questioned on two fronts. First, it seems that most sys- 
tems treated in equilibrium SM fail to be ergodic. This follows from 
the KAM theorem and is the major criticism by Earman and Redei. 
Second, even if a system is ergodic, it isn't clear to what extent that 
property is either necessary or sufficient for explaining the success of 
the Gibbs' averaging method. This is the main thrust of Sklar's critique. 
On the one hand, these criticisms both seem to suggest that one 
should try to explain the success of equilibrium SM without appeal to 
ergodicity. In this respect they accord with Khinchin's exploration of 
"[t]he possibility of a formulation without the use of metric indecom- 
posability [i.e., metric transitivity or ergodicity]" (Khinchin 1949, 62). 
On the other hand, Sklar's suggestion that the proper explanation of why 
the Gibbs method works appeals directly to the microscopic constitu- 
tion of the system, the nature of its interactions, and the actual distri- 
bution of its initial conditions. In this respect it appears totally at odds 
with Khinchin's claim that SM works in large part exactly because of its 
abstraction from these details. Sklar's suggestion about what provides 
the full and correct explanation for why the Gibbs method works clearly 
has allegiance to a reductionist, perhaps, Deductive-Nomological(D-N) 
approach to explanation: A proper explanation of thermodynamic, 
macroscopic behavior will involve appeal to the exact nature of the sys- 
tem's microscopic constitution and the laws governing its evolution de- 
termined by the nature of the forces of interaction among the microcon- 
stituents, etc. Surely this is at odds with Khinchin's point of view. 
In what follows, I would like to explore the possibility that a differ- 
ent kind of explanatory framework is required to account for the suc- 
cess of equilibrium SM. In particular, I want to address the questions 
raised earlier in the introduction: What explains the large degree of 
abstraction from the details to which Khinchin refers. As already 
noted, this is a request for an explanation of a kind of universal be- 
189 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 8 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
havior. Khinchin shows how the CLT can be used to calculate disper- 
sions of phase functions about their microcanonical averages. That is, 
he uses the Gaussian distribution, which is the limiting distribution in 
the CLT to provide asymptotic estimates for the values of the ther- 
modynamic quantities (as the number of components of the systems 
gets large). The explanatory question we want to answer is why this 
should work for such a wide variety of systems. 
3. Khinchin's Proposal. Khinchin proposes to reformulate the problem 
of justifying the identification of infinite time averages with phase av- 
erages in the language of probability theory. Suppose, for the phase 
function of interest, f that its value on the energy surface differs very 
little from its average value f-suppose, that is, that it is a nearly 
constant function on FE. More precisely, suppose that the phase 
dispersion of f relative to the microcanonical measure is small, 
(f - f)2 _ 8, e small. Given this, it follows that the phase dispersion 
of the time average, f will be at least as small:3 
(f - f)2 (f - f)2 (1) 
The idea then is to employ the CLT to show that as the number of 
components of the system gets large, (f - f)2 -> 0. Hence, asymp- 
totically we see that for these functionsf, the probability goes to zero 
that the time average differs from the phase average by any specified 
amount. 
What allows one to employ the CLT in this manner? Here we need 
to briefly look at what the theorem says. The CLT is a statement about 
the limiting behavior of the distribution function for sums of random 
variables as the number of random variables in the sums tends to in- 
finity. In its simplest form we assume that the individual random vari- 
ables (Si) are independent and identically distributed. We are interested 
in the distribution of the sum S(n) = En Si. The CLT states that the 
3. Equation (1) says that the phase dispersion of the time averagef cannot be greater 
than the phase dispersion off itself. Equality holds if and only iffis a constant function. 
A simple proof of this inequality is the following (Truesdell 1961, 47): For h any summ- 
able function, the Schwartz inequality gives (i )2 h2 . Now take the phase average of 
both sides: (h)2 < h2. By the Birkhoff ergodic theorem h2 = h2, and so, (h)2 ? h2. Now 
let h = f - f this yields (1). 
190 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 9 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
nim p (S(n) < ) 1 e-t22 dt.4 
That is, the probability that the normalized sum S(n)lavn has a value 
less than x converges, as n -> oo, to the Gaussian or normal distribution. 
The normalization factor is clearly proportional to Jn which expresses 
the square root law of fluctuations. This means that the typical effect 
of several random contributions to the sum is of the order of V/n. Since 
n increases more slowly than n, this tells us that the effect of the 
random contributions to the collective behavior increases much more 
slowly than does the number of terms in the sum. 
Khinchin is able to apply this theorem for the estimation of phase 
dispersions of functions f representing thermodynamic quantities in 
part because he assumes that thesef's have a particular structure. They 
are so-called "sum functions." They have essentially the same form as 
the sum S(n). As he says, the theorem will apply in part because of 
"the peculiar properties of mechanical systems treated in statistical 
physics (breaking up into a large number of components), and partially 
[because of] the specific properties of the functions with which we are 
dealing (these are, as a rule, the 'sum-functions', i.e., the sums of func- 
tions each depending on the dynamical coordinates of only one com- 
ponent" (Khinchin 1949, 63). In fact, that the functions he considers 
are sum functions is responsible for his being able to assume their near 
constancy on the energy surface in the first place. This is an expression 
of the law of large numbers. 
It is important to understand exactly how restrictive Khinchin's pro- 
posal is. By abandoning the goal of showing that a system, (F, 4t, u), 
is ergodic, Khinchin gives up on showing that time averages equal 
phase averages for almost all phase functions f Instead, his aim is to 
argue that certain special functions-sum functions which presumably 
represent macroscopic or thermodynamic quantities-are "ergodic." 
That is, that the time averages for these special functions are nearly 
equal to their phase averages.5 
Khinchin 1949, Section 23 and Chapter 6, treats in some detail the 
example of a monatomic ideal gas. This is a system composed of a 
4. Note that here we have assumed that the expectations of Si, Si equal zero for all i. 
5. There is a serious worry really about how realistic the restriction to sum functions 
is. Despite what Khinchin says, many functions of interest in statistical mechanics do 
not have this special form. At best we must take sum functions to be a proper subclass 
of functions which exhibit the appropriate "nearly constant" behavior on the energy 
surface; and hence the explanatory program outlined here would need to be extended 
to the full class of functions of interest. 
191 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 10 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
large number of molecules that are treated as point particles. The total 
energy of this system is simply the sum of the kinetic energies of the 
individual molecules. That is, there is no mutual potential energy or 
interaction energy.6 The energy, therefore, is a sum function. 
An important quantity is the so-called structure function for the 
system. For a system with Hamiltonian H(x) the structure function is 
given by: 
Q(x) = S(E- H)dx2N. 
It is the "volume" of the surface of constant energy with respect to the 
Lebesgue measure, and plays the role of the normalizing factor in the 
definition of the microcanonical distribution: 
6 (E- H) 
fr f (E - H)dx2' 
Therefore, the structure function clearly plays a role in determining the 
average value of any arbitrary phase function on the energy surface FE: 
f(x) = f(x)du(x). 
Khinchin is able to show that the probability distribution for the energy 
of a given component of a system is determined by the structure func- 
tions of that component itself, the structure functions for the other 
components, and the structure function for the entire system. He shows 
how one can find approximate expressions for the structure function 
of systems like the ideal monatomic gas that are composed of a large 
number of similar components. (The components will all have structure 
functions of the same basic form.) As he says, "[u]sing the methods of 
the theory of probability we will be able to establish for the structure 
functions of such [large] systems the approximate expressions which 
are to a large extent independent of the nature of individual compo- 
nents" (Khinchin 1949, 75). 
In effect Khinchin shows how one can treat the energy, say, of each 
of the components of the ideal gas as independent and identically dis- 
tributed random variables. Their common structure functions determine 
their common distribution function. One can then employ the CLT to 
determine the asymptotic value for the energy of a large component of 
the system-a component composed of many molecules. The result, of 
course, is that the energy will be Gaussian distributed and strongly 
6. The importance and ramifications of this idealization will be discussed below. 
192 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 11 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
peaked about the mean with root-mean-square deviation proportional 
to the square root of the number of components, N, as N -- ?. 
The entire argument depends on the possibility of treating a large 
system as being decomposable into components. Furthermore, it is nec- 
essary that the phase functions representing the thermodynamic quan- 
tities for the entire system be sums of phase functions of these com- 
ponents. For example, if the energy E = E(x1, ..., x2N) can be written 
as the sum E = El(xl, . . ., x) + E2(x,+l, . .., 2N) we say that the 
system can be decomposed into two components represented by the 
coordinates (x, . . ., xl) and (xi+, . . ., x2N). These components each 
have their own phase spaces F1 and F2 whose direct product is the phase 
space F for the whole system. Likewise each component has a structure 
function Q2 and Q2. The structure function for the entire system is the 
convolution of the structure functions of its components: 
Q(x) = 
Fn,(QY)2( - y)dy. 
Of course, for an n component system, the structure function is the n-fold 
convolution of the structure functions of the components (Khinchin 
1949, 41). 
This assumption of decomposability is essential for the program. 
But it brings with it what Khinchin (1949, 41) takes to be a "meth- 
odological paradox." We can call this the "paradox of interaction." 
The decomposability of the system into components in the sense just 
described excludes the possibility that the components interact with one 
another energetically. As Khinchin says, 
[i]ndeed, if the Hamiltonian function, which expresses the energy 
of our system, is a sum of functions each depending only on the 
dynamic coordinates of a single particle (and representing the 
Hamiltonian function of this particle), then, clearly, [Hamilton's 
system] of equations ... splits into component systems [of equa- 
tions] each of which describes the motion of some separate particle 
and is not connected in any way with other particles. Hence the 
energy of each particle, which is expressed by its Hamiltonian func- 
tion, appears as an integral of equations of motion, and therefore 
remains constant. (Khinchin 1949, 42) 
The paradox arises because it is a presupposition of the applicability 
of SM that the particles (say, the molecules of a gas) are "in a state of 
intensive energy interaction, where the energy of one particle is trans- 
ferred to another (for instance by means of collisions)" (Khinchin 1949, 
41-42). 
193 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 12 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
Khinchin's response to the paradox of interaction is to state that we 
must really think of the particles as "only approximately isolated en- 
ergetically components." He holds that we must, when being precise, 
allow for correlations between components which would strictly speak- 
ing block the kind of decomposition into individual components we 
have been considering. He says, 
inasmuch as forces of interaction between the particles manifest 
themselves only at very small distances, such mixed terms in the 
expression of energy, representing mutual potential energy of par- 
ticles, will be (in the great majority of points of the phase space) 
negligible as compared with the kinetic energy of particles or with 
the potential energy of external fields. In particular they will con- 
tribute very little in evaluating various averages.... However, 
these mixed terms that are neglected, from the point of principle 
play a very important role, since it is precisely their presence that 
assures the possibility of an exchange of energy between the par- 
ticles, on which is based the whole of statistical mechanics (Khin- 
chin 1949, 42-43) 
The paradox of interaction is clearly a concern. And, Khinchin's 
rather handwaving response surely requires deeper justification. Two 
responses to this problem immediately present themselves. First, 
one might try to make precise Khinchin's vague claim that the "mixed 
terms" representing the mutual potential energy will be negligible 
in comparison with the terms for the kinetic energy of the components 
and the energies of external fields. C. Truesdell (1961, 55) formulates 
this as a program for further study: Khinchin's argument has depended 
on the separability of the Hamiltonian; namely, that H(x) = 
Z= 1 Hi(x). For a separable Hamiltonian, though, for each component, 
Hi we know that Hi(xi) = constant is an integral of the motion, and 
so there is no interaction at all. Truesdell sees Khinchin as imagining 
that the Hamiltonian for the real system is best expressed in the fol- 
lowing form: 
N 
H(x) = Hi(x,) + 6Hin (xl, x2,. XN), 
i=1 
and allowing 6 -> 0. That is, according to Truesdell, Khinchin's results 
can be represented as holding in the following limit: 
lim lim. 
N---o -> 0 
194 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 13 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
But, Truesdell argues that "physically adequate theorems should refer 
to the inverted limit":7 
lim lim. 
-- 0 N->oo 
While this formalizes Khinchin's handwaving, as far as I know, there 
are no exact results referring to the "inverted limit." Furthermore, 
while I believe it is clear that the inverted order of the limits is more 
realistic, it is not so obvious (to me at least) that there is a physical 
justification for letting a -> 0 after taking the limit of large systems. 
The second approach to the paradox of interaction is to keep 6 > 0 
and see if one can still show that the phase dispersion of the appropriate 
phase functions gets small as the number of components of the system 
gets large. This is the aim of the so-called "Theory of the Thermody- 
namic Limit." In other words, the goal is to try to prove limit theorems 
for systems with interacting components as N -> oo, and the volume 
V -- oo but where the density N/V remains constant. This program has 
been quite successful. Work by Ruelle (1969), Lanford (1973), and oth- 
ers have led to rigorous theorems demonstrating the existence of the 
thermodynamic limit for systems with more realistic interaction poten- 
tials. The potentials for which such limits exist must satisfy so-called 
stability and tempering conditions. The stability condition demands 
that the potential be bounded "from below." Crudely speaking, this 
assures that an infinite number of particles will not "collapse" into 
some bounded spatial region. The tempering condition guarantees that 
the strength of the interaction between particles falls off sufficiently as 
their separation increases. 
Results such as these lead one to expect that even for systems with 
interacting components we can expect Khinchin-type "Central Limit- 
ing behavior": For the right sort of phase functions, their values on a 
surface of constant energy will be peaked around the most probable 
value with narrow dispersions determined by the Gaussian law-that 
is, with their dispersions asymptotically proportional to the number of 
components. Mazur and van der Linden (1963), in fact, explicitly dem- 
onstrate that Khinchin's asymptotic formula for the structure function 
of a system of noninteracting components, also holds for systems in- 
teracting with more realistic potentials. 
4. Problems with Khinchin's Program. There are two main problems 
with the program outlined in the last section. First, the limit theorems 
7. See Truesdell 1961, 55. I have corrected a missprint in the specification of the order 
of these limits in Truesdell's paper. 
195 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 14 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
can fail, even for systems with weakly interacting components if the 
system is undergoing a phase transition. Even "small" interaction 
terms can combine to realize large effects when a system is at a critical 
point. This fact is, of course, explicitly recognized by those people in- 
vestigating the thermodynamic limit. Nevertheless, it would be nice to 
have a unified account of large systems encompassing systems both 
near and far from their critical points. I shall have more to say about 
such a framework in the next section. 
Second, there is a sense in which the Khinchin type programs com- 
pletely fail to answer the main question to which the ergodic proposal 
addressed itself. This failing has been explicitly recognized by Truesdell 
and Sklar. For instance, Sklar (1993, 163) notes that "the Khinchin 
theorem only tells us that there is a 'high probability asymptotically 
going to one' that a system in a given micro-state will have its infinite 
time average of the appropriate phase function equal to the phase av- 
erage of that function." Furthermore, he argues that demonstrating 
this probability one claim is not sufficient. After all, these probabilities 
are themselves being computed with respect to the microcanonical mea- 
sure. But it is the justification of the use of the microcanonical measure 
which is exactly at issue. As we saw earlier in Section 2, ergodicity is 
invoked in the attempt to justify the use of this measure for computing 
phase averages. But on the current proposal, we are trying to do with- 
out having to prove the system to be ergodic. 
Suppose that we have failed to notice some global constant of mo- 
tion other than the energy; e.g., suppose angular momentum is also a 
conserved quantity. This means that the system's actual state is con- 
fined to a subspace of the energy surface of dimension 2N - 2. The 
Khinchin type results show that, asymptotically, there is a zero prob- 
ability that the time average off differs from the phase average off on 
the 2N - 1 dimensional energy surface. But, relative to the microca- 
nonical measure on the energy surface, the subspace to which the sys- 
tem is actually confined has measure zero. In this situation, the result 
of calculating phase averages with respect to the microcanonical mea- 
sure on the full energy surface and identifying these with the values for 
thermodynamic quantities will generally yield completely erroneous re- 
sults. Of course, if the system is ergodic, then we know there are no 
global constants of motion that we have missed. But, the entire point 
of Khinchin's program is to make an "end run" around having to 
demonstrate ergodicity. It looks like the move to focus on the large 
number of components of the systems treated by SM, and the special 
nature of the phase functions typically representing thermodynamic 
quantities has not helped with the fundamental question addressed by 
the ergodic proposal outlined in Section 2. 
196 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 15 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
Faced with the fact that most systems treated by SM are not ergodic, 
as the KAM theorem demonstrates, Wightman has made the following 
proposal. Given the applicability of the KAM theorem we have a sys- 
tem whose energy surface 1E can be decomposed into at least two in- 
variant regions of nonzero Lebesgue measure, one of which is ergodic 
and the other not. Wightman (1983, 20) suggests that perhaps, as N 
and V get large, the relevant thermodynamic observables are repre- 
sented by phase functions that are "insensitive to the non-ergodic por- 
tion of the flow even if its relative phase volume does not go to zero." 
The focus on large N and V, as well as on particular phase functions 
exhibits a clear affinity with the Khinchin type, thermodynamic limit 
proposals.8 
However, Earman and Redei raise the following objection to Wight- 
man's proposal. Let us call the ergodic region A and the nonergodic 
"KAM" region B. In this situation there are many normalized &,- 
invariant measures that are a.c. with respect to the Lebesgue measure 
other than the microcanonical measure,u. Earman and Redei construct 
the following family of measures: 
u = A + (1 - 8)1 (0 8 e 1). (2) 
Here ",uA" is the unique (since the flow on A is ergodic) normed invar- 
iant measure on A a.c. with respect to the Lebesgue measure defined 
as follows: 9 
PA() un A) 
,u(A) 
And, #j is any normed, a.c., invariant measure whose support is B. By 
construction, for any e, u, is a normed, &,-invariant, a.c. measure on 
the entire energy surface FE. 
If we compute the phase average off with respect to ji we get the 
following: 
(A) f t(x) d(x) + (1 - ) f(x)d (x) (A) JTE E 
B 
(Recall that u is the microcanonical measure.) 
The objection is that by adjusting e one can make the phase average 
of the observable represented byfas insensitive to the ergodic portion 
of the flow (that is, region A) as one would like. In other words, if e is 
8. I will suggest below that what one needs to show is that the calculated averages of 
the functions are insensitive to the nonergodic protion of the flow. 
9. See Earman and Redei 1996, 72. 
197 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 16 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
small, then f is dominated by the second term in the equation above. 
In such a situation, it is surely to be expected that f, will yield incorrect 
predictions for the actual value of the thermodynamic observable rep- 
resented by the functionf But, as Earman and Redei (1996, 72) note, 
"ergodic theory does not explain why this [is to be expected]." It seems 
to me that we must grant Earman and Redei's conclusion. Ergodic 
theory does not explain why we should expectf to yield poor values 
for the thermodynamic quantities when e is sufficiently small. Never- 
theless, I think that there is some deep merit to Wightman's proposal 
not considered by Earman and Redei. In the next section, I shall de- 
scribe a framework that offers us the promise of determining for which 
values of e we can expect averages with respect to , to yield reasonable 
results. The idea is to ask to what extent e may be diminished and yet 
in the limit of large N and V, we can still expect the Gaussian distri- 
bution to emerge. In effect, what we are asking for is an account of the 
robustness or universality of the Gaussian distribution or, equivalently, 
of Central Limiting behavior. 
5. The Renormalization Group. In the last section, I noted that the limit 
theorems established in the rigorous theory of the thermodynamic 
limit, while extending the results of Khinchin, do not hold when the 
system is at a critical point. Systems undergoing phase transitions re- 
quire different treatment. At the critical point, components of the sys- 
tem that are widely separated spatially become strongly correlated. In 
the language of the thermodynamic limit, this would mean that the 
tempering condition fails to obtain for such systems. 
It turns out that systems undergoing phase transitions typically ex- 
hibit the following property: Their behavior at the critical point is char- 
acterized by a small set of dimensionless numbers called "critical ex- 
ponents." What is truly remarkable about these numbers is their 
universality: It is a well-established experimental fact that systems as 
diverse as different fluids composed of different kinds of molecules with 
different forces of interaction between them, and even lattice systems 
such as ferromagnets, have critical behavior characterized by the same 
critical exponents. In other words, the critical behavior of systems 
whose components and interactions are radically different is virtually 
identical. Hence, such behavior must be largely independent of the 
details of the microstructures of the various systems. This is known in 
the literature as the "universality of critical phenomena." 
Surely one would like to account for this universality. The so-called 
"renormalization group" provides the desired explanation. Let me give 
a broad outline of the form this explanation takes. 
198 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 17 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
Every system, say each different fluid, is represented by a function- 
its Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian characterizes the kinds of interac- 
tions between the system's components (or degrees of freedom), the 
effects of external fields acting upon the system, etc. When the system 
is not in the critical regime, its different components are correlated 
(because of interactions) only weakly with one another. However, when 
a system is near its critical point the "length" of the range of correla- 
tions between the different degrees of freedom increases. In fact, at the 
critical point, this so-called "correlation length" diverges to infinity. 
The divergence of the correlation length is intimately associated with 
the system's critical behavior. It means that correlations at every length 
scale (between near as well as extremely distant components) contribute 
to the physics of the system at its critical point. In effect, this constitutes 
a highly singular mathematical problem, one which is completely in- 
tractable. While it is relatively easy to deal exactly with correlations 
that obtain between pairs of particles, the situation is completely hope- 
less when one must consider correlations between three or more in- 
deed more than 1023-particles. The guiding idea of the renormaliza- 
tion group method is to find a way of turning this singular problem 
into one which is regular and tractable. This miraculous alchemy is 
effected by transforming the problem into one of analyzing the topo- 
logical structure of an appropriate abstract space-the space of Ham- 
iltonians. 
One introduces a transformation on this space that maps an initial 
physical Hamiltonian describing a real system to another Hamiltonian 
in the space. The transformation preserves, to some extent, the form 
of the original physical Hamiltonian so that when the interaction terms 
are properly adjusted (renormalized), the new renormalized Hamilto- 
nian describes a system exhibiting the same or similar thermodynamical 
behavior. Most importantly, however, the transformation effects a re- 
duction in the number of coupled components or degrees of freedom 
within the correlation length. Thus, the new renormalized Hamiltonian 
describes a system which presents a more tractable problem. It is to be 
hoped that by repeated application of this renormalization group trans- 
formation the problem becomes more and more tractable until one can 
solve the problem by relatively simple methods. In effect, the renor- 
malization group transformation eliminates those degrees of freedom 
(those microscopic details) which are inessential or irrelevant for char- 
acterizing the system's dominant behavior at criticality. 
In fact, if the initial Hamiltonian describes a system at criticality, 
then each renormalized Hamiltonian must also be at criticality. The 
sequence of Hamiltonians thus generated defines a trajectory in the 
abstract space that, in the limit as the number of transformations goes 
199 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 18 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
to infinity, ends at a fixed point. The behavior of trajectories in the 
neighborhood of the fixed point can be determined by an analysis of 
the stability properties of the fixed point. This analysis also allows for 
the calculation of the critical exponents characterizing the critical be- 
havior of the system. It turns out that different physical Hamiltonians 
can flow to the same fixed point. Thus, their critical behaviors are 
characterized by the same critical exponents. This is the essence of the 
explanation for the universality of critical behavior: Hamiltonians de- 
scribing different physical systems fall into the basin of attraction of 
the same renormalization group fixed point. This means that if one 
were to alter, even quite considerably, some of the basic features of a 
system (say from those of a fluid F to fluid a F' composed of a different 
kind of molecule and a different interaction potential), the resulting 
system (F') will exhibit the same critical behavior. This stability under 
perturbation demonstrates that certain facts about the microconsti- 
tuents of the systems are individually largely irrelevant for the systems' 
behaviors at criticality. Instead, their collective properties dominate 
their critical behavior, and these collective properties are characterized 
by the fixed points of the renormalization group transformation (and 
the local properties of the renormalization group flow in the neighbor- 
hood of those points). We can, through this topological analysis, un- 
derstand both how universality arises and why the diverse systems dis- 
play identical behavior. 
Before returning to the problem of explaining the success of equilib- 
rium SM, it is important to realize that this type of explanation for 
universal behavior is ubiquitous.10 Consider the following simple, yet 
illustrative, example. An engineer is designing a structure such as a 
bridge. The work is necessarily qualitative in the following sense. Be- 
cause of the extreme complexity of the materials, the engineer does not 
really know the exact nature of the equation that governs the behavior 
of the bridge. Nevertheless, she would like to be assured that the bridge 
is not going to collapse. Had she the exact equation, she could in prin- 
ciple determine the "location" of any singularities in the equation 
which may indicate configurations of materials for which a collapse 
might be possible. However, since the engineer does not have this exact 
equation, she is actually concerned with the equation's (structural) sta- 
bility-roughly, the stability of the topology of its solutions under per- 
turbation of its form. In other words, since the equation she works 
with (her dynamical system) is most likely an approximation to the 
actual equation, it is important to know the extent to which the two 
dynamical systems have the same singularity structure or will exhibit 
10. For a detailed discussion see Batterman 1998. 
200 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 19 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
the same qualitative behavior. The engineer needs to know that the 
qualitative conclusions she makes (concerning, for instance, the pos- 
sibility that the bridge will collapse) on the basis of her dynamical 
system, will also hold for the actual dynamical system (differential 
equation) describing the real structure in the world. The stability anal- 
ysis that provides such information is analogous to that involved in 
determining the fixed point structure of the space of Hamiltonians just 
outlined. We get an account of stability of the critical behavior under 
perturbation of the details of the interactions (Hamiltonians) charac- 
teristic of the systems. 
It seems to me that this type of analysis, broadly conceived, does lie 
behind the explanation and understanding of various instances of uni- 
versality discussed in the physics and mathematics literature.11 My goal 
now is to show that the same strategy can be employed to explain the 
success of the Gibbs method in equilibrium SM. As we have seen, such 
an explanation requires that we explain the ubiquity of the Gaussian 
distribution as the limiting distribution for sum functions representing 
thermodynamic quantities of interest. My suggestion is that the rele- 
vant explanatory framework is exactly that of the renormalization 
group method. By translating the problem into the renormalization 
group framework, we may, in principle at least, have a way of ration- 
alizing Wightman's suggestion concerning the justification of equilib- 
rium SM without falling prey to the Earman-Redei objection. In other 
words, this approach aims to respond to the objections to the Khinchin 
program in the spirit of the original proposal-without having to ap- 
peal to ergodicity. 
A number of papers (Jona-Lasinio 1975; Cassandro and Jona- 
Lasinio 1978; Gallavotti and Martin-L6f 1975; Bleher and Sinai 1973, 
1978, 1982) have developed a rigorous connection between renormal- 
ization group methods dealing with phase transitions and certain as- 
pects of limit theorems in probability theory. For our purposes it suf- 
fices to establish the connection only at the most qualitative level. 
To this end, let us rewrite the CLT in a slightly different form than 
that presented above in Section 3. Let us assume here that Si can take 
the value 1 or 0 if the ith toss of a coin is, respectively, heads or tails 
with probabilities p and 1 - p. Recall that S(n) = E2 1 Si. It is the 
number of heads in n tosses. Then the CLT says 
11. Goldenfeld et al. (1989) have argued that renormalization group type analyses are, 
in fact, necessary for explaining and understanding virtually any macroscopic phenom- 
enology. Barenblatt's (1996) work on so-called "intermediate asymptotics" takes a simi- 
lar line. 
201 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 20 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
lim P (a c S() np < < b = 1 e-t22 dt (3) 
no GO 
Joonp(1 - p)7 
This describes the limiting behavior for sums of independent and iden- 
tically distributed random variables. 
We are now concerned with the possibility of limit distributions for 
sum functions representing thermodynamic quantities in which the 
summands are functions representing interacting components of real- 
istic systems. We may still treat the component functions for large sys- 
tems as random variables; because of the interactions, however, it is 
surely not the case that they can be treated as independent. 
The least severe relaxation of the criterion of independence is to 
assume correlations realized by a simple Markov process. In other 
words, imagine we are dealing with a sequence of coin tosses in which 
the probability of a particular outcome on a given trial depends on the 
result of the previous trial. We can express this dependence in terms of 
a matrix of transition probabilities: 
Ka 1- a 
Say a head occurs on the ith trial. Then the first row states that on the 
(i + 1)St trial, the probability of heads is a and the probability of tails 
is 1 - a. According to the second row, if tails occurs on the ith trial, 
then the probability of heads on the (i + 1)St trial is P and the proba- 
bility of tails is 1 - /f. Let p be the probability of heads on the first 
trial and assume that 0 < a, ,/ < 1. Given all of this, it is possible to 
prove the following limit theorem: 
lim P a S(n) p <b (4) 
0 (1 a- /5) / p(1 - P) (1 - 
a ? /) 
-= b e-t2/2 dt. 
The important feature to note here is that the same asymptotic reg- 
ularity is obtained in the case where there is this Markov dependence 
or correlation between the trials. (See Jona-Lasinio 1975, 101-102). 
That is, the right hand sides of the two limit theorems (3) and (4) are 
identical. The collective behaviors are the same. From this example we 
learn that there are at least some distributions for sums of dependent 
or correlated random variables that converge to the Gaussian distri- 
bution in the limit of a large number of trials. 
202 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 21 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
We also know that this Central Limiting behavior fails in the case 
of phase transitions and critical behavior where the correlation or de- 
pendence is in some sense strong. In such a case the probabilistic in- 
terpretation of the renormalization group treats the fixed points of the 
renormalization group transformation as non-Gaussian limit distri- 
butions for sums of strongly dependent random variables.12 The uni- 
versality of critical behavior is explained through the determination of 
the basins of attraction of these non-Gaussian fixed points. 
The suggestion now is that we explain the universality of the Gaus- 
sian distribution in a completely analogous way (see Sinai 1992, Chap- 
ter 15 for a nice discussion of the strategy). Furthermore, since having 
the Gaussian distribution emerge in the limit as the number of com- 
ponents of the system goes to infinity is apparently essential for real- 
izing Khinchin's nonergodic justification of Gibbs' method, we may 
thereby explain the success of equilibrium SM. The goal, therefore, is 
to determine the basin of attraction of the Gaussian fixed point. As the 
simple examples of the two coin tosses shows, this domain surely can 
contain distributions that are weakly dependent in an appropriate 
sense. 
But what about Wightman's proposal and the objection raised by 
Earman and Redei? Wightman suggests that at least for some systems 
to which the KAM theorem applies, that the thermodynamic observ- 
ables will be insensitive to the nonergodic portion of the phase flow 
even if the relative measure of that nonergodic portion does not ap- 
proach zero as the system gets large (that is, as N -> oo and V -> co). 
Letf(x) = iJf (x) be a sum function representing a thermodynamic 
quantity of interest on our system. Suppose that the individual com- 
ponents,f, treated as random variables, are identically distributed with 
respect to the measure #u(x) for some given e. (u, is defined according 
to equation (2) above.) To counter Earman's and Redei's objection one 
would need to show that for the common distribution _,8(x), the dis- 
E-N tribution function for the sums f(N) = - AN (for suitable 
BN 
normalizations BN and displacements AN) converges as N -> oo to the 
Gaussian. 
In the renormalization group framework we are now considering, 
this amounts to showing that the distribution #u6 is in the domain of 
12. Sinai 1982 has rigorously constructed non-Gaussian limit distributions for block 
variables (sum functions) for certain lattice systems. The determination of these fixed 
points involves the so-called e-expansion which plays such a fundamental role in the 
theory of Wilson (see Wilson and Kogut 1974). The "e" in the expansion is, of course, 
distinct from the "e" in Earman's and R6dei's example. 
203 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 22 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
attraction of the Gaussian distribution. Determining the necessary and 
sufficient conditions for whether a distribution is in this domain of 
attraction is a completely solved problem in probability theory (at least 
for the case where independence is assumed)13 (see Jona-Lasinio 1975 
and Gnedenko and Kolmogorov 1968, 171ff.). If upon investigation 
for real systems of interest, it turns out that for some range of values 
for e < 1, the measures ,u are in the domain of attraction of the Gaus- 
sian distribution, then Wightman's proposal will have been vindicated 
(at least for those systems and that range of e values). 
Would this provide an explanation for why Gibb's phase averaging 
works? I want to claim that the answer is a qualified "yes." It can be 
argued, I believe, that the topological analysis involved in the renor- 
malization group provides an acceptable explanation for the univer- 
sality of critical phenomena.'4 One understands why some one critical 
exponent characterizes the critical behavior of a vast range of distinct 
systems in terms of the stability of that behavior under a kind of per- 
turbation of the microscopic details-kinds of particles, types of inter- 
actions, etc. This stability, in effect, is represented by the "size" of the 
domain of attraction of the relevant fixed point of the renormalization 
group transformation. The renormalization group provides principled 
reasons for why and to what extent the details of the microconstituents 
can be ignored. 
This sort of explanation may be available in the current context, if 
the following conjecture can be substantiated: We can treat the param- 
eter e as characterizing (in a sense to be explained) the degree to which 
certain dynamical details are relevant to the calculation of the system's 
equilibrium behavior. For small values of e in Earman and Redei's 
measure, we know that the structure of invariant KAM tori on the 
phase space matters more and more to the averages calculated with 
respect to y,. We can think of these tori as responsible for (or at least 
as descriptive of) correlations among various degrees of freedom of the 
system. For instance, there is surely strong correlation among degrees 
of freedom in the invariant KAM regions-the invariant tori. These 
strong dependencies guarantee the presence of weaker correlations be- 
tween degrees of freedom in the assumed ergodic regions complemen- 
tary to the invariant tori on the energy surface: In these regions there 
is at least weak correlation reflecting the fact that allowed microstates 
must avoid the KAM tori. Given this it seems that the 1u, distribution 
of one "component" can be strongly dependent on the distribution of 
13. Many other results are also known for cases involving dependent random variables. 
See, for example, Ibraghimov and Linnik 1969. 
14. See Batterman 1998 for a discussion of this sort of explanation. 
204 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 23 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
another "component" of the system.15 The conjecture is that e can be 
plausibly related to an appropriate conception of strength of depen- 
dence or of correlation among the relevant components of the system.16 
The conception of "strength" I have in mind here is the following. 
It is the weight given to the correlations resulting form the KAM tori 
in the calculation of average values. One can think of the measures #u, 
for various values of e, as specifying how much weight different regions 
on the energy surface receive in the calculation of averages. In other 
words, the different e values specify the extent to which the strongly 
correlated degrees of freedom in the KAM tori contribute to the av- 
erage value of the appropriate (sum) function representing the ther- 
modynamic equilibrium quantity. For distributions ,u with e small, the 
"bad" nonergodic regions will dominate the calculated averages more, 
and one should expect that Central Limiting behavior will fail-- , will 
not be in the domain of attraction of the Gaussian fixed point. On the 
other hand, if the distribution is in that domain (ife is sufficiently large), 
then one might just as well compute phase averages with respect to the 
microcanonical measure Iu, since the limiting distribution for N -> co will 
be the same, viz., the Gaussian. The aim is to demonstrate the robust- 
ness of the Gaussian distribution as the limit distribution for sum func- 
tions under a variation of the importance or weight of the correlations 
determined by the existence of the nonergodic regions on the energy 
surface. 
Let me put the point another way. We do not seek to justify the 
microcanonical distribution as the unique appropriate distribution for 
calculating phase averages. Instead, our goal is to show that if the 
components of the system are actually weighted according to some 
measure /u8 # u in the domain of attraction of the Gaussian distribu- 
tion, then in the limit of large numbers of components the asymptotic 
formulas for the thermodynamical sum functions will yield results as 
if the components were weighted according to the microcanonical mea- 
sure. But of course, many probability measures will be justified on this 
15. On Khinchin's proposal (1949, 38-39), a component of a system need not be a 
physically distinct entity (like an individual molecule)-the set of values of a degree of 
freedom or the phase space subspace representing that set of values counts as a com- 
ponent. 
16. In the discussions of the probabilistic version of the renormalization group, strong 
dependence is explicated in terms of a failure of so-called "strong mixing," where for 
lattice systems strong mixing holds if one cannot compensate for weakening dependence 
between components by increasing the spatial distance between them. In ergodic theory, 
on the other hand, mixing typically refers to the emergence of, or approach to, prob- 
abilistic independence in the infinite time limit. I am unsure exactly of what connections, 
if any can be made between these two notions. 
205 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 24 ===

ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
proposal. There is really nothing very special about the microcanonical 
measure. 
6. Conclusion. A number of investigators have asked why equilibrium 
SM works. But what, exactly, is the explanandum? Most interpreters 
have understood the question rather narrowly, as a demand for justi- 
fying the computation of phase averages using the microcanonical mea- 
sure. The majority of responses have involved appeals to ergodicity 
and other properties in the ergodic hierarchy. As we have seen, though, 
such appeals are unlikely to work-at least for the majority of systems 
to which equilibrium SM is supposed to apply. 
Khinchin's program is a notably different. He tries to show that an 
appeal to the nature of the sorts of phase functions that typically rep- 
resent the thermodynamic quantities of interest (their being sum func- 
tions), together with the fact that such systems are composed of an 
extremely large number of similar components, suffices to justify the 
use of Gibbs method in equilibrium SM. This program has been ex- 
tended and continued in the investigations of the thermodynamic limit 
by Ruelle, Lanford, and others. As I noted in Section 3, it has had 
many successes. In particular, what I called the paradox of interaction 
is dealt with quite effectively. 
In spite of these successes, it seems that the objections raised in one 
form or another by Truesdell, Sklar, and Earman and Redei still have 
some force. If the system is not ergodic, then it is possible to construct 
a.c. invariant measures of the /u,-variety that are, prima facie, on an 
equal footing with the microcanonical measure. According to Earman 
and Redei, this raises the problem of finding a rationale for choosing 
the microcanonical measure among all of these competitors. Their con- 
clusion is that ergodic theory seems unable to provide such a rationale. 
Perhaps, in order to explain why calculating averages with respect to 
the microcanonical measure yields correct results, one will need to ap- 
peal explicitly, as Sklar has suggested, to the microscopic details, the 
nature of the molecular interactions, and the matter of fact distribu- 
tions of initial conditions in the world. 
However, an appeal to the detailed nature of the microconstituents 
and their interactions entails that we give up any attempt to answer 
the question of why equilibrium SM works, where that question is 
construed in a broader sense. The broad sense concerns why the pre- 
scriptions of equilibrium SM yield proper results virtually without re- 
gard for these microscopic details. That is, it is a question about the 
universal applicability of the method. Providing the details for each 
case individually does not give us any explanation for the universality 
which for many is an essential characteristic of SM. Recall Khinchin's 
206 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 25 ===

WHY EQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS WORKS 
explicit claim that "[i]t is a complete abstraction from the nature of 
[the molecular] forces, that gives to statistical mechanics its specific 
features and contributes to its deductions all the necessary flexibility" 
(Khinchin 1949, 8). 
My aim in this paper has been to set out a framework within which 
this broader question of explaining a form of universality can be ad- 
dressed. Renormalization group analyses have been used to explain, 
and provide understanding of, the universality of critical phenomena 
(see Batterman 1998). The probabilistic formulation of the renormal- 
ization group strategy allows for a direct application of the same sort 
of analysis to account for the ubiquity of the Gaussian distribution for 
noncritical systems studied in SM. The suggestion is that we can ex- 
plain why equilibrium SM works, if we can provide principled reasons 
for why the details of the microconstituents are by and large inessential 
for accounting for the thermodynamic or macroscopic behavior ob- 
served. The statistical mechanical explanation of this behavior appeals 
essentially to the estimates for phase dispersions guaranteed by the 
emergence of the Gaussian distribution in the asymptotic limit of a 
large number of components. In other words, we can understand why 
equilibrium SM works, if we can characterize the domain of applica- 
bility of the CLT. The renormalization group argument provides ex- 
actly this (at least ideally) by exhibiting the stability of the Gaussian 
distribution (as the limit distribution for the relevant sum functions) 
under perturbation of certain microscopic details. 
The possibility of constructing a.c. invariant measures (the /u mea- 
sures) which are in fact on an equal footing with the microcanonical 
distribution is, therefore, not a problem. On the contrary, if these dis- 
tributions are in the domain of attraction of the Gaussian distribution, 
then their existence only serves to illustrate the extent to which the 
microscopic details are irrelevant or inessential to the thermodynamical 
equilibrium behavior we wish to explain. 
REFERENCES 
Barenblatt, Grigory. I. (1996), Scaling, Self-similarity, and Intermediate Asymptotics. Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Batterman, Robert. W. (1998), "Universality, Unification, and Understanding", Preprint. 
Bleher, P. M. and Ya. G. Sinai (1973), "Investigation of the Critical Point in Models of the 
Type of Dyson's Hierarchical Models", Communications in Mathematical Physics 33: 
23-42. 
Cassandro, M. and G. Jona-Lasinio (1978), "Critical Point Behaviour and Probability The- 
ory", Advances in Physics 27: 913-941. 
Earman, John. and M. Redei (1996), "Why Ergodic Theory Does Not Explain the Success 
of Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics", British Journal of the Philosophy of Science 47: 
63-78. 
207 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).


=== PAGE 26 ===

208 ROBERT W. BATTERMAN 
Gallavotti, Giovanni. and A. Martinlof (1975), "Block-spin Distributions for Short-range 
Attractive Ising Models", Il Nuovo Cimento 25 B: 425-441. 
Gnedenko, Boris. V. and A. N. Kolmogorov ([1949] 1968), Limit Distributions for Sums of 
Independent Random Variables. Translated by K. L. Chung. Reading MA: Addison- 
Wesley. 
Goldenfeld, Nigel, O. Martin, and Y. Oono (1989), "Intermediate Asymptotics and Renor- 
malization Group Theory", Journal of Scientific Computing 4: 355-372. 
Ibraghimov, Ildar. A. and Yu. V. Linnik (1969), Independent and Stationary Sequences of 
Random Variables. Groeningen: Walter Noordhoff Publishing Company. 
Jona-Lasinio, G. (1975), "The Renormalization Group: A Probabilistic View", II Nuovo 
Cimento 26 B: 99-119. 
Khinchin, Alexander. I. (1949), Mathematical Foundations of Statistical Mechanics. Trans- 
lated by G. Gamow. New York: Dover Publications. 
Lanford, III, Oscar E. (1973), "Entropy and Equilibrium States in Classical Statistical Me- 
chanics", in A. Lenard (ed.), Statistical Mechanics and Mathematical Problems Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, pp. 1-113. 
Malament, David and S. Zabell (1980), "Why Gibbs Phase Averages Work-The Role of 
Ergodic Theory", Philosophy of Science 47: 339-349. 
Mazur, Peter and J. van der Linden (1963), "Asymptotic Form of the Structure Function 
for Real Systems", Journal of Mathematical Physics 4: 271-277. 
Ruelle, David (1969), Statistical Mechanics: Rigorous Results. New York: W. A. Benjamin. 
Sinai, Yakov G. (1978), "Mathematical Foundations of the Renormalization Group Method 
in Statistical Physics", in G. Dell'Antonio, S. Doplicher, and G. Jona-Lasinio (eds.), 
Mathematical Problems in Theoretical Physics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 303-311. 
. (1982), Theory of Phase Transitions: Rigorous Results. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
. (1992), Probability Theory: An Introductory Course. Translated by D. Haughton. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Sklar, Lawrence (1973), "Statistical Explanation and Ergodic Theory", Philosophy of Science 
40: 194-212. 
. (1993), Physics and Chance. Philosophical Issues in the Foundations of Statistical 
Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Truesdell, Clifford (1961), "Ergodic Theory in Classical Statistical Mechanics", in P. Cal- 
dirola (ed.), Ergodic Theories, volume 14 of Proceedings of the International School of 
Physics "Enrico Fermi". New York: Academic Press, pp. 21-56. 
Wightman, Arthur S. (1983), "Regular and Chaotic Motions in Dynamical Systems: Intro- 
duction to the Problems", in G. Velo and A. S. Wightman, (eds.), Regular and Chaotic 
Motions in Dynamic Systems. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 1-26. 
Wilson, Kenneth G. and J. Kogut (1974), "The Renormalization Group and the c Expan- 
sion", Physics Reports 12: 75-200. 
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 29, 2016 14:39:16 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
